
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07426/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 26 April 2018                   |On 14 May 2018                          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr nazim temur
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by
Claimant:     Ahmed Rahman Carr Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Vernon sitting at Taylor  House  on  3  November  2017)
    allowing on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision made on 10 March  2017  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    further discretionary leave to remain and to refuse him leave to remain
    on an alternative basis.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the  claimant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 19  January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "In short, the grounds argue that the Judge erred by  finding  that
         in 2013 the respondent  had  granted  the  appellant  discretionary
         leave based on his mental health condition.  The respondent  argues
         that that was not the  case  in  2013.   At  paragraph  50  of  the
         decision, the Judge does assume that the appellant had been granted
         leave as stated above.  But if that was not the case in 2013,  then
         the Judge may well have made a factual error.  Had that  error  not
         been made then it is open to argument that the  decision  may  have
         been different."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of Turkey, who arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 29 December 2000 and claimed asylum on the  same  day.   His  asylum
    claim was refused on 5 February 2001.  His appeal against  the  refusal
    was dismissed on 26 June 2003.  The claimant submitted  an  application
    for ILR in 2007, and this was refused on 17  March  2008.   He  made  a
    further application  for  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate  grounds
    outside the Immigration Rules on 6 January 2010.  This application  was
    refused on 30 July 2013.  On that date, the  claimant  made  a  further
    asylum claim which was refused.  However, he was granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 6 April  2016  pursuant  to
    paragraph 353B of the Rules.  The claimant made a  further  application
    for leave to remain on 5 April 2016.

 4. On 10 March 2017, the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    the application. He  had  an  unspent  conviction  for  an  offence  of
    destroying and damaging property on 13 April 2015,  for  which  he  had
    been sentenced to community order on 20 August 2017.  This  criminality
    weighed heavily against his character, and it was considered  that  the
    conditions of his previous grant of leave no longer prevailed.  He  did
    not qualify for limited leave to remain on private life grounds, as  he
    had failed to demonstrate that there were very significant obstacles to
    his reintegration into Turkey.  His legal representatives claimed  that
    he had experienced a rapid decline in the state of his  mental  health:
    he had been sectioned and was currently placed at a  hospital  in  West
    Suffolk following a relapse. Further evidence had been  requested  from
    him and his legal representatives with regard  to  his  current  mental
    health problems and whether he remained sectioned at the hospital.  But
    no response had been received. Thus, the  medical  evidence  which  had
    been provided with his application was considered to be  out-dated  and
    not reliable.  On his return to Turkey, it was considered that he could
    access treatment for his  depression  similar  to  that  which  he  had
    received in the United Kingdom, if he required it.  It was not accepted
    that  returning  him  to  Turkey  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Articles 3 or 8 ECHR on medical grounds.

 5. At paragraphs 44 and 45 of the refusal letter, the caseworker addressed
    the question of whether there were  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    claimant's case which meant that his removal from  the  United  Kingdom
    was no longer appropriate, having regard to  the  factors  set  out  in
    paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules.  He said at paragraph 45:

         "I have taken into account your character, conduct, compliance and
         any time that you may have spent in the United Kingdom beyond  your
         control after your human  rights  or  asylum  claim  was  submitted
         and/or refused.  It is acknowledged  that  there  was  a  delay  in
         considering your appeal and your further submissions, however,  you
         were awarded discretionary leave previously on this basis and since
         this date, there have been no further delays by the Home Office  in
         dealing with your applications.  Furthermore, you have  not  raised
         any exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of  leave  on  any
         other basis so I am not prepared to  exercise  discretion  in  your
         favour.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  Vernon.   In  his
    skeleton  argument,  Counsel  for  the  claimant  submitted  that   the
    Secretary of State had given no  consideration  as  to  the  claimant's
    mental health when considering exceptional circumstances "despite  this
    having formed the basis of the previous grant of leave."

 7. In his subsequent decision, the  Judge  summarised  the  basis  of  the
    claimant's appeal as follows:

         "During  the  last  few  years  he  has   suffered   with   rapidly
         deteriorating mental health and has, in  fact,  been  sectioned  on
         three occasions.  His mental health is the basis upon which he  was
         granted discretionary leave to remain in 2013,  the  [Secretary  of
         State] accepting that his mental  health  amounted  to  exceptional
         circumstances for the purposes of paragraph 353B of the Immigration
         Rules.  The state of his mental health has not changed  since  that
         time.  The only change in the [claimant's] circumstances is that he
         has been convicted of an  offence  of  criminal  damage  in  August
         2015."

 8. The Judge gave his reasons for allowing the appeal at  paragraphs  [37]
    to [57].  At paragraph [50], he found that the Secretary of  State  had
    accepted (in 2013) that the claimant's circumstances  were  exceptional
    so as to result in the conclusion that  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom at that time was not appropriate:  "That  decision  appears  to
    have been based upon the [claimant's] mental health conditions."

 9. At paragraph [56], the Judge concluded as follows:

         "In circumstances in which the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  (by
         granting  a  period  of  discretionary  leave  in  2013)  that  the
         [claimant's] circumstances were exceptional, and  where  there  has
         been subsequently no material change in his  mental  health  (which
         formed the basis of the  conclusion  that  his  circumstances  were
         exceptional), I am satisfied the decision  to  refuse  him  further
         leave to remain, thereby interfering with his right to private life
         contrary to Article 8.1, is disproportionate and is  not  justified
         by reference to Article 8.2 ECHR."

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. Mr Ian Jarvis of the Specialist Appeals Team advanced  two  grounds  of
    appeal.  The first was that the Judge had made a material error of fact
    at paragraph [50].  The Home Office had not issued the claimant with DL
    because of his mental health condition.  He went on to  quote  verbatim
    from the grant note.  This provided inter alia as follows:

        "Length of Residence - The applicant entered the UK on 29  December
        2000 and has therefore lived in the UK for 12 years and  8  months.
        It should be noted that it took 2 years for his appeal against  his
        original  asylum  claim  to  be  heard.    He   submitted   further
        submissions on 16 Janu8ary 2010, and these were recorded  as  being
        refused on 25  February  2010.   However,  this  letter  was  never
        issued.  The Home Office  issued  the  RFRL  on  6  December  2012,
        without a date of address.  It could be considered that  there  has
        been a total of a 4-year delay in processing the applicant's  case,
        further allowing him to form bonds with his family and develop  his
        private life.

        It is considered that there has been an element of  mishandling  of
        the applicant's case and therefore it has been concluded to provide
        him with a grant of discretionary leave."

11. Mr Jarvis additionally pleaded that there was no suggestion in the Home
    Office refusal letter that the mental health condition of the  claimant
    was material to the grant of DL in 2013.

12. Ground 2 was that, even if the Judge was right to  proceed  as  he  did
    (which was not accepted), the Judge had further materially erred in law
    in treating the assessment of the case outside the Rules  as  purely  a
    review of the Secretary of State's refusal to grant a further period of
    DL.  His task was to consider whether, at  the  date  of  the  hearing,
    there were any compelling circumstances in a case  where  the  claimant
    had failed to meet the requirements of the Rules.  The Judge's approach
    manifestly ignored material changes in the law since  the  decision  of
    the Home Office in 2013, namely:  (i)  the  introduction  of  the  very
    significant obstacles test into the Rules; and (ii) the introduction at
    the same time of section 117B into the 2002 Act  which  now  prescribed
    the statutory weight to be given or not given to certain themes  within
    the Article 8.2 assessment.

13. Mr Jarvis pleaded that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  unlawfully
    conducted a "constrained review" of the Secretary of State's 2013 grant
    of DL.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Isherwood produced the decision of Mr Clayton  of  the  Further
    Submissions Team (OLCU) dated 7 October 2013,  explaining  why  he  had
    decided to make a discretionary grant of limited leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom to the  claimant  for  30  months.   It  was  from  this
    internal document (aka "the grant note") that her colleague, Mr Jarvis,
    had quoted verbatim in the grounds of appeal.   Ms  Isherwood  accepted
    that this document had not been  previously  disclosed  to  either  the
    claimant or his legal representatives.

15. Mr Jacobs, who did not appear below, produced a  copy  of  the  refusal
    letter of 7 October 2013 which he believed had been placed before Judge
    Vernon.  He submitted that it was open to Judge Vernon  to  infer  from
    the contents of this letter that the claimant's  mental  health  formed
    the basis of the grant of DL in 2013.

16. Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  to  draw  such  an  inference  would  be
    illogical and perverse as the letter explained why the claimant was not
    entitled to relief on human rights grounds on  account  of  his  mental
    health condition.

17. I invited Mr Jacobs to comment on paragraph  45  of  the  2017  refusal
    letter.  He accepted that this paragraph explained that the  basis  for
    granting DL in 2013 was delay.  But it did not say that the grant of DL
    was exclusively on this basis.

Discussion

18. In E&R -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  QB  1044,
    Carnwath LJ said at paragraph [66]:

         "In our view, the time has now come to accept  a  mistake  of  fact
         giving rise to unfairness is a separate head  of  challenge  in  an
         appeal on a point of law, at  least  in  those  statutory  contexts
         where the parties share an interest in cooperating to  achieve  the
         correct result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an  area.   Without
         seeking to lay down a precise code, the ordinary requirements for a
         finding of unfairness are apparent from the above analysis  of  the
         Criminal Injuries Compensation Board case.  First, there must  have
         been a mistake as to the existing fact, including a mistake  as  to
         the availability of evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the
         factual evidence must have been "established", in the sense that it
         was  uncontentious  and  objectively  verifiable.    Thirdly,   the
         appellant (or his advisors) must not have been responsible for  the
         mistake.  Fourthly, the mistake must have played  a  material  (not
         necessarily decisive) part in the tribunal's reasoning."

19. Carnwath LJ went on  to  say  in  paragraph  [68]  that,  assuming  the
    relevance of showing a mistake of  fact  in  the  Tribunal's  decision,
    there may need to be evidence to prove it.  The Court had discretion to
    admit new evidence, but it was normally exercised subject to  Ladd  -v-
    Marshall principles, raising in particular the  issue  of  whether  the
    material could and should have been made available before the decision.

Admissibility of the Grant Note

20. It appeared initially that Mr Jacobs might have a valid  argument  that
    the grant note should not  be  admitted  into  evidence  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal as the Secretary of State was at fault in  not  ensuring  that
    the grant note was before Judge Vernon. However, this argument does not
    run as the Secretary of State disclosed the  reason  for  the  previous
    grant of DL at paragraph 45 of the decision  letter  of  October  2017.
    So, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  the  necessary  information  in
    front of him, but he overlooked it. The grant  note  is  admissible  to
    prove the truth of what is stated in the decision letter, and hence  to
    prove the mistake of fact by Judge Vernon alleged by the  Secretary  of
    State.



Proof of Mistake of Fact

21. I am satisfied that the Judge Vernon laboured under  the  misconception
    that the grant of DL in 2013 was based upon an acceptance by  the  then
    Secretary of State that it was not appropriate to remove  the  claimant
    to Turkey because of his mental ill-health.  It is shown by  the  grant
    note that this is incorrect, and that the claimant's mental health  was
    not a factor which contributed in any way to the grant of DL in 2013.

22. On the  topic  of  character,  conduct  and  associations,  Mr  Clayton
    observed that, since his  arrival  in  2000,  the  applicant  had  made
    numerous attempts to regularise his immigration  status.   He  did  not
    have a criminal record. Despite being detained on numerous occasions as
    an illegal entrant and working illegally, he had never been  convicted.
    He developed strong ties with his brothers, nieces and nephews who were
    are all settled in the UK.

23. On the topic of compliance, Mr Clayton  said  that  the  applicant  had
    generally managed to comply with reporting  restrictions,  on  and  off
    throughout his stay in the UK.  He had maintained contact with the Home
    Office by writing to them on various dates between 5 November 2010  and
    3 October 2011, and the Home Office had failed to  respond  to  any  of
    these submissions.

24. In the light of the contents of the grant note, it  is  established  by
    uncontentious and objectively verifiable evidence that  the  Judge  was
    completely mistaken as to the reason for the previous grant  of  DL  in
    2013.

Responsibility for the Error

25. On the issue of responsibility for  the  error,  I  accept  Mr  Jacob's
    submission that it is the party who is complaining of the  mistake  who
    must not have been responsible for it.  So, on the particular facts  of
    this case, it is  the  Secretary  of  State  who  must  not  have  been
    responsible for the mistake of fact.

26. In the refusal letter of 7  October  2013,  which  was  written  by  Mr
    Clayton, he stated at paragraph 33 that it had been decided to exercise
    a  discretionary  grant  of  leave  in  the  claimant's  favour   under
    exceptional circumstances when applying paragraph 353B, without  giving
    any explanation as to the reasoning which had led to this decision.

27. However, earlier at paragraph 29, he acknowledged that the claimant had
    requested that his case be considered under  the  legacy  exercise.  He
    explained that the  Case  Resolution  Directorate  was  established  to
    resolve all incomplete, old asylum cases where the initial asylum claim
    was made prior to 5 March 2007 and which had not  been  concluded  with
    either removal or a grant of  leave,  or  otherwise  closed.   He  also
    explained that the work of the CRD had now been overtaken by the  Older
    Live Cases Unit, of which he was a representative.

28. As the legacy exercise was directed  at  cases  where  there  had  been
    significant delay on the part of the Home Office, the implication of Mr
    Clayton's explanation was that the reason for the grant of  DL  to  the
    claimant  was  lengthy  residence  for  reasons  beyond  his   control.
    Conversely, the notion that the claimant's mental health condition  was
    the trigger for DL  was  highly  tendentious,  not  only  because  much
    earlier in the 2013 letter Mr Clayton had explained  why  the  claimant
    did not qualify for relief on medical grounds under either Article 3 or
    Article 8 ECHR, but  also  because  (as  Mr  Jacobs  accepted  in  oral
    argument) ill health per se does not come within the scope of paragraph
    353B.

29. In any event, the Secretary of State put the matter  beyond  reasonable
    doubt by explaining in the October 2017 decision letter  the  basis  of
    the previous grant of DL in 2013.  The contents of the 2013  letter  do
    not in any respect contradict  the  clarification  given  in  the  2017
    decision letter, and so the Secretary of State is not  responsible  for
    the Judge's manifest error about the reason which underlay the grant of
    DL in 2013.

Whether mistake of fact material to the outcome

30. The mistake of fact was clearly material to  the  outcome.   The  Judge
    placed great  weight  on  the  (mistaken)  fact  that  the  exceptional
    circumstances recognised by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  2013  still
    persisted.

Conclusion

31. Accordingly, the fundamental mistake of fact  made  by  the  Judge  has
    given rise to material unfairness, whereby the Secretary of  State  has
    been deprived of a fair hearing of her case in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Directions

As was agreed by the representatives in the  event  that  the  Secretary  of
State's case on material unfairness was made out, this  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  for  a  fresh  hearing  (Judge
Vernon incompatible).

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 28 April 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

