
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/07537/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 December 2017                        |   On 25 January 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                         mr Adekunle Olayinka Adeola
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Dingley, Counsel, instructed by London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Nigeria who arrived  in  the
    UK on a visit visa on 28 February 2014 and overstayed.   The  appellant
    applied in December 2015 for leave to remain in the United Kingdom with
    his sponsor, who has indefinite leave to remain in the  UK,  and  their
    child.  That application was refused by the respondent  in  a  decision
    dated 22 February 2016.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  24
    August  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mozolowski  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

      1) Ground 1.  The judge failed to have regard to  a  letter  dated  18
         July 2017, which was attached to the permission to appeal from a Ms
         Joanne Jackson-Louis an Early Help Worker at the Royal  Borough  of
         Greenwich Children's Centre.  It was submitted that the letter  was
         not in the appellant's bundle but if it was not before the judge it
         was a failure on  the  part  of  the  previous  representatives  to
         produce it, rendering the hearing procedurally unfair.  If  it  was
         before the judge then it was submitted that the judge erred in  law
         in failing to consider the document and the appellant relied on  MM
         (unfairness - E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).

      2) Ground 2.  It was submitted that the judge erred in her findings in
         relation to the appellant and the sponsor, in finding that they did
         not cohabit, and it was submitted that this was the wrong approach,
         when the Tribunal ought  to  have  assessed  whether  there  was  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship.

      3)  Ground  3.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in   the
         consideration of Section  117B  and  the  appellant  relied  on  MA
         (Pakistan) &  Others  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 submitted that in  the  absence
         of criminality it would not be reasonable to expect a British child
         to leave the UK where there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship.

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that any error of  law
    was disclosed.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. The only ground pursued before  me  by  Mr  Dingley  was  Ground  1  in
    relation to the document which it was alleged was before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although Mr Dingley submitted  a  skeleton  argument  and  a
    bundle of further documents he accepted that this was  in  relation  to
    any remaking of the decision if an error of law was found.

 5. Mr Dingley accepted however, that there were  significant  difficulties
    in relation to the alleged document.  The appellant had produced an  e-
    mail from his former representative, who represented the  appellant  at
    the time of the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.   This  e-mail,
    dated 25 October 2017, noted that the letter from  Ms  Joanne  Jackson-
    Louis an Early Help Worker  at  the  Royal  Borough  of  Greenwich  was
    received by the representatives on 18 July 2017.  The  representatives,
    James Solicitor.com indicated further that:

         "The first thing our Counsel did at the hearing on 21 July 2017 was
         to serve the Tribunal Judge with the letter  from  the  Early  Help
         Worker.  The defendant (sic) was not represented at the hearing and
         could not therefore be served with the letter."

    The e-mail went on to state that the former representative, in order to
    assist, would review and sign a draft witness statement (if provided by
    the new representatives) but that he  would  not  accede  to  a  future
    request  for  assistance  until  the  appellant   complied   with   the
    arrangement to pay outstanding fees.

 6. I also had before me the letter in question.  In addition the appellant
    had prepared an additional witness statement where it was  stated  that
    his then solicitor asked him to  take  the  letter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at the date of hearing and "give the same to  the  barrister".
    The appellant went on to state that he gave the letter to his barrister
    and that "she placed the letter before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    during the hearing on 21 July 2017.  However the Honourable Immigration
    Judge did not accept it because it was not printed in colour.  She also
    commented that the letter does not have  a  letterhead.   Further,  the
    respondent was not represented at the hearing and could not, therefore,
    be served with the letter."

 7. The letter in question from Ms Jackson-Louis dated 18 July indeed  does
    not have a letterhead and appears to be a  relatively  poor  photocopy.
    The letter confirms details in relation to the appellant and  his  son,
    including that the appellant brought his son to clinic  to  be  weighed
    and that the appellant was present at four out of nine meetings that Ms
    Jackson-Louis had with the child and the child's mother and that he was
    "a constant presence" in his son's life.

 8. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no reference  to  any  letter
    being produced either in her Record of Proceedings or in  the  decision
    and reasons.  The judge specifically noted that  the  documents  before
    her were the appellant's  bundle  of  documents  and  the  respondent's
    bundle of documents.  The judge made negative credibility findings on a
    number of matters  including  in  relation  to  the  lack  of  adequate
    evidence in relation to the claimed role that the appellant  played  in
    his  son's  life.    There  were  further  findings  in   relation   to
    difficulties in the witness statements of the appellant and the sponsor
    (the judge noting that they were too similar and  lacking  in  detail).
    The judge specifically found, at [18], that  although  it  was  claimed
    that the appellant remained at home whilst the sponsor went to work and
    the appellant did  various  household  tasks  and  took  the  child  to
    immunisations and to nursery, "immunisations are not a  frequent  event
    even  in  a  baby's  life  but  even  if  the  appellant  went  to  the
    immunisation clinic, I would have expected this to have  been  recorded
    by the doctor or health visitor.  There is no letter of  support  about
    this."

 9. The judge went on to find that there were other letters that the  judge
    felt ought to have been available, including from the child's  nursery,
    from health visitors, neighbours and friends  etc.   Whilst  the  judge
    made no reference to the absence of a letter from an early help worker,
    it is notable that the letter  from  Ms  Jackson-Louis  refers  to  the
    appellant taking the child to a clinic whilst  the  judge  specifically
    notes  the  absence  of  evidence  from  someone  confirming  that  the
    appellant took the child  to  the  clinic,  albeit  that  this  was  an
    immunisation clinic (and Ms Jackson-Louis  refers  to  the  appellant's
    child being weighed at a clinic  rather  than  an  immunisation  clinic
    specifically).

10. Mr Dingley, quite properly in my view, conceded  that  the  appellant's
    witness statement evidence and the e-mail from the  previous  solicitor
    did not take the appellant's case much further and that,  specifically,
    he submitted that as an ordinary lay  person  little  weight  could  be
    attached to the appellant's account that the judge  refused  to  accept
    the evidence.  Mr Dingley accepted that there were a  number  of  other
    possible  explanations  including  that  the  document  may  have  been
    withdrawn by Counsel for the  appellant.   What  was  notable,  and  Mr
    Dingley accepted the deficit in the appellant's case, was any  evidence
    either witness statement or oral  evidence  either  from  the  previous
    solicitor or, perhaps more importantly the Counsel who represented  the
    appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the  absence  of   such
    information it was accepted by Mr Dingley  that  the  e-mail  from  the
    previous  solicitor  was  of  little  weight,  particularly   when   it
    contradicted somewhat the evidence of the appellant who said  that  the
    letter was put before the judge and the judge  refused  to  accept  it,
    whereas the previous solicitor merely stated that the  letter  was  put
    before the judge, with no indication that it had not been accepted.  Mr
    Dingley indicated that there were continuing difficulties in  obtaining
    further information from the previous solicitors.

11. In light of all the circumstances, and Mr Dingley made  no  substantive
    submissions that might contradict this, I am satisfied  that  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal reached findings that were open to her  on  the
    basis of the evidence, that  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
    appellant had a genuine subsisting relationship with either his claimed
    partner or his child.

12. I am further not satisfied that  any  procedural  unfairness  has  been
    disclosed and Mr Dingley did not  actively  pursue  the  grounds  cited
    above, accepting that it had not been established  that  this  evidence
    was before the judge.  I am not satisfied that MM  (unfairness  -  E&R)
    applies in the circumstances.  It cannot be said that  there  could  be
    any unfairness arising in the circumstances where a particular document
    has not been lodged with the Tribunal, regardless of any argument as to
    the alleged deficiencies in the appellant's then legal representation.

13. I have already noted Mr Dingley did not pursue the  remaining  grounds.
    These amount to no more than a disagreement when the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It could not be said that the conclusions reached
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  were  irrational  and  she  reached
    findings that were properly open to her on the evidence produced.

14. I further note  that  these  findings  were  made  in  the  context  of
    difficulties with the appellant's  evidence  including  questions  over
    credibility.  The judge made a number of other findings in relation  to
    the lack of adequate evidence of both the relationship with the sponsor
    and the child, including alternative findings at [21], that even if the
    appellant were involved in taking  the  child  to  immunisation  clinic
    'more would be needed to show the Appellant having a  significant  role
    in the health of the child'.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Dated: 12 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  12 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
