
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 1 October 2018                     |On 22 October 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                        MISS JANICE HALDAIN MORRISON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Mordi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge S Aziz of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissing
    her appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 21 June  2017
    refusing her application for leave to remain on family and private life
    grounds.

2.   The appellant's principal ground contends that the  judge  acted  in  a
    procedurally unfair fashion in his conduct of the hearing by  'stepping
    into the ring' (to use the phrase referred to by the judge who  granted
    permission) by cross-examining the appellant and therefore adopting the
    position of one of the parties (the respondent).  As part of this  same
    contention the written grounds take issue with the judge's  description
    of the appellant's Counsel, who is said to have put  to  the  appellant
    that her account of events  did  not  make  sense.   The  grounds  aver
    "[t]his inevitably creates the impression  that  the  FtTJ  might  have
    hijacked the Appellant's Counsel's examination-in-chief".

3.   In submissions before me Mr Coleman accepted that  the  loose  language
    used by the author of the appellant's grounds was unacceptable and that
    he had already made that  clear  (and  would  do  so  again)  to  those
    instructing him.  I pointed as an example to the author's reference  to
    "[e]ven a dullard upon reading the FtTJ determination ...".  I  do  not
    think it would be right to count these defects in the  grounds  against
    either Mr Coleman or the appellant, but I reiterate that the author  of
    these grounds may find if such language is used again that he or she is
    reported for conduct unbecoming a legal representative.

4.   There was an initial discussion regarding what documents I should  look
    at in order to  have  a  fuller  picture  of  what  transpired  in  the
    proceedings before the judge.  I explained to the parties that  when  I
    checked the Tribunal file I found the judge's own Record of Proceedings
    illegible.  Mr Coleman said that even though the appellant had made  an
    application to produce Counsel's Notes, he was content to rely  on  the
    Notes provided by Mr Bramble made  by  the  Presenting  Officer.   This
    recorded as follows:

         "                                            HO Reference  M1683904


         Re:     Janice     Haldain            Date     of     Birth:     25
             Nationality: Jamaica
                 Morrison                  February
                                           1971


         To: SAT


         Present:
         IJ Aziz
         Representative Ms A Hussain (C), Mordi & Co Solicitors
         Appellant
         Lesley Singh SCW (AQA)


         FLOAT CASE


         Time given combined with lunch 12.30 - 14.00


         A not the biological parent of the  British  child.   Consideration
         falls outside the rules.  A claims to be the  daily  carer  of  the
         child.


         IJ had no HOB, PO provided a copy.  PO no AB, R provided.
         No witnesses  in  attendance  and  witness  statements  in  the  AB
         unsigned.


         Preliminary issues:
         Document check.  2012 application basis (PO not  in  possession  of
         file).  R conceded A cannot meet rules.


         Hearing:
         A made 2012 application (referred to in current  RFRL  39)  on  the
         basis of a family life gained from cohabiting  with  her  aunt  and
         uncle.  In contradiction, the application subject to appeal was  on
         the basis A was the carer of a British Citizen child, who  she  had
         lived with from the age of 2  (circa  2007/2008).   She  left  that
         accommodation in 2015 (WS different addresses).
         A maintained this was true whilst simultaneously that she moved out
         of her uncle's property in 2012 when  he  moved  to  London,  later
         correcting this to 2008 to fit with her current  claim.   She  made
         allegations of gross misconduct regarding her legal representatives
         of the  2012  application  in  that  they  omitted  mentioning  her
         relationship with the BC child, and this only came  to  light  with
         the instruction of a new lawyer in 2013/2014.


         The BC child and er grandmother (WS in AB) were not  in  attendance
         and their statements were  unsigned.   A  stated  that  her  friend
         Juliet was visiting her unwell  mother  so  did  not  come  to  the
         hearing.  Allegedly she knew the basis of A's claim.  The child  is
         in Canada.  Juliet's WS states her daughter,  the  child's  mother,
         lives in Canada.  A denied that the child was visiting  her  mother
         in Canada stating the mother had gone to Jamaica so the two  missed
         each other.  The IJ interrupted  PO  line  of  questioning  to  ask
         questions already intended.  A could not answer who had  taken  the
         child to Canada despite stating  that  she  was  essentially  fully
         responsible for the child's upbringing.  She stated it was a friend
         of Juliet's but did not know their name, only that A had seen their
         face.


         A stated if she returns to JAM no one could care for the child like
         she does.


         A is not working at the  moment,  last  employment  coincided  with
         student leave.  She did not intend to return to  JAM.   She  raised
         problems on returning that the IJ stated she had not raised  before
         (DV previous bf, raised in 2016).
         A has distant family in JAM.  She undertakes volunteering roles  in
         the UK and goes to church.  She has distant family in UK.  A states
         she could not relocate to JAM because she has  been  away  for  too
         long and is unfamiliar with the country, she does not wish to leave
         the child, and prefers UK.


         Overall the appellant did not come across as a credible witness and
         had no corroborative evidence in support of her claim".


    I am grateful to the submissions I heard from Mr Coleman and Mr Bramble
    on this issue and indeed the other grounds to which  I  shall  come  to
    shortly.


5.   I consider that the appellant's principal ground falls  well  short  of
    establishing procedural unfairness on the part of  the  judge.   It  is
    clear from the judge's own analysis, read together with  the  PO  Note,
    that the judge's interventions arose at a  stage  in  the  respondent's
    cross-examination when the appellant was being asked to explain how  it
    could be that the child, T, came to be visiting Canada where her mother
    had been said to live.  (The appellant's case had been that in 2005 the
    child's mother had disconnected herself from the child when she  was  2
    years old and handed her over to her maternal grandmother, JE, that the
    appellant was living with JE and that both of them began caring  for  T
    together).  Viewed in this context, this part of the  appellant's  oral
    testimony represented  her  main  opportunity  to  explain  an  alleged
    inconsistency.   The  judge's  interventions  are  consistent  with  an
    attempt to ensure the appellant  understood  the  significance  of  the
    issue and had proper opportunity to respond.  They are thus  consistent
    with the judge's own  portrayal  of  them  as  being  to  "assist"  the
    appellant  (see  paragraph  64).   There  is  no  suggestion  that  the
    appellant was put off responding with the evidence she wished  to  give
    and gave or that the judge misrecorded it.  It is true that the PO Note
    states that "[t]he  IJ  interrupted  PO  line  of  questioning  to  ask
    questions  already  intended",  but  that  simply  confirms  that   the
    questions the PO would have asked were the same as those of the  judge.
    The appellant was represented and Counsel  at  the  hearing  raised  no
    objections to the judge's  interventions  either  at  the  time  or  in
    submissions.

6.   The issue regarding the visit of T to Canada arose at the hearing  when
    the appellant was asked why JE had not attended to support her claim to
    be a potential carer of T.  The appellant said JE was unwell and that T
    was on a visit to Canada and T had travelled to Canada with  a  friend.
    Asked the name  of  this  friend  the  appellant  did  not  know.   The
    appellant had then said T's mother was in Jamaica.  It was put  to  the
    appellant that that was not what JE  said  in  her  witness  statement.
    Against this background I consider  what  was  said  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 69-74 to be wholly within the range of reasonable responses.
     At 69-74 the judge said;

         "69. Unaware of the identity of the responsible adult who has taken
             T to Canada: Both in her statement and in her  oral  evidence,
             the appellant made clear that  even  though  she  is  not  the
             biological parent of  T  and  she  does  not  have  any  legal
             guardianship over her,  that  she  is,  for  all  intents  and
             purposes, the child's parent (along with her friend JE).


         70.  If that is indeed the  case,  then  it  is  nothing  short  of
             staggering  that  she  did  not  know  the  identity  of   the
             individual who has taken T on  holiday  to  Canada.   All  the
             appellant could say was that the individual was  a  friend  of
             JE's and that she recognised the person's face.


         71.  I am afraid that this aspect of her evidence demonstrated very
             clearly to the  Tribunal  that  she  is  not  someone  who  is
             exercising parental responsibility over T.  It is  simply  not
             credible that she could claim to  be  acting  as  the  child's
             parent since T's biological mother abandoned  her  at  a  very
             young age and be unaware of the identity of the adult who  has
             taken her child to Canada.  On  the  contrary,  her  level  of
             ignorance on this issue is actually a very good  indicator  of
             the fact that she is not  exercising  parental  responsibility
             over the child.


         72.  Why has T gone to Canada: I am also  not  persuaded  that  the
             appellant was being candid with the Tribunal as to why  T  has
             gone to Canada.  Her evidence was that she had gone  to  visit
             her godparents.  She had also initially stated T's  biological
             mother lived in Jamaica.


         73.  When it was put to her that in JE's  unsigned  statement,  she
             had indicated at paragraph  5  that  the  child's  mother  was
             living in Canada, the witness was again left stalling  for  an
             answer to explain the contradiction.   She  eventually  stated
             that there had been a misunderstanding.  T's biological mother
             does live in Canada.  It was simply that she was currently  in
             Jamaica on holiday.  I am afraid that I find this  to  be  yet
             another example of an untruth.


         74.  I also find merit in Ms Ramsey's observation that it does  not
             seem credible that T's biological mother would leave Canada at
             the same time that T was visiting the country.  I do not  find
             that the appellant has given the Tribunal a  truthful  account
             of why T is currently in Canada and whom she is  visiting.   I
             am  not  persuaded  that  she  has  lost  all  ties  with  her
             biological mother".

7.   As regards the issue taken in the grounds with  the  judge's  statement
    that the appellant's Counsel had put to the appellant that her  account
    (as to  why  she  had  not  mentioned  looking  after  T  in  her  2012
    application) "did not make sense", I  fail  to  see  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's account  was  significantly  affected  by
    what the appellant's Counsel had or had not put to her regarding  this.
    In the absence of any note produced by the Counsel who  represented  or
    anything said about this in the PO Note (which Mr Coleman  was  content
    to rely on), I consider it more likely than not that Counsel was simply
    giving the appellant  an  extra  opportunity  to  explain  the  glaring
    contradiction in her testimony. That is a commonplace technique used by
    Counsel in cases up and down the land where the evidence is  contested.



8.   It must not be underestimated how material was the appellant's  failure
    to provide an adequate explanation for why she had not mentioned  T  in
    her 2012 application.  On the one hand, she had put in  an  application
    in 2012 based on family life she had established living with her  uncle
    and aunt.  On the other hand, she was now saying to the judge  that  in
    2012 she was not living with her uncle and aunt (see paragraphs 33  and
    34) but with JE and that both of them were caring for T  together  (see
    paragraph 27).  The appellant's attempted explanations at  the  hearing
    included a claim that she had informed her solicitors in 2012 that  she
    was caring for T; however, given  that  she  produced  no  evidence  to
    support that the judge rightly rejected it.

9.   I mentioned earlier that the  appellant  raised  other  grounds.   They
    were not amplified by Mr Coleman but for completeness I find that there
    was nothing wrong with the judge  finding  at  paragraph  76  that  the
    appellant   had   falsely   claimed   that   she   exercised   parental
    responsibility.  It does not matter that the respondent had not alleged
    this in her reasons for refusal, since the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    afforded sufficient evidential basis for such a conclusion.

10.  The  grounds  also  contend  that  the  judge  erred  in  treating  the
    appellant's failure to show she had mentioned T in her 2012 application
    as "the sole basis of her adverse credibility  findings".   The  simple
    answer to this contention is that the judge did not  treat  it  as  her
    sole basis: at paragraphs 55-59 the  judge  noted  concerns  about  the
    documentary evidence.  At paragraphs 69-74 the judge addressed concerns
    regarding the appellant's evidence  about  T's  visit  to  Canada.   At
    paragraph  75  the  judge  notes  concerns  about  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's evidence indicated that she had not been living with T  for
    the past three years.  At paragraph 76  the  judge  noted  that  "[t]he
    above adverse findings lead  me  to  an  overall  conclusion  that  the
    appellant has essentially manufactured a human rights claim ...".

11.  The grounds also contend that it was not open to the judge to  come  to
    the conclusion that the  appellant  would  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Jamaica.   In  this  respect,  the  grounds
    amount to a mere disagreement with the judge's finding to the contrary.
     The judge gave sound reasons at paragraph 80 for concluding  that  the
    appellant did not meet paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules.  The claim  in
    the grounds that the judge failed  to  make  a  proper  proportionality
    assessment is also devoid of merit.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and that accordingly his decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal must stand.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 16 October 2018

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
