
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07438/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     G M
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date  of  birth  4  March  1984,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 17 June 2017 to refuse
    a human rights based application for leave to remain  under  the  Rules
    and refused the matter on the basis that there was no exceptional  case
    for the grant of leave outside of the Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  on  14
    December 2018 to appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bowler dated 23 July 2017 which had led to the appeal  being  dismissed
    on human rights grounds.

3.   The  immigration  history  shows  that  the  Appellant  had  originally
    applied in 2014 for leave to remain which had been rejected.  A further
    application made was refused without a right of appeal and  the  matter
    was appropriately challenged.  Ultimately  a  Section  120  notice  was
    served raising the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner,
    Ms [P], which claim was refused  and  certified  in  March  2017.   The
    Respondent's case as put to  the  Judge  was  that  the  Appellant  was
    treated as having made a new application on 1 February  2016  when  the
    Section 120 grounds were submitted.  It seems  the  unchallenged  facts
    were that the Appellant had  formed  a  relationship  with  Ms  [P],  a
    British national, which had developed into a special relationship,  not
    least of one of the Appellant being the carer for Ms [P].   Ms  [P]  it
    was argued on the evidence before the Judge had been in a  relationship
    of far greater length and significance than the  Judge's  decision  had
    acknowledged.  The issue was raised in the grounds and was said  to  be
    an error of fact which amounts to a significant error of law over their
    relationship and its duration.

4.   In  addition,  the  Judge  made  other  findings  in  relation  to  the
    existence of a qualifying child called, for  these  purposes,  W.   The
    child W is the Appellant's cousin.  The Judge  accepted  the  role  the
    Appellant played in W's upbringing and rather  took  the  view  on  the
    information that a Mr Mahmood, the other 'special guardian',  would  be
    around  even if the Appellant, the other  'Special  Guardian',  had  to
    return to Pakistan.

5.   What the current position may be in that respect has changed but  I  do
    not take it into account as demonstrating any error of law.   The  fact
    was that there were parental and other roles which the  Appellant  had.
    The evidence before the Judge was that the other special  guardian  was
    absent from the UK and was absent  for  significant  periods  of  time.
    Thus, the real ability of the Mr Mahmood as special guardian to provide
    support and assistance were demonstrably limited.  Thus,  the  reliance
    the Judge placed upon the availability of Mr Mahmood was  more  limited
    than could be assumed or the mother of W and Mr Mahmood being  able  to
    take on those responsibilities.

6.   Having considered this matter it seemed to me that there was  substance
    in the grounds, particularly of the  relationship  and  the  impact  of
    separation of the Appellant  from  the  qualifying  child  and  further
    consideration needed to be given to the issue  of  reasonableness.   It
    was more difficult to deal with the factual situation, which  has  been
    put to me, and was essentially not substantively challenged as  to  the
    length of relationship between the Appellant and Ms [P].  Accepting  as
    I have been told the representations that were made,  bearing  in  mind
    that Mr Aslam appeared before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it  seemed
    to me that there was substance in the point that the  relationship  was
    of greater significance than the Judge appeared  to  attribute  on  the
    evidence  that  was  provided.   I  conclude  the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand.  There  was  at  least  one  error  of  law  and
    potentially two and it seemed to me right and proper that those  should
    both in fairness be addressed again.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  Returned to the First-tier.  This  case  should  be  listed  at  Taylor
    House, not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bowler  or  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies.

(2)  List for hearing two hours.  No interpreter required.

(3)  Any  further  evidence  being  submitted  in  support  of  the  appeal,
    updating material and otherwise to be served not less than ten  working
    days before the further hearing.

(4)  The Appellant to serve a skeleton argument not less than  five  working
    days before the hearing.

(5)  Any additional documents relied upon by the  Respondent  to  be  served
    not later than five working days before the further hearing.

An anonymity order is made.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 12 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
