
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/07252/2016

                                                 HU/07255/2016

                                                 HU/07258/2016

                                                 HU/07273/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th October 2018                    |   On 7th November 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                          mr s k (First Appellant)
                         mrs r k (Second Appellant)
                          mr s k (Third Appellant)
                          mr s k (fourth Appellant)
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Litigant in person, no legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Burns dismissing their appeals against the applications  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of their private and family life  under  Article  8
    ECHR promulgated on 10th April 2017.  The Appellants  appealed  against
    that decision and were granted permission to appeal by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb in the following terms:

         "2.  The Grounds prepared by  A1  are  lengthy.   Many  of  the  28
             paragraphs  (plus  additional  text)  of  the  Grounds  simply
             assert, in effect, the appellants' case and  the  weigh  (sic)
             that should be given to facts or evidence relied upon  by  the
             judge in reaching his decision.   Specifically,  there  is  no
             merit in a number of the arguments: (1)  that  the  judge  was
             biased and/or pre-determined the appeal -  the  judge  clearly
             brought an open mind to his decision and there is  nothing  to
             suggest otherwise in the material; (2)  that  the  proceedings
             were unfair because the HOPO was unprepared and did  not  have
             one of the relevant files - importantly,  however,  the  judge
             did have all the information and material (as was accepted) in
             order to make his decision; (3) that the judge erred simply by
             not referring to all the case law  -  providing  he  correctly
             directed himself in law it was not necessary to refer  to,  or
             cite, all or any of the cases and he did subject to one caveat
             (on which see below); (4) that  the  judge  did  not  properly
             apply the public interest factors in s.117B  of  the  NIA  Act
             2002 - he did, with the exception of  s.117B(6)  (see  below).
             Further, and in particular, it was properly open to the  judge
             to  find  that   the   adult   appellants,   given   all   the
             circumstances, had not established the  requirements  of  para
             276ADE(1)(vi),  namely  that  there  are   'very   significant
             obstacles' to their integration on  return  to  India.   I  am
             wholly unpersuaded that the judge failed to  give  proper  and
             rational weight to all the evidence as it relates  to  A1,  A2
             and A4.

         3.   However, it is arguable that the judge  failed  adequately  to
             assess A3's best interests and, in particular whether he could
             succeed under para 276ADE(1)(iv) in establishing it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect him to return to India where he had not
             been since he was 6 years' (sic) old.  He was at the  date  of
             hearing  17  years  old  and  about  to  take  his  A'   Level
             examinations.  It is arguable that he (sic)  judge  failed  to
             apply the approach in R, (MA (Pakistan)  and  others)  v  SSHD
             [2016] EWCA Civ 705, in considering where his  best  interests
             lay and whether there were 'strong' reasons to outweigh  them.
             The same issue arose for A1 and A2 under s.117B(6) of the  NIA
             Act 2002 as A3 is a 'qualifying child' with whom they  have  a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  This  may  also
             have an impact upon A4's situation if  the  remainder  of  his
             family were not to leave the UK.

         4.   Consequently, I grant permission  solely  on  that  basis.   I
             refuse permission on all other bases set out  in  the  lengthy
             Grounds."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply from  the  Respondent  but  was
    given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

 3. Before the hearing commenced I confirmed with the First Appellant  that
    he was happy to proceed without a legal representative and that he  was
    confident that he would be able to deal with the  matters  and  present
    the appeal on behalf of his family and he indicated that he was content
    and confident to do so.  On that basis, as is  customary  when  dealing
    with a litigant in person, I discussed the issues  openly  and  plainly
    with Mr Walker in the presence of the First Appellant in a manner  that
    allowed him to engage with and fully understand the discussion  between
    myself and the Respondent's representative, which the  First  Appellant
    confirmed he had fully understood both during and at the close  of  the
    hearing.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of my decision I indicated that I did find that there were
    material errors of law in the decision, such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside but that my reasons for so finding would follow.  My reasons  for
    so finding are as follows.

 5. As discussed with the parties, and as is plain from Judge Grubb's grant
    of permission, the key  point  at  stake  here  is  whether  the  Third
    Appellant's qualification as a  child  under  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or his eligibility  for  a
    grant of leave if he is able to meet the terms of paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of the Immigration Rules were considered by the First-tier Tribunal  or
    not.  It is not in dispute that the Third Appellant  at  the  time  the
    applications for further leave to remain were made on 7th October  2015
    was 17 years old and the Fourth Appellant was 22  years  old.   At  the
    date of the appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in April 2017
    the Third Appellant was  still  17  years  of  age  whilst  the  Fourth
    Appellant was at that time 22 years of age.  I am told that at  present
    date the Third Appellant is 19 years of age and the Fourth Appellant is
    23 years of age.  For the sake of completeness  the  Third  Appellant's
    date of birth is 20th November 1994 and the Fourth Appellant's date  of
    birth is 27th August 1999.

 6. Turning from those facts to the judge's consideration of the matter, Mr
    Walker  pragmatically  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not  considered
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and had also applied an incorrect  approach  to
    Section 117B(6), which I agree with given that the judge's appraisal of
    the reasonableness of the child's relocation to India in light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
    is flawed.  I find that the consideration at  paragraph  68  is  flawed
    because the  judge  finds  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    qualifying child having lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years is simply a factor of merely "some  weight".   In  my  view
    this does not reflect  the  entirety  of  the  matter  as  the  correct
    approach the judge should have  taken  should  have  been  to  consider
    whether there were any "powerful reasons" why  the  Appellant's  family
    should not be granted status in the United Kingdom having regard to the
    fact that the  child  had  met  the  seven  year  continuous  residence
    threshold pursuant to the approach taken by Elias, LJ in MA  (Pakistan)
    that binds all lower courts and tribunals.  On this note  I  take  into
    account the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MT and ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC)  wherein  the
    Appellant - mother of "qualifying children"  held  a  poor  immigration
    history and had overstayed (as could be said of  the  Appellant  family
    here) but had also importantly been convicted  of  a  criminal  offence
    involving fraud.  However, notwithstanding that criminal offending  and
    fraud, the Upper Tribunal panel found that the immigration history  was
    not a powerful reason and was described instead as "run  of  the  mill"
    immigration offending.

 7. Thus, given the fact that there is no assessment of whether  there  are
    powerful reasons or not to defeat  the  First  and  Second  Appellants'
    ability to  rely  upon  their  parental  relationship  with  the  Third
    Appellant, given that he was a qualifying child  at  the  date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing in April 2017, in my  view  the  judge  has
    materially erred in law in failing to  take  account  of  the  starting
    point as to whether there are powerful reasons or  not  which  make  it
    reasonable for the child to leave the United  Kingdom,  notwithstanding
    that he has passed the seven year continuous residence threshold.  This
    finding remains in harmony with the updated version of the Appendix  FM
    1.0b guidance published on  22nd  February  2018  which  maintains  the
    parameter of the need for powerful reasons to make  it  reasonable  for
    the child to leave the United Kingdom, notwithstanding that  they  have
    met the yardstick of seven years.

 8. Thus this does in my view form a material error of law in the  decision
    as if the judge had found in favour of  the  Third  Appellant  and  had
    found that there were no powerful  reasons  warranting  the  First  and
    Second Appellants removal, this will  have  equally  had  an  important
    impact on the proportionality of the Fourth  Appellant's  appeal  given
    that the question then for the Tribunal  would  have  been  whether  it
    would have been proportionate to separate that  adult  child  from  his
    family from whom he appeared to still be dependent.

 9. There is an added complication in this appeal however as time has moved
    on and now the Third Appellant is  19  years  of  age  and  the  Fourth
    Appellant is 23 years of age, however the error remains a material  one
    that still requires resolution de novo in light of the following facts.
     It is not in dispute and it is confirmed by the First  Appellant  that
    the Third and Fourth Appellants entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  14th
    October 2006 and at that time the Fourth Appellant was 11 years of age,
    and the Third Appellant was even younger still.  Thus, in light of  the
    fact that the Fourth Appellant and the Third Appellant  are  now  adult
    children of the First and Second Appellants, notwithstanding that  they
    cannot now at present rely upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), they are  able
    to rely upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) if they  can  establish  that  they
    have spent half of their life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  are  aged
    between 18 and 25 years.  Thus, in light of  this  premise  it  remains
    appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for further consideration of the proportionality of whether  the  Third
    and Fourth Appellants are able to meet paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and whether it  is  proportionate  to  remove  their
    parents, the First and Second Appellants, in light of the error made by
    the First-tier Tribunal in that the Third Appellant  may  have  been  a
    qualifying child at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in April 2017, and indeed the Third Appellant would have  been
    a qualifying child also at the date of  the  application  made  to  the
    Secretary of State on 7th October 2015 and at the date of the  refusals
    of 26th and 24th February 2016.

10. In light of the above findings I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  in  its  entirety
    and this matter is  to  be  remitted  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

Directions

 i) The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Taylor House.

ii) No interpreter is required.

iii) At present only the First Appellant proposes that he is called to  give
    evidence, however he may wish to revisit this decision in light of  his
    two children both being young adults and capable of giving evidence  in
    their own right in relation to the proportionality  of  the  separation
    between them and their parents should they establish they are  able  to
    meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).

iv) The time estimate for this appeal is three hours.

 v) No special directions have been sought and,  however,  I  maintain  the
    anonymity direction made previously.

Caveat

13. At the time of hearing this appeal there is no indication  as  to  when
    the judgment arising from KO (Nigeria) - which was heard by the Supreme
    Court earlier this year - will be handed down.   However,  needless  to
    say, given that that judgment is likely to discuss the decision  in  MA
    (Pakistan) which has exercised my decision, it may be that guidance  is
    given in this judgment which will impact upon the  further  hearing  of
    this matter, however I say no more on this matter save for this caveat.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date          17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
