
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07789/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2018                          |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 SHAKIL [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 2nd January 1984.   On
    20th January 2007 the Appellant  made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on
    the basis of his private and family life in the UK.   That  application
    was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 28th June 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pears sitting at Hatton Cross  on  7th  June  2018.   The
    appeal was dealt with on the papers, and  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 20th June 2018 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 3rd  July  2018.
    On 24th October 2018 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  granted
    permission to appeal on what are recited  as  Grounds  3  and  4  only.
    Those grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeded with
    the appeal in the absence of the Appellant or  any  representative  and
    notwithstanding an application to adjourn on medical grounds and it was
    contended that there had been procedural unfairness.  All other grounds
    represent an expression of disagreement with the findings  that  appear
    to have been open to the judge to reach on the papers before him.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Khan.  The Secretary of State appears by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Documentation

 5. There is before me a bundle of documents produced  by  the  Appellant's
    instructed solicitors relating to the  Appellant's  medical  condition.
    Considering the submission that there has been a procedural  unfairness
    to the Appellant in proceeding when he was unable to attend due to  ill
    health I considered it appropriate, and it was  not  challenged  by  Mr
    Bramble, to give due consideration to that  documentation.   It  is  of
    some relevance.  It consists of correspondence from the Appellant's  GP
    and appointments relating to the  Appellant's  treatment  at  hospital.
    From it, it seems clear that the Appellant is  suffering  from  chronic
    hepatitis B and that  he  has  been  and  continues  to  remain  to  be
    unfortunately  unwell,  and  is  being  medically  treated   for   this
    condition.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. In submission Mr Khan, whilst noting that the  grounds  before  me  are
    limited, points out that the judge failed to make due consideration  in
    any event to the Appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh, in particular
    that his mother had now passed away, that his parents had divorced when
    he was 5, and that he has no social ties  in  Bangladesh.   He  submits
    that the  judge  has  failed  to  make  findings  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's ability to reintegrate into Bangladesh  society,  and  that
    the Appellant would suffer very significant  obstacles  on  return,  in
    particular with regard to the difficulty he  would  have  in  obtaining
    medication for his hepatitis B.

 7. Mr Bramble acknowledges that the letter from Dr  Jason  John  from  the
    King Edward's Medical Group does give some  information.   However,  he
    considers that the judge has dealt with the issue of  very  significant
    obstacles at paragraph 13 of his decision.  He reminds me the threshold
    is a high one and consequently the ability of the Appellant to get over
    that is material.  He submits it is very unlikely that  a  judge  would
    find differently to the finding of Judge Pears and that the  judge  has
    already given some consideration to the Appellant's medical  condition.



The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. In granting permission to appeal Judge  Page  limited  the  grounds  to
    those of procedural unfairness that might have arisen as  a  result  of
    the failure to grant an adjournment, albeit that the  judge  had  noted
    that the Appellant was suffering from his current  condition  for  some
    time.  I accept that there has been procedural  unfairness  insofar  as
    the judge did fail to direct himself or consider the documents provided
    which showed that on 6th June the Appellant attended both Accident  and
    Emergency and his GP and  had  been  prescribed  medication  which  (in
    accepting the submission made by Mr Khan) was indicative of a worsening
    of his condition on the day before the hearing.   Whilst  clearly  such
    documents could not have been before the Tribunal at the hearing of the
    appeal, the subsequent documents provided by  the  Appellant's  medical
    practitioners confirm this position.  I therefore  consequently  accept
    that this was an Appellant who had genuine reasons  for  not  attending
    the hearing.

11. On that basis, and on that basis alone, I accept that the Appellant may
    well not have had a fair hearing.  Whilst Judge Pears has made findings
    of fact, it may well be that had the Appellant been present and able to
    answer  questions  it  might  have  influenced  the  judge's  decision.
    Consequently to that extent, I am prepared to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal with none of the findings of fact to stand  and
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier for rehearing.   However,  I
    emphasise that the basis for doing this is purely because the Appellant
    is entitled to have effectively his "day in court".  On  the  basis  of
    the evidence that has so far been before the Tribunal the Appellant  is
    warned that there appears to be scant evidence to show that  the  judge
    will come to a different conclusion to that of Judge Pears.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed a material  error  of  law
solely to the extent that there was procedural unfairness to  the  Appellant
in not being granted an adjournment  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is set aside.   Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
rehearing of this matter.

 1) On finding that there is an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for  rehearing
    with an ELH of two hours.

 2) That the rehearing be heard on the first available date 28  days  hence
    before any Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  Immigration
    Judge Pears.

 3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve  a  bundle  of
    subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That the Appellant do personally attend the hearing for the purpose  of
    cross-examination.

 6) That in the event the Appellant requires an interpreter it is  for  his
    instructed  solicitors  to  notify  the  Tribunal   of   the   language
    requirement within seven days of receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
