
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07952/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2019                          |On 7th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              Pushpinder Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Douglass Simon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India, born  on  5  November  1957.   He
    applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  as  the  partner  of  Ms  Liza
    D'Silva, a British citizen.  This application was refused in a decision
    dated 5 July 2017, on the basis that the evidence was not sufficient to
    prove that the Appellant and Ms D'Silva had  cohabited  for  two  years
    prior to the date of application and since their religious marriage  on
    21 October 2015 and that given his divorce to his first  wife  was  not
    yet finalised, this cast doubt on the genuineness  and  subsistence  of
    the relationship.

 2. It was considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family
    life continuing abroad because there was  evidence  that  Ms  D'Silva's
    medical conditions could be treated in India. It was also  found  there
    were no exceptional circumstances for a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules as  Ms  D'Silva's  daughter  was  now  an  adult  and  there  was
    insufficient evidence of a particular dependency between them.

 3. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rastogi for hearing on 11  June  2018.
    In a decision and reasons dated 28 June 2018, the judge  dismissed  the
    appeal, finding at [34] that the requirements of EX1(b)  and  EX2  were
    not met and there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the
    grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    renewed grounds of appeal made three points. Firstly,  that  the  judge
    erred in her approach to the evaluation of insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life within the meaning of EX1(b) and EX2 of Appendix FM,  given
    that whilst private medical treatment for Ms D'Silva may  be  available
    in major cities, given the parties' limited means and difficulties  due
    to their ages in finding employment  in  India  it  would  entail  very
    serious hardship.  They would not be able to afford the medication  and
    they would be likely to be unemployable. It  was  submitted  the  judge
    failed to make adequate findings of fact in this respect,  particularly
    given that the Appellant's partner is a British citizen.

 5. Secondly, in failing to find that there was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant's partner and her daughter, given the evidence  of  continued
    dependence for  practical,  financial  and  emotional  support  in  the
    context of the  history  of  the  mother/daughter  relationship,  which
    clearly met the tests set out in the judgments in  Gurung  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 8 and Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

 6. Thirdly, having at [24] and [44] found  that  the  Appellant's  partner
    could not meet the minimum income requirement,  his  income  having  in
    fact gone down, in finding at [49] that it will  be  proportionate  for
    the Appellant to leave the UK on  the  basis  there  would  be  only  a
    temporary  separation  between  him  and  his  partner.   This  was  an
    erroneous approach, given that the issue of  exceptional  circumstances
    under GEN 3.22 fell to be  determined  on  the  basis  of  a  permanent
    separation should the Appellant's partner choose to remain in  the  UK,
    but the judge had failed to appreciate this distinction and thus failed
    to  properly  direct  herself  and  lawfully  conduct  the   applicable
    balancing exercise.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley in  a
    decision dated 3 December 2018, with reference to the third  ground  of
    appeal, but permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  all
    grounds could be argued.

     Hearing

 8. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Slatter for the  Appellant
    sought to rely on the grounds of appeal. He submitted  in  relation  to
    the evaluation of insurmountable obstacles that no adequate findings of
    fact or reasons had been given.  The Appellant's partner is in  receipt
    of a quantity of medication for  different  problems  to  do  with  her
    health, including glaucoma, arthralgia of  multiple  joints,  fibroids,
    depression, type 2 diabetes.

 9. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Mr Slatter sought to rely on
    [46] of Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and [56] of Ghising [2012] UKUT  00160
    (IAC) where the court found that the test as set out in Kugathas [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 was too restrictive.   On  the  facts  of  this  case,  the
    Appellant's partner's daughter had come to the UK  at  the  age  of  13
    having been previously separated from her mother.   Both  she  and  her
    mother gave evidence before the Tribunal as to the  dependency  between
    them.  Even though the Appellant's partner's daughter is now 27, she is
    still very reliant on her mother and they have lived together since she
    arrived in the UK at the age of 13.

10. Mr Slatter submitted there was clearly evidence capable  of  satisfying
    family life.  He further submitted the judge had erred in that GEN 3.22
    and the test of unjustifiably harsh consequences makes clear that  that
    has to be considered not only as to the effect on the  Appellant  or  a
    partner, but also on other family members and the judge needed to  have
    considered the  impact  on  the  Appellant's  partner's  daughter  when
    considering the appeal outside the Rules. He  submitted  that  this  is
    clear from Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at [45] which provides:

         "By virtue of EX1(b) insurmountable  obstacles  are  treated  as  a
         requirement for the grant of leave under  the  Rules  in  cases  to
         which  that  paragraph  applies.   Accordingly   interpreting   the
         expression in the same sense as in the Strasbourg case law leave to
         remain would not normally be granted in cases  where  an  applicant
         for leave to remain under the partner route was in the UK in breach
         of immigration laws, unless the applicant or  their  partner  would
         face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their  family  life
         together outside the UK which could not be overcome or would entail
         very serious hardship.  Even in the case where such difficulties do
         not exist however leave  to  remain  can  nevertheless  be  granted
         outside the Rules in exceptional circumstances in  accordance  with
         the instructions.  That is to say in circumstances in which refusal
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual
         such that refusal of the application  would  not  be  appropriate".



11. It was thirdly submitted that the judge's findings  were  inconsistent,
    in that at [49] the judge found that removal  would  be  proportionate:



         "Having considered all relevant factors I do not find there  to  be
         any circumstances which are capable of amounting  to  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for either the Appellant or Ms D'Silva.  I  have
         considered whether their temporary separation so the Appellant  can
         apply for entry clearance of itself is a disproportionate breach of
         their right to respect for their family life but I do not  find  it
         to be so".

12. However the judge found at [44] and [47]:

         "44. The Appellant does not claim to be personally self-sufficient.
          In light of my findings at 24 above, I  do  not  find  him  to  be
         sufficiently supported by  Ms  D'Silva  as  her  earnings  are  not
         sufficient to meet the minimum income requirement in the Rules ...

         47.  As for the possibility of the Appellant returning to India  to
         make an application for entry clearance either with or  without  Ms
         D'Silva, this was not a particular feature of the Appellant's  case
         but, in any event, I have had regard to the judgment of  Lord  Reed
         at 51 of Agyarko in which he said that if the applicant was certain
         to be granted leave to enter, there may be no  public  interest  in
         their removal.  That is not the case here in light of  my  findings
         on the MIR."

13. Mr  Slatter  submitted  that  this  internal  inconsistency  materially
    impacted on the balancing exercise and rendered the judge's  assessment
    of proportionality unsafe.

14. In her submissions, Ms Kenny submitted that the Appellant's partner and
    her daughter had been separated previously and that the only point  was
    that they were living under the same roof, which does not,  in  itself,
    show  a  relationship  going  beyond  normal  emotional  ties  and  the
    circumstances were no different from that  of  many  young  adults  who
    lived at home.

15. In relation to the decisions in Ghising [2012]  UKUT  00160  (IAC)  and
    Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8, she submitted that this  was  in  a  specific
    context of Gurkha cases and thus did not  apply.   In  any  event,  she
    submitted that the Appellant is the carer  for  his  partner,  not  her
    daughter and it was surprising that the daughter was not taking a  more
    substantial role in caring for her mother if they  have  such  a  close
    relationship.

16. In relation to whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life in India, Ms Kenny submitted that  the  Appellant  has  30  years'
    experience as a garment maker in India; that any  British  citizen  who
    moved abroad would lose access to his or her GP and A and E, the  judge
    had considered the fact that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  receiving
    medical treatment and had made findings open to her on the evidence.

17. In respect of the third ground of appeal, she submitted that  this  was
    not material as the appeal would still fall for refusal  based  on  the
    other grounds and thus there was no material error.

18. In reply, Mr Slatter submitted that Ms Kenny had been silent on whether
    the judge's legal correction in respect of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31
    was correct but had instead focused on whether the evidence was capable
    of meeting that test.  He  reiterated  that  the  judge's  finding  was
    contrary to the judgment in Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)  at  [61].
    He submitted that the Appellant's partner's daughter is married but  in
    the process of getting divorced.  She had always lived with her  mother
    since arriving in the UK aged 14.  It is significant that she lost  her
    other parent and the period when she was separated from her mother made
    their relationship stronger.  He did not think it was right to  suggest
    that most young adults or 27 year olds live at home with their mothers.
     He submitted it was a material error in that had  the  judge  properly
    directed herself she might have reached a different conclusion.

     Findings and Reasons

19. I find a material error of law in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rastogi for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of  appeal.   In
    particular, that having found that the Appellant was unable to meet the
    minimum income requirement of the Rules at [44] and [47],  the  judge's
    conclusion at [49] that their  temporary  separation  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate breach of their family life is inconsistent with  that
    previous finding, given it is clear that the Appellant cannot meet  the
    Rules and thus any separation would not  be  temporary,  but  would  in
    effect be permanent and sever the family life that has  been  built  up
    between the Appellant and his partner.

20. Notably and contrary to the Respondent's refusal, the judge found  that
    the Appellant did satisfy the test as a partner  within  paragraph  GEN
    1.2 at the date of the hearing, that the relationship was  genuine  and
    subsisting, the Appellant was able  to  meet  all  of  the  suitability
    requirements and thus the issues were considerably narrowed.

21. I further find that the judge erred at [36] in finding that essentially
    the Appellant and his partner could relocate to India and that the loss
    of medication would not be an insurmountable obstacle as the  Appellant
    is not likely to be employable in  light  of  his  age  and  there  was
    insufficient evidence, in light of her medical issues, that his partner
    would be either.

22. I find that the judge fell into error in that she has  failed  to  take
    account of a material consideration and that is the respective ages  of
    the Appellant and his partner.  The Appellant was 60 years  of  age  at
    the time of the hearing  before  the  judge.   Whilst  his  partner  is
    younger as in she is 49 years of age, it was not disputed that she  has
    a  number  of  medical  complaints  and  I  find  those  are   material
    considerations  which  were  not  factored  in  by  the  judge  in  her
    assessment of  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    relocating to India.

23. I further find that the manner  in  which  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    relationship between the Appellant's partner and her daughter fails  to
    engage with the jurisprudence as a whole, i.e. not just Kugathas [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 but Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and Gurung [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 8 nor takes account of the elements of dependency between them.

24. For these reasons I set  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rastogi aside and I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
