
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07851/2015
     HU/07856/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                           |On 07 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       mr samrat rai (first appellant)
                      mr kshitij rai (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr. A. Jafar, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal with the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and  Mr  Samrat  Rai
    was the first appellant and Mr Kshitij Rai as the second appellant.

 2.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nepal  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 10 September 2015 to refuse to grant them
    indefinite leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules as  the  adult
    dependants of a veteran  discharged  before  1997  of  the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas.  The appellants' case is that they would have already been  in
    the United Kingdom had the respondent not wronged the family and before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge it was accepted by  the  respondent  that
    family life had been  engaged  and  it  was  therefore  a  question  of
    proportionality under Article 8(2) of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights (ECHR) taking into account the respondent's legitimate  interest
    in immigration control and the historic injustice which is  a  relevant
    feature of these Article 8 claims.

 3. The  appellants  appealed  following  a  hearing,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 January 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer
    allowed their appeals.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth on 15 August  2017.   His
    reasons for so doing are:

          1) "It is arguable that the judge has set out  with  insufficient
             particularity the application  of  the  criteria  pursuant  to
             Section 117 in  carrying  out  the  proportionality  exercise,
             despite the reference at paragraph 10 to taking  into  account
             the respondent's legitimate interest in immigration control as
             reflected in Section 117, which  observation  is  repeated  at
             paragraph 12.

          2) It is arguable that  the  proportionality  exercise  has  been
             affected."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Although Mr Tarlow relied on the two grounds put  forward  for  seeking
    permission to appeal he acknowledged that in light of paragraph  56  of
    Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight)  [2013]  UKUT
    567 (IAC) the second ground could not be made  out.   Paragraph  56  of
    that decision states:

         "56. The court said that the question to be decided was whether the
             historic injustice suffered  by  Gurkhas  should  be  accorded
             limited or substantial weight in the  Article  8(2)  balancing
             exercise.  It seems clear from a reading of the  determination
             as a whole that it was their view, depending on all the facts,
             that it should be given substantial weight."

 7. He therefore proceeded to argue, as per the respondent's first  ground,
    that the judge has provided  inadequate  reasoning  for  finding  adult
    dependency as recognised in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

 8. I do not accept Mr Tarlow's submission and for the reasons put  forward
    by Mr Jafar I find that the judge has adequately reasoned why  he  came
    to the conclusions that he did which  were  open  to  be  made  on  the
    individual facts of this particular appeal.

 9. At paragraph 1  of  the  judge's  decision  it  is  recorded  that  the
    respondent's  Counsel,  Ms  Davies,  who  appeared  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing accepted that family life had been engaged and it  was
    therefore a question of proportionality  that  fell  to  be  considered
    taking into account the respondent's legitimate interest in immigration
    control and the historic injustice which is a relevant feature  of  the
    appellants' Article 8 claims.  The judge found at paragraph  6  of  his
    decision that the sponsor looks after the appellants' wellbeing and day-
    to-day expenses and that it was not open for the appellants to be  able
    to apply under the Immigration Rules before 2009 under the respondent's
    old policy.  The sponsor had also  confirmed  visiting  the  appellants
    each year until 2007 and has  visited  them  since  as  has  his  wife.
    Further it was confirmed in the  appellants'  witness  statements  that
    they were both unmarried and not leading an independent life  and  that
    they were financially wholly dependent upon their sponsor.  Beyond that
    (paragraph 11 of the decision) are findings that the property in  which
    the appellants live is  owned  by  their  sponsor  and  that  there  is
    evidence from bank statements from 2007 to show consistent  withdrawals
    in  Nepal  throughout  the  period  from   then   by   the   appellants
    demonstrating  their  financial  dependence  upon  their  sponsor.   At
    paragraph 12 the judge correctly sets out the  Kugathas  "test"  before
    coming to conclusions that were open to be made on the evidence.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6 November 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

