

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07165/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford via Skype                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 November 2020                           |On 14 December 2020            |
|                                              |                               |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 AZRA SAJJAD
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Rehman instructed by Kenton Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Skehan promulgated on the 28 February 2020 in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
        an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  to  refuse  her  application  for
        leave to enter the United Kingdom pursuant to Appendix  FM  of  the
        Immigration Rules.
     2. The application was refused as the ECO was not satisfied sufficient
        evidence had been adduced to show the appellant met  the  financial
        eligibility requirements of the Rules,  although  this  matter  was
        resolved by the production of relevant payslips before  the  Judge,
        because the appellant did to meet the relationship requirements  of
        the Rules, and because no exceptional circumstances were  made  out
        sufficient to  warrant  admission  to  the  UK  outside  the  Rules
        pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
     3. At [6] the Judge records that it was  agreed  between  the  parties
        that the only issue within the appeal was the  genuineness  of  the
        appellant's marriage.
     4. The Judges findings are set out at [7] of the decision in  relation
        to the Immigration Rules and at [9] in relation to Article 8  ECHR.
        In these paragraphs the Judge writes:


        7.   In considering this issue I note that I was not provided  with
             an immigration history for the appellant.  The  appellant  has
             stated within her previous correspondence with the  respondent
             that she lived in the UK between January 2005 and April  2012.
             This is at odds with the information provided by  the  sponsor
             who told me that  she  lived  in  Pakistan  for  19  years.  I
             expressly raised the possibility with the sponsor that he  may
             be confused and explained to him that he had an opportunity to
             clarify  his  evidence  providing  me  with  further   details
             relating to his relationship. I  was  not  provided  with  any
             clarification from the sponsor. The sponsor told  me  that  he
             had spent the last month and  a  half  in  Pakistan  with  the
             appellant. In the circumstances  there  has  been  an  obvious
             opportunity  to  collate  documentation  that  would   support
             evidence of cohabitation, or at least recent pictures  of  the
             couple together. This is an unusual case where  the  appellant
             and sponsor claim to have  been  married  for  20  years.  The
             appellant has had the benefit of  legal  advice  in  preparing
             this appeal, and the paucity of  supporting  documentation  is
             unusual. While I note the provision of  international  calling
             cards, these do not provide any evidence as to who used  these
             cards  or  what  numbers  were  called.  I   acknowledge   the
             possibility of confusion on the sponsor's part, however I have
             not been provided with any medical evidence that might  assist
             me in weighing sponsors evidence. For the avoidance of  doubt,
             I consider  the  absence  of  children  to  be  irrelevant  in
             determining the genuineness of the relationship.


        ...


        9.   The appellant has not shown a family life with the sponsor and
             as such Article 8 is not engaged. I do not for this reason  go
             on  to  consider  the  further  steps   within   Razgar.   The
             respondent's failure to admit  the  appellant  to  the  United
             Kingdom is not unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
             Act 1998 and in particular with regard to the right to respect
             for private and family life contained in article 8 of ECHR.


     5. Permission to appeal was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal




Error of law


     6. At the commencement of the hearing it was necessary to consider  an
        application made by the appellant pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of  the
        Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules in light of the fact the bundle that
        had been  prepared  for  the  purposes  of  the  hearing  contained
        evidence that was not before the Judge. That evidence went  to  the
        core of one aspect of the appellant's case namely the  time  it  is
        alleged the appellant and sponsor spent together  in  Pakistan  and
        the  appellant's  time  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This   was   all
        information that was available at the date of the earlier  hearing,
        but not produced, and it was not established the  test  in  Ladd  v
        Marshall  was  met  in  the  appellant's  favour.  No  satisfactory
        explanation for the failure to provide this  material  earlier  was
        forthcoming. It was also the case that Mr Melvin had not seen  this
        material with there being no evidence before the Upper Tribunal  to
        show it had been served upon the respondent in good time.
     7. Whilst that evidence may support a future application  it  was  not
        made  out  in  all  the  circumstances,  including  the  overriding
        objectives and interests of justice, that such material  should  be
        admitted at this  stage,  especially  when  the  matter  the  Upper
        Tribunal was considering is whether the Judge has erred in law in a
        manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on the  basis
        of the evidence available to the Judge at the date of hearing.
     8. In relation to the Judge's comments concerning the fact the sponsor
        was confused, Mr Rehman submitted that he is 72 years  of  age  and
        that old people can get confused.
     9. It is also asserted the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  evidence
        available concerning the appellant's stay in  the  United  Kingdom,
        with specific reference to the Visa application where in reply to a
        question the appellant stated that she  had  travelled  to  the  UK
        arriving on 24 January 2005 and leaving on 27 April 2012  and  that
        the purpose of the trip was for  a  family  visit.  There  is  also
        reference to question 32 and reference to a Visa application having
        been made in Pakistan for a visit which was refused on 13 July 2015
        on the basis the appellant was told to apply for a spouse visa.  It
        is  also  alleged  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
        information provided in the appellant's copy passports.  Mr  Melvin
        challenged the reference to the passports on the basis this did not
        form part of the grounds of appeal but there is arguable merit that
        it falls within ground number four in which the Judge  is  said  to
        have  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  appellant's   evidence
        properly.
    10. At page 8  of  the  appellant's  bundle  is  an  extract  from  the
        appellant's passport bearing the stamp of the High Commissioner for
        Pakistan, London dated 30 September 2005.
    11. It is also asserted there  are  a  number  of  photographs  of  the
        appellant and sponsor which was evidence before the Judge.
    12. It is argued that had the Judge considered the  evidence  properly,
        in light of the decision in GA (see below) a different decision may
        have been made.
    13. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Melvin submitted a number of
        the points that have been made were not made before the  Judge  and
        did not  appear  in  either  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, the application for permission to appeal, or in the grant
        of permission.
    14. It is  settled  law  that  a  Tribunal  or  Court  should  restrict
        the parties arguments to those upon which permission to appeal was
        granted; see Latayan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
        [2020] EWCA Civ 191 at [32] (Talpada applied).
    15. The terms of the grant by the Designated Judge are in the following
        terms:


        The grounds assert the Judge arguably erred in  law  first,  by  in
        failing properly and  in  its  cultural  context  to  consider  the
        evidence for the Appellant and second, in failing to give  adequate
        reasons to reject that evidence.


        The judge's decision recalls the only  issue  was  the  subsistence
        (incorrectly referred to as genuineness) of the marriage which  had
        been contracted in 1999. At paragraph 3 (vii)-(ix) the Judge  noted
        the sponsors evidence about the times he had spent in Pakistan with
        the Appellant. Her findings in the first part of paragraph 7 of her
        decision  arguably  fail  to  address  or  adequately  address  the
        Sponsor's claim that the Appellant had lived in the United  Kingdom
        a long time ago and the Appellant's statement that she had lived in
        the United Kingdom between January 2005 and April 2012.


        The point which the Judge makes at paragraph 3(vi) about stamps  in
        passports  arguably  does  not  reflect  an  understanding  of  the
        behaviour of many dual nationals visiting their  country  of  other
        nationality to produce to immigration control the  passport  issued
        by the country whose immigration officials are going to inspect it.


        The grounds refer to evidence of photographs of the  Appellant  and
        the Sponsor together over a period of time.  The  Judge  refers  to
        these at paragraph 4(i) upon which the comment "they have  provided
        a wedding and other photographs to confirm  this",  that  is  there
        subsisting relationship. Having referred  to  the  photographs  the
        Judge proceeds later  at  paragraph  5  to  comment  that  she  was
        provided with various photographs of the  Appellant's  wedding  day
        (emphasis added) upon which he makes no comment or findings.


        At paragraph 7  of  her  findings  she  comments  on  the  lack  of
        documentation to support evidence of  cohabitation,  visits  or  at
        least recent pictures of the couple together that fails to  explain
        how these comments relate to or are  consistent  with  her  earlier
        comments.


        The Judge commented on the  paucity  of  supporting  documentation,
        finding it unusual. It may be the Appellant failed to discharge the
        burden of proof upon her but it  is  arguable  the  Judge  has  not
        adequately shown to the Appellant as  the  losing  party  that  her
        evidence and that of her husband has been carefully considered  nor
        given sufficient reasons for her to understand why the evidence has
        been rejected.


        Both  grounds  of  appeal  disclose  arguable  errors  of  law  and
        permission to appeal is granted.


    16. It is therefore clear that  both  the  grounds  and  the  grant  of
        permission referred to the issues raised by Mr  Rehman  which  were
        matters before the Judge, even ignoring the material that  was  not
        admitted.
    17. Mr Melvin submitted that reading of the  decision  shows  that  the
        Judge did consider the question of whether it had been  established
        there was a  subsisting  relationship  but  noted  the  paucity  of
        evidence provided.
    18. It is argued the Judge noted  the  contradiction  in  the  evidence
        regarding the appellant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  even
        though the Judge gave the sponsor the opportunity  to  correct  the
        evidence.
    19. Having considered the material available  together  with  competing
        arguments it is clear the Judge's finding that  the  evidence  that
        was made available was somewhat limited is  a  finding  within  the
        range  of  those  reasonable  open  to  the  Judge.  There  is   no
        explanation for why this was so or why basis information such as  a
        chronology showing  the  appellants  immigration  history  was  not
        before the Judge.
    20. There was no medical evidence to support the submission the sponsor
        may have an impaired ability to recall facts and despite the  Judge
        giving the sponsor the opportunity  to  clarify  what  is  a  clear
        contradiction in the evidence the sponsor was unable to do so.
    21. The Judge clearly took all the evidence into account and summarises
        such at [3] - [5] of the decision under challenge.
    22. The reason the Judge dismissed the appeal can clearly be understood
        from a reading of the decision which is that the appellant had  not
        provided sufficient evidence to support the contention that her and
        the sponsor were in a subsisting marriage.
    23. Relevant case law is the decision in Goudey (subsisting marriage  -
        evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041(IAC) in which the Tribunal held:


           i) GA  ("Subsisting"   marriage)   Ghana*   [2006]  UKAIT  00046
              means that the matrimonial relationship must continue at  the
              relevant time rather than just the formality of  a  marriage,
              but it  does  not  require  the  production   of   particular
              evidence  of   mutual  devotion  before entry  clearance  can
              be granted;
          ii) Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being corroborative
              of the contention of the parties  that  they  communicate  by
              telephone, even if such data cannot  confirm  the  particular
              number the sponsor was calling in the country in question. It
              is not a requirement that the parties also write or text each
              other.
         iii)  Where  there  are  no  countervailing   factors   generating
              suspicion as to the intentions of the parties, such  evidence
              may be sufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof  on  the
              claimant.


    24. Whilst Mr Rahman referred  to  headnote  (ii)  in  support  of  his
        argument the Judge had erred in the  assessment  of  the  telephone
        calling cards this cannot  be  taken  out  of  context.  The  Judge
        clearly considered all the available evidence but found that  there
        were countervailing factors which cast doubt upon  the  appellant's
        claim.
    25. Evidence relating to 2005, such as  the  stamp  referred  to  in  a
        passport referred to above, is historic. The reply to the  question
        in the Visa application is not, of itself, determinative and has to
        be considered against the other evidence available to the Judge.
    26. I do not find it has been made out the Judge failed to consider the
        evidence properly. In addition  to  the  documentary  evidence  the
        Judge had the benefit of seeing and  hearing  oral  evidence  being
        given. The findings are supported by adequate reasons including the
        observation that despite having been claimed to have  been  married
        for 20 years very little  supporting  evidence  was  provided.  The
        weight to be given to the evidence that was provided was  a  matter
        for the Judge. The Judge  specifically  refers  to  the  claim  the
        appellant was in the UK between 2005 and 2012 but did not find this
        determinative for which adequate reason have been given.
    27. The Court of Appeal have recently reminded  us  that  an  appellate
        court must not interfere with the decision of a court below  unless
        a  genuine  error  of  law  material  to  the  decision  has   been
        established.  In many cases there may  be  more  than  one  finding
        available to Judge depending upon the interpretation given  to  the
        evidence. The fact the appellant  suggests  that  on  the  evidence
        alternative findings should have been made does not mean  that  the
        findings actually made was wrong or outside the range  of  findings
        that were available to the Judge.
    28. I do not find the appellant has established, despite a disagreement
        with the outcome and desire for a more favourable resolution to the
        appeal, that the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to the
        decision to dismiss the appeal. It is possible  to  understand  why
        the Judge arrived at the conclusion she did.  That  conclusion  has
        not been shown to be irrational or outside the  range  of  possible
        outcomes on the evidence.


Decision

    29. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 December 2020

