
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2019                                |On 24 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 Zaheer [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar, Legal Advisor, Ghafoors Immigration
Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  15  April  1986.   He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell  to
    dismiss his appeal on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant first came to the UK in February 2008 as the spouse of  a
    British citizen claiming that the relationship began on  13  May  2008,
    i.e. three months after he arrived here.   The  appellant's  leave  was
    curtailed with an in-country right  of  appeal  which  he  subsequently
    availed himself of. That appeal was dismissed on 23 July 2009  and  his
    appeal rights became exhausted in August 2009, but he remained  in  the
    UK anyway.   He  married  another  British  citizen,  [SA],  but  their
    relationship ended after three  years.   The  appellant  then  met  his
    current partner, whom he subsequently married, [KW], with whom  he  has
    recently had a child, [FA], who was born on [~] 2018.

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

3.   In extensive grounds of appeal, the appellant appealed Judge  Kimnell's
    decision to dismiss his appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was
    promulgated on 25 October 2018.  The grounds  of  appeal  run  to  four
    grounds. The first ground states that the Immigration Judge  was  wrong
    to decide that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" to the  family,
    that is the appellant and his current wife and child, going to live  in
    Pakistan. The appellant relies on the  recent  Supreme  Court  case  of
    Regina v Agyarko v the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 (Agyarko) in support of this  ground.  Agyarko  approved
    the definition of "insurmountable obstacles" in EX.2 of the Immigration
    Rules as "very significant difficulties" which would be "faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  "very
    serious hardship to the applicant  or  their  (sic)  partner".  I  have
    underlined the words "could not" to emphasise  that  the  test  is  not
    intended to be one of hardship or serious inconvenience but is intended
    to be a barrier which it is very difficult to overcome.

4.   The appellant was given permission to appeal Judge  Kimnell's  decision
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, who,  in  a  particularly  fulsome  and
    helpful grant of permission, gave the appellant permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal on 21 February 2019.  Judge  Hanson  identified  the
    question of "insurmountable obstacles" and whether the judge had  fully
    considered that matter as of particular importance.  He said  that  the
    current appeal was under Article 8 of the ECHR and there was a  legally
    arguable error in that it may have been material to the  decision  that
    Judge Kimnell had dismissed the appeal  in  circumstances  where  there
    would  be  great  difficulty  in  the  family  returning  to  Pakistan.
    Arguably, Judge Kimnell had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    deciding that it was proportionate to require the appellant to go  back
    to Pakistan and make a fresh application for entry clearance to re-join
    his British spouse.  It was not disputed by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant was entitled to apply  for  re-admission  to  the  UK.  There
    appeared to Judge Hanson to be at least be arguable grounds for  saying
    that the obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  his  spouse  returning  to
    Pakistan to continue their family life there were "insurmountable"  and
    that exceptional  circumstances  had  to  be  shown  why  it  would  be
    appropriate in this case  to  require  the  appellant  to  go  back  to
    Pakistan.



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

5.   Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Kumar,  who  represented  the  appellant,
    pointed out that the appellant's relationship with Ms [W] was the third
    such relationship since the appellant had arrived in the  UK.   He  had
    had children by all three relationships, and he had not  given  up  the
    hope  of  establishing  contact  with  the  children  by  the   earlier
    relationships.  This matter had not been given any weight by the First-
    tier Tribunal because there was no current evidence of contact being in
    place.  Nevertheless, Mr Kumar suggested that  such  contact  could  be
    established.   He then outlined ground 1, pointing out that he accepted
    that the appellant had family  members  in  Pakistan  and  that  it  is
    possible that the appellant may be able to gain employment, but it  was
    unlikely that his wife would be able to do so.  His wife was above  the
    income threshold and there was little point in the appellant  returning
    to Pakistan because he was likely to  be  granted  entry  clearance  to
    return for family settlement in any event.  The appellant was likely to
    suffer significant hardship and, more importantly, the fact  the  whole
    family would be forced to suffer significant hardship, for the  reasons
    given in the grounds of appeal, so no useful purpose.  The  appellant's
    sponsor is a white British female who has never visited  Pakistan,  was
    not familiar with the language or culture.  In  the  circumstances,  Mr
    Kumar submitted, she would be expected to experience "very  significant
    difficulties"  in  settling  in  a  country   which   was   known   for
    discrimination  of  women  at  societal  level,  cultural  barriers  to
    integration and other difficulties.  Pakistan is ranked as a  dangerous
    place for many women and the sponsor, whilst she  was  in  a  long-term
    relationship, could therefore considered to be at risk if she  went  to
    live there. Therefore, even though the appellant was  married  (to  the
    sponsor) she might be at risk of sexual or  gender-based  violence.  In
    any  event,  would  face  very  significant  hardship  in  retuning  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant and the sponsor  might  face  difficulties  in
    finding employment.

6.   Mr Kumar also relied on EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41  to  support  the
    submission that the material question was whether the  removal  of  the
    appellant was proportionate. Given that the appellant's  removal  would
    inevitably have a very significant  impact  on  the  family,  Mr  Kumar
    submitted, that family  life  would  be  disrupted.  Therefore,  having
    regard to  its  effect  on  the  family  unit,  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate. Nor was it right for the respondent to  assume  that,
    because the appellant might qualify  under  the  Immigration  Rules  to
    return to the UK as the spouse of a British Citizen  (it  was  accepted
    that the eligibility requirements  were  met  in  this  case),  it  was
    necessary and proportionate to  require  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan  and  make  a  fresh  such  an  application.  Thus,  would  be
    disproportionately disruptive to family life in the  UK.  The  case  of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 was relied on to support the proposition  that
    it would  only  be  in  comparatively  rare  cases  that  it  would  be
    appropriate, necessary and proportionate to require a foreign  national
    to return to their country of nationality to make a  fresh  application
    where the appellant had a family in the UK, including a child.  Even if
    the appellant has been residing in the UK unlawfully, in cases where it
    would otherwise it would be certain he would be granted leave to  enter
    the UK if returned to his own country, there may be no public  interest
    in his removal.

7.   On the other hand, Mr Lindsay said that although there was no  Rule  24
    response, it would need to be established under EX.1 of the Rules  that
    the  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  outside   the   UK   were
    "insurmountable".   He  said  that  there  was   a   wider   range   of
    considerations under Article 8 than merely to look at the well-being of
    the family. The starting position was the Immigration Rules. There  was
    no good reason why the appellant should  not  return  to  Pakistan  and
    apply for entry clearance to re-join his spouse.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraph 15 of the decision where Judge Kimnell pointed out  that  the
    submission had been made that Ms [W] could not live in Pakistan because
    her husband's family had no home and, "in parts of Pakistan", it  would
    be difficult to live as a white woman. It was also  recorded  by  Judge
    Kimnell that the submission had been made that  the  appellant's  uncle
    was "a bit funny".  Ms [W] would be worried about paying for healthcare
    as well.  These were not, in Mr Lindsay's  submission,  strong  grounds
    for opposing going to  live  as  a  family  in  Pakistan,  although  he
    accepted some hardship would be suffered.

8.   There would be some discrimination at  societal  level,  but  this  was
    dealt with at paragraph 23 of the decision, where the judge pointed out
    that although violence was commonplace, including domestic violence and
    honour  killings,  this  was  not  a  case  where  these  things   were
    particularly  likely  to  occur.   The  status  of  women  differs   in
    accordance with their social position.  The appellant had a  supportive
    family and would be able to return  to  live  with  or  close  to  that
    family.  Given wider  family  support,  and  a  functioning  healthcare
    system, no reason was established  as  to  why  the  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's return to Pakistan were insurmountable. There was no  doubt
    that Ms [W] would find it difficult to settle in a strange country with
    a different language and culture, but it was not be right to  say  that
    these difficulties could not be overcome.  Chikwamba was also  referred
    to by Mr Lindsay. However, he submitted that Judge Kimnell was entitled
    to find that appropriate, necessary  and  proportionate  to  require  a
    foreign national to return to their country of nationality  to  make  a
    fresh application where the appellant had a family in the UK  including
    a child. Mr Lindsay referred to the public interest  considerations  in
    Section 117B(4)(a) and (b) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and pointed out that "Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life or a relationship with a  qualifying  partner  ...that  is
    established by a person at a  time  when  that  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully."  It  was  submitted  that  this  was  the  position  here.
    Therefore, Judge Kimnell was  entitled  to  decide  that  the  need  to
    enforce proper immigration controls  was  an  overriding  factor.   His
    decision was in accordance with recent case law, including Agyarko.

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.


Conclusion

10.   I  have  considered  carefully  the  submissions  by  both  sides  but
    concluded that Judge Kimnell gave a clear, well-structured and properly
    reasoned decision.  He had proper regard to the background material  in
    relation to Pakistan in concluding that the risk that Ms [W] would face
    significant difficulties  in  settling  into  a  country  with  such  a
    different culture, language and history, did not  cross  the  threshold
    required to show that there were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  for  the
    purposes of EX.1 of the Immigration Rules. Judge  Kimnell  referred  to
    Agyarko and also to a number of other pertinent cases to this  area.  I
    am satisfied that he fully understood the definition of "insurmountable
    obstacles" in EX.2 of the Immigration Rules and apply that test to  the
    fact this case. He also considered the appeal outside those  rules  but
    concluded that although the threshold was low for an article  8  claim,
    the couple would  be  able  to  establish  family  life  there  or  the
    appellant could apply for settlement in accordance with the Immigration
    Rules. Judge Kimnell was entitled to attach weight to the section  117B
    factors in the  public  interest  in  the  enforcement  of  immigration
    control. I am not persuaded that there is anything in  Judge  Kimnell's
    decision which amounts to an error of law.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal weighed all the  factors  in  the  balance  and
    reached a conclusion it was entitled to reach on the evidence it heard.



Notice of Decision

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.  Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 21 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 21 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
