

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07547/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2017                         |On 5 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          REBECCA AKUMMA ABLORDEPPY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Davies, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I refer to the Appellant in this appeal as the Secretary of State and  to
   the Respondent as the Claimant. The Claimant is a national of  Ghana  who
   was born on 23 June 1970. She entered the United Kingdom  on  15  October
   2000 with entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  and  remained  without  leave
   thereafter. Her human rights claim was refused by the Secretary of  State
   on 23 September 2015 under the partner route and under paragraph 276  ADE
   of the Immigration  Rules.  She  appealed  against  that  decision  under
   section 82 (1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
   (NIAA). Her appeal was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Richards-
   Clarke in a decision promulgated on 27 June 2016.


2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
   on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  give  adequate
   reasons for findings on material matters. Permission was granted by First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Easterman on 18 October 2016 on the basis that it was
   arguable that  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  leading  her  to  the
   conclusion that there would be insurmountable obstacles or  very  serious
   hardship for the Claimant or her partner in Ghana  could  not  reach  the
   threshold required.


   The Hearing

3. The matter  therefore  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
   whether there is a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal. At the hearing Mr  Davies  conceded  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had failed adequately to consider the evidence  with  regard  to
   the availability of fertility treatment in  Ghana  and  consequently  her
   finding that the  Claimant  would  not  be  able  to  continue  fertility
   treatment in Ghana was not  adequately  reasoned.   Both  representatives
   agreed that there was no inadequacy of reasoning in relation to the First-
   tier Tribunal's finding that the Claimant's partner could not speak Ga.

Discussion

4.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Claimant  met   the
   requirements of EX1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because there
   were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Ghana.  The
   factual  findings  which  led  her  to  this  conclusion  were  that  the
   Claimant's partner's home, work and family were in the United Kingdom and
   he would have language difficulties in Ghana. She  also  found  that  the
   Claimant and her partner would be unable to continue fertility  treatment
   outside Ghana. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal challenge  both
   of these  findings.  The  Secretary  of  State  contends  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  failed  to  make  a  finding  that  fertility   treatment   was
   unavailable in Ghana and that Ghana is a multilingual  country  in  which
   eighty languages are spoken and English  is  the  official  language  and
   lingua franca.


5. I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  inadequately
   reasoned. The Secretary of State's case as set out  in  the  reasons  for
   refusal letter  (RFRL)  at  page  4  was  that  fertility  treatment  was
   available in Ghana and a web link to that evidence was  provided  in  the
   letter. The First-tier Tribunal failed to address this in coming  to  her
   conclusions and therefore that finding cannot stand. Mr Diwnycz  accepted
   that there was no challenge to the Judge's finding  that  the  Claimant's
   partner could not speak Ga. The Secretary of State was not represented at
   the appeal and the point in relation to English being the  lingua  franca
   in Ghana is not in the RFRL. However, in concluding that his inability to
   speak the language would amount to an insurmountable obstacle or  serious
   hardship, the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard any relevant case
   law and in particular the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  R(on  the
   application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440.


6. In all the circumstances therefore I  find  that  there  was  a  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I  preserve  the
   finding of fact that the Claimant's partner cannot speak Ga.


Notice of decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the Claimant's  appeal  involved
the making of a material error of law.

I set the decision aside and the appeal will be determined  de  novo  having
regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements  due
to the nature and extent of fact finding required  by  a  Judge  other  than
Judge Richards-Clarke.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Dated 31 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

