
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07108/2017
     HU/07109/2017
     HU/07111/2017
     HU/07112/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2018                            |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                         ms E M A (first Appellant)
                         mr D O O (second Appellant)
                         mr E T O (third Appellant)
                         mr T O O (fourth Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms P Glass, Counsel, instructed by Ineyab Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are  a  family  from  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are the parents of the  third  and  fourth  appellants,  two
    minor children who were born on 19 December 2006 and 15 December  2011
    respectively.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent dated  5  June  2017  to  refuse
    their human rights application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of their family and private lives  under  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE.  In a decision promulgated  on  31  May  2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R L Walker dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission from the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  may  have  erred  in
    relation to the adequacy of the best interests' assessment of the third
    appellant who has been here  for  ten  years  as  a  child  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer, 29 August 2018).

 3. The appellants' grounds are as follows:

      1) ground 1:  inadequate consideration of the best  interests  of  the
         children;

      2) ground 2: status of the third appellant as a qualifying  child,  it
         was submitted that the reasonableness  assessment  was  inadequate.
         Bearing in mind what was said by Lane J in MT  and  ET  (children's
         best interests ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88,  at  [34],
         something more than immigration status is  required  and  that  the
         starting point is that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary and that the judge  did  not  give
         significant weight to the fact  that  the  third  appellant  was  a
         qualifying child.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. Ms Glass relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that the third
    appellant is now 12 and at secondary school although she accepted  that
    this was not before the Upper Tribunal in terms of  the  error  of  law
    assessment.  She relied on ZH Tanzania and submitted that it was  clear
    that the courts have decided that children are  not  parcels  and  that
    great weight should be attached to their best interests  and  that  the
    sins of the  parents  should  not  be  taken  into  consideration  when
    considering the best interests.

 5. Ms Glass further submitted that Judge Walker's assessment of  the  best
    interests was inadequate and he failed to deal with the specific  test.
    The point is that the  children  have  put  down  roots.   She  further
    submitted that whilst the judge directed himself at [45] to Section 55,
    this was inadequate.  Ms Glass relied on MA Pakistan  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    709 and particularly at  paragraph  57  that  any  issues  of  unlawful
    conduct have no role in the best interests' assessment.

 6. Similarly, relying on Kaur (children's best  interests/public  interest
    interface) [2017] UKUT 14 it is  vital  to  have  a  full  and  careful
    assessment of the best interests and  these  children  never  lived  in
    Nigeria and the eldest child has lived almost all of his  life  in  the
    UK.  Although Ms Glass acknowledged that Judge Walker had accepted that
    the children's best interests were to remain in the UK  and  for  their
    lives not to be disrupted, she submitted that he stopped there and that
    he had failed to adequately engage with all aspects of  the  children's
    best interests.

 7. In respect of ground 2, Section 117B is addressed by the judge at  [42]
    of the decision and reasons, however significant weight must  be  given
    to the best interests' assessment in  the  balancing  exercise  and  Ms
    Glass again drew my attention to MA Pakistan.  The starting point would
    be that leave has to be granted and that powerful reasons were not  set
    out.  What was set out was the adults' immigration  history.   Although
    Ms Glass initially submitted that  this  immigration  history  was  not
    relevant, she accepted  that  it  was  relevant  as  part  of  a  wider
    reasonable assessment although  not  as  part  of  the  best  interests
    assessment.  Ms Glass  relied  on  paragraph  15  of  the  grounds  and
    submitted that  the  findings  at  [47],  that  the  overall  situation
    warrants the family returning to Nigeria, were not adequately reasoned.



 8. Mr Whitwell submitted  that  Judge  Walker  had  found  that  the  best
    interests of the children were to remain in the UK and that at no point
    did the parents' immigration history  factor  in  that  best  interests
    assessment.   That is patently the case.   At [45]  the  judge  directs
    himself to the best interests.  I bear in mind that the judge  went  on
    to consider five factors:

      1) that the minor appellants would be moving as a family unit;

      2) that there was a functioning education system in Nigeria and  there
         was no claim that the children would not be educated  or  it  would
         not be available to them;

      3) that, as set out at [46], in terms of going to  Nigeria  the  minor
         appellants would not  be  strangers  to  Nigeria,  the  people  and
         customs and culture as  the  appellants  "appear  to  have  existed
         within the Nigerian diaspora in the UK";

      4) the judge made findings in relation to the  family  being  able  to
         attend similar churches or branches of the church on return;

      5) the judge made a finding, contrary to the evidence of the first and
         second appellants whom the judge did not find  credible,  that  the
         family would have family support in Nigeria [46].

 9. Mr Whitwell further submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not  been
    taken to anything that Ms Glass suggested had not been assessed by  the
    judge or not been taken  into  consideration  in  the  best  interests'
    assessment.  Mr Whitwell relied on what was said  in  EV  (Philippines)
    and Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 specifically at paragraph 36:

         "In a sense the Tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an  answer
         falls to be given to the question: is it in the best  interests  of
         the child to remain?  The longer the child has been here, the  more
         advanced (or critical) the stage of his education, the  looser  his
         ties with the country in question, and  the  more  deleterious  the
         consequences of his return, the greater the weight that falls  into
         one side of the scales.  If it is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's
         best interests that he should not  return,  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control may well not tip the balance.  By  contrast  if
         it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only on  balance
         (with some factors pointing the other way) the result  may  be  the
         opposite".

10. Mr Whitwell further emphasised the lack of any information  to  suggest
    what it was that the  First  tier  Tribunal  had  not  considered  when
    assessing the children's best interests.  It was his submission that it
    cannot be said that any child over 7 can never leave the UK.




11. It was not disputed that at the time of the hearing the  appellant  was
    still in primary education and at this stage  of  his  life  there  was
    nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that  there  was
    anything further in the best interests' assessment over and  above  his
    education, his friends, his family and their links to the church,  that
    the judge ought to have addressed.


12. I take into account that it is not disputed, that the  judge,  at  [45]
    and [46] conducted a best interests' assessment and did in  fact  reach
    the conclusion in favour of the appellants, that it  would  be  in  the
    best interests of the children, for their lives not to be disrupted  in
    any way, particularly their education, by a move to Nigeria.  The judge
    did so taking into account all the evidence  before  him,  adopting  an
    appropriately wide focus on  the  evidence,  including  the  children's
    schooling and the length of the third appellant's  residence  (at  [16]
    and [40]) and there was nothing before me to  suggest  that  there  was
    anything the judge failed to take into consideration.

13. It is evident the judge  considered  all  the  factors  before  him  in
    reaching the conclusion that he did that  the  best  interests  of  the
    minor appellants would be for their  lives  not  to  be  disrupted,  in
    particular their education by a move to Nigeria.  The judge had in mind
    the evidence before him,  including  the  documentary  evidence.   This
    included witness statements from the adult appellants,  a  letter  from
    the third appellant's school which indicated that as of Tuesday  8  May
    2018 the third appellant was in year six at primary school and  was  on
    track to reach the expected level in his SATs test and  had  secured  a
    place for high school in September 2018 with 100% attendance  and  that
    his parents were interested in his education.  The judge reflected this
    in his findings, including at [24] that the third appellant  was  doing
    well at school and that the fourth appellant had started primary school
    the previous year ([40]).

14. There was also a GP record of vaccinations and attendance to his GP for
    minor matters,  together  with  letters  in  evidence  in  support  and
    photographs and medical evidence in relation to the first appellant.

15. The judge also took into consideration that the move  would  result  in
    some disruption to their lives.  It was unclear what  further  analysis
    could have been undertaken.  No error of law is disclosed in ground 1.

16. In respect of ground 2,  the  judge  noted,  at  [32],  the  very  poor
    immigration history and overstaying of the adult appellants.  That  was
    the  first  factor  taken  into  consideration  in  the  reasonableness
    assessment.  Such a finding was available to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. The second factor taken  into  consideration  was  the  burden  to  the
    taxpayer in terms of education and the NHS (it not having been disputed
    that the first appellant had had access  to  antiretroviral  drugs  for
    over a decade) at [42] in terms of the Section 117B assessment.

18. The third factor in the Tribunal's consideration of whether there  were
    powerful reasons against the grant of leave, was  that,  at  [30],  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard the adult appellants  and  found
    their account to be evasive and unconvincing and was satisfied that the
    evidence given was far from simultaneous and "what they consider to  be
    the best to say rather than being based on the truth".

19. Mr Whitwell submitted that these were very powerful reasons outweighing
    the children's best interests.  Mr Whitwell relied on paragraph  76  of
    the respondent's  family  migration  guidance,  version  1.0  dated  22
    February 2018 which provides that such strong reasons may  arise  where
    for example the child will be returning with the family  unit  and  the
    parents have deliberately sought to circumvent the immigration  control
    or abuse the immigration process.  Although it could  well  be  that  a
    different Tribunal might  have  reached  a  different  conclusion,  the
    judge's findings were adequately reasoned.

20.  I take into account what was said in the Presidential panel in MT  and
    ET including in the headnote as follows:

         'A very young child, who has not started school  or  who  has  only
         recently done so, will have difficulty  in  establishing  that  her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be.  This position, however, changes over time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part.'

21. The child considered in the case of MT and ET was  fourteen  years  old
    and in that case the Upper Tribunal found that, given the  strength  of
    the child's case her parent's conduct in  using  a  false  document  to
    obtain employment, for which she had received a  community  order,  did
    not constitute powerful reasons why leave should not be granted.

22. I accept Mr Whitwell's submission that the child's best interests in MT
    and ET were significantly stronger, including that child had  'embarked
    on a course of studies leading to the  taking  of  GCSEs'  whereas  the
    third appellant in the appeal before me was still at primary school  at
    the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  (as  identified
    by the judge at [24].

23. In terms of ground 2, the judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusions
    he did in terms of reasonableness and it was not a  case  that  it  was
    just the immigration history that the judge  took  into  consideration.
    The  judge  considered  the  wider  factors,  including  the  financial
    elements, the use of the NHS and the education  system,  together  with
    what the judge found to be a lack of credibility in evidence  from  the
    first and second appellants.

24. The judge properly took into consideration that the best  interests  of
    the children were for them to remain in the UK and  took  into  account
    the place of those children in the wider world, including school.

25. The First-tier Tribunal properly followed the  fact-sensitive  approach
    required.   The  judge  properly  considered  the  relevant  case  law,
    including, at [47], MA (Pakistan).  This is a case where the judge made
    findings available to him and the strength  of  the  minor  appellants'
    best interests, reflected in those  findings,  was  not  at  the  level
    considered in MT and ET.   Equally, as outlined above, there were other
    considerations over and above the poor immigration history,  which  the
    judge properly took into consideration and which amounted  to  powerful
    reasons why leave should not be granted.  No error of law is  disclosed
    in ground 2.

Conclusion

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  24 October 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals are dismissed I make no fee award.

Signed                                  Date:  24 October 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
