
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                               Appeal Numbers: HU/07309/2016
                                                               HU/07311/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 February 2018                        |On 28 February 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                             Ms BAL MUKARI MAGAR
                           mr JAGAT BAHADUR MAGAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellants are the adult children of Mr  Kharka  Bahadur  Magar,  a
    former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas ("the sponsor"). They  appealed
    decisions of the respondent Entry Clearance Officer, dated 17  February
    2016, refusing them leave to enter to join the sponsor, who is  settled
    in the UK. The dispute in these appeals has been whether the  decisions
    amounted to a breach of article 8. The respondent decided  family  life
    did not exist as between the appellants and the sponsor but, even if it
    did, any interference with family life was outweighed by the legitimate
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

 2. The appeals were heard by the First-tier Tribunal,  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross, on 3 July 2017. The sponsor gave evidence. The  judge  carefully
    considered whether the facts showed that family life for  the  purposes
    of article 8 was  in  existence  as  between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor. In particular, she noted there were other siblings and a  very
    large extended family living in Nepal.  However,  the  appellants,  who
    were 27 and 23 years of age at the date of application, were  unmarried
    and had not started families of their own. The sponsor was  in  regular
    contact with them. The appellants were unemployed and dependent on  the
    sponsor's financial support. The judge concluded she  was  "just  about
    persuaded on the balance of probabilities that family life  does  exist
    between the appellants and their father".

 3.  Submissions  were  made  to   the   judge   that,   when   considering
    proportionality, the historic injustice  accorded  to  Gurkha  veterans
    should be taken into account and, if the appellants would have  settled
    in the UK long before  but  for  the  historic  injustice,  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  immigration  controls  would  be  outweighed
    (Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT
    00567 (IAC), Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ  8).  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied the sponsor would have settled in the UK long ago if  he  had
    had the opportunity to do so, noting that, having  been  granted  entry
    clearance on 9 July 2009, the sponsor did not travel to the UK until 25
    April 2012.

 4. In any event, the judge considered the historic  injustice  factor  was
    outweighed in the particular circumstances of the case. Firstly, taking
    account of section 117B, she noted the appellants did not speak English
    and, given their lack of education, they were unlikely to  be  able  to
    find employment in the UK. Secondly, she noted  that  the  sponsor  had
    been complicit in his late wife's attempt to  deceive  the  immigration
    authorities by including within a previous application a child who  was
    not in fact her child but her grandchild. The judge noted  the  sponsor
    was unemployed and could visit or return to live in Nepal.  He  had  no
    other relatives in the UK. The judge found it was appropriate to attach
    significant weight to the deception and she reasoned that the weight to
    be attached to the historic injustice or, as she put it, "the  debt  of
    gratitude" owed to the sponsor was significantly reduced.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    on renewal by the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  grounds  made  the  following
    points;

       . The judge's reasoning that the sponsor would not  have  settled  in
         the UK in 1971 because of his actions in 2009/12 was, at  its  very
         best, "extremely tenuous" and  was,  in  any  event,  incapable  of
         determining the question of whether the appellant  was  subject  to
         the historic injustice. The correct test was  whether  the  sponsor
         would or might have settled here but the judge only  asked  herself
         whether he would;

       . The judge erred by recognising that, if all that was relied  on  in
         the public interest side of  the  balance  were  the  interests  of
         immigration control, the historic injustice factor  would  normally
         require a decision in the appellant's favour (Ghising);

       . The judge erred by relying on the sponsor's  deception  and  should
         have asked herself whether the appellants had  a  poor  immigration
         history or criminal antecedents;

       . The judge erred in her application of the factors in  section  117B
         which did not represent  a  radical  departure  from  nor  override
         previous case law on article 8; and

       . The judge erred by taking account of the  fact  the  sponsor  could
         return to Nepal as reducing the weight to the family  life  between
         him and the appellants.

 6. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's approach to the question of family life was erroneous.

 7. Mr Jarvis helpfully narrowed the issues. Firstly, he accepted the force
    of the submission that the judge erred in reasoning from the  sponsor's
    behaviour in 2009/12 that he would not have settled in the  UK  in  the
    1970s.  I agree. Such an inference could only rationally be drawn after
    making clear findings about the reasons behind the sponsor's decisions.
    Mr Wilford told me  that  this  point  was  not  taken  in  either  the
    respondent's decision notices or  by  the  presenting  officer  at  the
    hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  where   he   represented   the
    appellants. The judge's reasoning cannot support her conclusion.

 8. This effectively opened the way to the appellants  to  argue  that  the
    historic injustice point should be accorded predominant weight  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise, so there was material error in  the
    judge's decision.

 9. Secondly, Mr Jarvis accepted the judge erred in regarding  the  section
    117B factors as capable of outweighing the  historic  injustice.  There
    was some discussion as to the weight which could be accorded to section
    117B factors in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New  Delhi  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320, which appeared to support the view that they were unlikely  to
    outweigh the historic injustice point (see  Lindblom  LJ  at  paragraph
    57). I find the judge erred in this respect but such  error  would  not
    have affected the outcome because it is clear that her  primary  reason
    for dismissing the appeals was that the historic injustice  factor  did
    not carry its usual weight on the facts of the case.

10. The representatives agreed that the determinative issue in this  appeal
    was whether the judge  was  entitled  to  find  the  fact  the  sponsor
    connived in the deception practised by  his  late  wife  in  her  entry
    clearance application was a matter which could  outweigh  the  historic
    injustice.

11. In Ghising, the Upper Tribunal explained the following in  relation  to
    the historic injustice point:

         "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article
         8 is held to be engaged and the fact  that  but  for  the  historic
         wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

             "... were prevented from settling in the U.K. That is why  the
             historic injustice is such an important  factor  to  be  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and why  the  applicant
             dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has  such
             a strong claim to have  his  article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
             notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
             interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy". [41]

         In other words, the historic injustice issue will carry significant
         weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to
         outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  Respondent,  where  these
         consist solely of the public interest just described.

         60.  Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be  appreciated
         that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the "public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy", which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed. But, if
         the Respondent is relying only upon the public  interest  described
         by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41 of Gurung, then  the  weight
         to be given to the  historic  injustice  will  normally  require  a
         decision in the Appellant's favour."

12. In this case, Mr Wilford argued, the appellants  did  not  have  a  bad
    immigration history and the judge should have focused on this, not  the
    deception by his mother. In reply, Mr Jarvis said the  authorities  did
    not specify precisely what was  capable  of  outweighing  the  historic
    injustice point. In fact, the Court  of  Appeal  in  Gurung  said  that
    courts should be wary of attempting to give prescriptive guidance as to
    the weight to be given to particular factors in the balancing  exercise
    (see paragraph 36). He said judges should take  account  of  everything
    and the question of weight would be for them. The deception was plainly
    capable of being materially significant and the judge was  entitled  to
    find the debt of gratitude owed was reduced. Mr Wilford said that, even
    if Mr Jarvis were correct, he would  argue  that,  on  the  facts,  the
    deception was not capable of outweighing the  historic  injustice.  The
    focus should be on the effect on the appellants and their family life.

13. I reserved my decision on the question of whether the judge's  decision
    contains a material error of law.

14. At paragraph 16, the judge said this:

         "I have considered what, if any, weight I should attach to the fact
         that the appellants'  mother  sought  to  deceive  the  immigration
         authorities in her application for entry  clearance  by  falsifying
         details to suggest that her grandson  was  in  fact  her  son.  Her
         application was refused as a result of the deception  and  she  has
         since died. I consider it highly likely that [the sponsor]  himself
         was complicit in the false claim.  As  the  person  sponsoring  the
         fraudulent application, and who would have been receiving into  his
         home the grandson had the deception been successful, I find that he
         must have been aware that a false application was being made. As  a
         result, I do consider it appropriate to attach  significant  weight
         to this factor. I accept that the appellants  themselves  may  have
         played no part in the deception. However, it is only  due  to  [the
         sponsor's] positive act of serving [in] the armed services of  this
         country that the appellants even have any potentially viable  basis
         for applying for entry clearance at all. Were it not for  the  fact
         that [the sponsor] is a Gurkha veteran, the appellants  would  have
         no arguable case for obtaining entry clearance.  I  find  that  the
         debt of gratitude owed to [the  sponsor],  and  the  weight  to  be
         attached to the historic injustice,  is  significantly  reduced  in
         this case by the fact that he and his wife sought  to  deceive  the
         immigration authorities of the country that he once served."

15. I note the mother's  application  was  refused  in  January  2012.  The
    notices of decision record that  the  appellants'  mother  presented  a
    "kindred roll" document which recorded one Kamal Kumar as  being  their
    firstborn child, whereas DNA evidence established he was  their  7-year
    old grandson. It is unclear whether the appellants  were  also  seeking
    entry clearance at that time. They were both over 18. I take the  judge
    to have found they were not complicit in the deception,  even  if  they
    were applicants. The deception did not operate on these applications.

16. There was some discussion as to whether the benefit to be  afforded  to
    ex-Gurkha families as a result of the historic injustice  vests  solely
    in the sponsor, to whom the debt of gratitude is owed, or also  in  his
    dependants. If it is the former, then it could be argued  it  had  been
    lost or reduced as a result of the sponsor's actions. If it  is  shared
    between them, then this would not necessarily follow.

17. Ultimately, I do not consider that this helps to  resolve  the  appeal.
    The authorities do not specify what  may  or  may  not  be  taken  into
    account and it is a matter for the judge as to the weight to  be  given
    to any individual factor. I consider the judge  was  entitled  to  take
    account of the deception, at least to the extent that the  dilution  of
    the strength of the historic injustice factor would be a disbenefit  to
    the sponsor (who wanted his children to join him in the UK). It was not
    an error to take it into account.

18. The fact the appellants were not complicit in the deception would,  all
    things being equal, reduce  to  the  weight  to  be  given  to  it.  Mr
    Wilford's second argument can therefore  be  taken  together  with  the
    first. However, once it is clear that the judge was entitled to  regard
    the weight to be given to the historic injustice should be reduced,  it
    is very difficult to show the judge  erred  in  giving  any  individual
    factor a certain weight. She heard all the evidence  and,  having  made
    her findings, approached her task as  to  how  the  balancing  exercise
    should be resolved with care. In my judgment, it cannot be said that it
    was not open to the judge find that the public  interest  prevailed  in
    this case.

19. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeals and her decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and her decision dismissing the appeals on article 8 grounds is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 9 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


