
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07884/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2018                           |On 06 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                  mary [o]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Praisoody, Counsel instructed by Deccan Prime
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Milis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Hawden-Beal   sitting   at   Birmingham)
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to grant her further leave to remain as the partner of a  person
    present and settled here, or to  grant  her  further  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules on compassionate grounds.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 6 November 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer gave  his  reasons
    for granting the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. In her decision promulgated on 28 April 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hawden-Beal found  the  refusal  decision  to  be  proportionate.   The
    situation the appellant found herself in was not  of  her  own  making.
    Her husband's aggressive behaviour towards her on account of his  brain
    damage had resulted in separation.  She was still in contact  with  him
    and he still regarded  her  as  his  wife.   There  was  no  supporting
    statement from the husband. The grounds contended that  there  were  no
    proper reasons for supporting the finding that there were no compelling
    circumstances.  The Judge had failed to engage with the effects on  the
    appellant of her husband's debilitating illness.   A  similar  approach
    should have been taken to comparable cases where spouses have  suffered
    domestic violence:

         "It is arguable that there has been a failure  properly  to  assess
         the impact on the appellant arising from her husband's brain damage
         when considering proportionality under Article 8 and whether  there
         were compelling/exceptional circumstances in this  case  justifying
         considering the case outside the Rules."

The Rule 24 Response

 4. On 30 December 2017, a member of the Specialist Appeal Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  As this was  an  appeal  reliant
    upon Article 8, it was incumbent upon the appellant to provide evidence
    of the strength of her connections to the United Kingdom, and  for  her
    to provide evidence that any decision to expect her  to  leave  the  UK
    would be disproportionate.  It was noted that  the  appellant  did  not
    even attend the hearing,  and  was  content  to  rely  on  her  witness
    statement.  At paragraphs 17 and 18 of her  determination,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had noted the compassionate circumstances, but  she
    concluded that the decision of the respondent was  proportionate.   The
    grounds appeared to focus on why the decision  of  the  respondent  was
    disproportionate, not the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an  error  law  was  made
    out, Ms Praisoody developed the arguments put forward in the grounds of
    appeal.  Her instructions were that the appellant  had  been  ready  to
    attend the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal with her husband, but  he
    had a violent episode which prevented this.  He was being looked  after
    by his daughter.   She  agreed  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    relating to the husband's condition.

 6. She submitted that, if the Judge had heard from the appellant, it would
    have been a different story.  Her instructions were that the separation
    was not a permanent one.  Their  relationship  was  on  and  off.   The
    appellant should be given another chance.   She  should  be  given  the
    opportunity to attend a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  with
    her daughter.  The Secretary of State had a policy of granting leave to
    remain to persons whose marriages had broken down irretrievably due  to
    domestic violence.  It was unfair that the  appellant's  situation  was
    not also covered by a policy.

 7. Since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the  circumstances  which
    would await the appellant in Kenya  had  changed.   Last  Saturday  her
    mother had died.  This meant that she no longer had  any  relatives  in
    Kenya.

 8. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Milis submitted that it was hard to see
    what the error of the Judge was, and indeed  why  permission  had  been
    granted.  The appellant did not turn up for  her  appeal  hearing,  and
    there was no evidence from her daughter.  There  was  also  no  medical
    evidence.  The appellant's solicitors had asked for the  appeal  to  be
    decided on the papers.  In order to rely on evidence that was  not  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal, she could make a fresh claim.

 9. In reply, Ms Praisoody  insisted  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her husband was still subsisting.  She had  not  had  the
    opportunity to explain her situation.  Accordingly, the Judge had  made
    an uniformed decision.  The Judge ought to have given  more  weight  to
    the appellant's difficulties.

Discussion

10. The relevant factual background is that the appellant was granted entry
    clearance as a student, and was subsequently granted leave to remain as
    a spouse from May 2012 until October 2015.   On  1  October  2015,  she
    applied for further leave to remain.  She said that her husband  was  a
    very sick man and had brain damage as the result of a serious condition
    he got into in July 2013.  This was tuberculosis meningitis.   She  was
    not living with him at the moment, as he had become very aggressive due
    to this condition, and he did  not  want  her  to  be  near  him.   The
    situation was beyond her control, and she hoped  that  as  soon  as  he
    recovered he would remember her and that they could be together again.

11. The  application  was  refused  on  1  March  2016.   The  respondent's
    reasoning was that, as they had not been residing together since  2013,
    and as there was no evidence of her having contact  with  her  partner,
    their relationship was not subsisting.  She had  family  in  Kenya  who
    might be able to support her in adjusting to life outside the UK.

12. In her grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    accepted that she was no longer living with her husband.  As the result
    of his TB and meningitis, he had suffered from memory loss for  several
    weeks, and he then  seemed  to  have  a  change  of  personality.   The
    appellant had put up with this for about three months, after which  she
    had to move out.  She did her best to manage the situation, but it  had
    become intolerable.  She wished to rely on the concept of "particularly
    difficult  circumstances"  as  she  had  a  reasonable  expectation  of
    settlement in due course, either via the marriage route, or via the 10-
    year private life route.

13. The appellant asked for an oral hearing, and one was  scheduled  to  be
    heard in Birmingham on 19 April 2017.   As stated by Judge Hawden-Beal,
    the day before the hearing a fax was received at the Tribunal from  the
    appellant's solicitors  stating  that  she  wished  her  appeal  to  be
    considered without  a  hearing.   The  solicitors  did  not  offer  any
    explanation for this change of position.  Mr Lawson,  who  appeared  on
    behalf of the Home Office, did not object to the appeal  proceeding  in
    the appellant's absence, so the Judge proceeded with the hearing of the
    appeal in the appellant's absence pursuant to Rule 28 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014.

14. In her witness statement signed on 15 April 2017,  the  appellant  said
    that soon after his discharge from  hospital,  her  husband  no  longer
    wanted to see her.  She still loved him and she remained  hopeful  that
    he would soon make a full recovery and they could start living together
    again.  She regularly spoke to him on the phone  and  occasionally  met
    him.  When she had last spoken to him, which was about a week  ago,  he
    had said that she was still his wife and that he would visit her lawyer
    with her to prepare a witness statement to support her appeal, and also
    to provide evidence of his medical condition and the treatment  he  was
    undergoing.  However, he had failed to attend as  agreed.   Hence,  she
    had been unable to submit a witness statement or  supporting  documents
    about his medical condition.

15. In her decision, the Judge Hawden-Beal rehearsed  the  background,  the
    evidence and the way in which the appeal had proceeded.   At  paragraph
    [14], the Judge held  that  the  appellant  could  not  show  that  her
    relationship with her husband was subsisting.  At paragraph  [18],  she
    said that the situation  in  which  the  appellant  found  herself  was
    unfortunate and not of her own making.  The husband had suffered  brain
    damage and as a result  had  become  aggressive,  and  had  effectively
    turned against her to such a degree "that she felt unable  to  continue
    residing in the matrimonial home".  She  had  not  cohabited  with  her
    husband for the last four years.  She claimed that  she  was  still  in
    contact and that he still regarded her as his wife,  and  that  he  was
    going to make a statement to that effect, "but he has not".  There  was
    therefore, regrettably, nothing to support her claim that the  marriage
    was subsisting.

16. The Judge went on in paragraph [19] to say that, in the  circumstances,
    she was satisfied  that  the  evidence  did  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest considerations which justified the maintenance of the  refusal
    decision.

17. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

18. I consider that the Judge has given adequate reasons for dismissing the
    appeal, notwithstanding the compassionate circumstances relied upon  by
    the appellant.  In essence, the grounds of appeal are an attempt to re-
    argue the case, and to bring forward additional  arguments  not  raised
    below as to why the  appeal  should  exceptionally  have  been  allowed
    outside the Rules.  The appellant claimed that her marital relationship
    with her husband was subsisting, but the evidence did not support  this
    claim.  The appellant claimed that  her  husband's  condition  was  not
    permanent, and she indicated that he  was  likely  to  recover  in  the
    foreseeable future,  thus  enabling  the  marital  relationship  to  be
    resumed.  But again the appellant did not produce the medical  evidence
    to substantiate this claim.

19. At all material times, the appellant had the benefit  of  legal  advice
    and assistance from Deccan Prime Solicitors LLP,  but  nonetheless  she
    did not avail herself of the opportunity to attend the hearing  of  the
    appeal, where she could have explained more fully  her  situation.   By
    electing for the hearing to proceed in her absence, the appellant  also
    chose to forego the benefit of having a legal representative to present
    her case in the most effective way.

20. However, for the avoidance of doubt, I do not consider  that  the  root
    cause of the appellant's failure before the First-tier Tribunal  was  a
    lack of effective representation.  The attempt to re-argue  the  appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal does not disclose any point of real merit.  It is
    not alleged that her marriage to her husband broke  down  irretrievably
    due to him being violent towards her, and so  the  appellant  does  not
    come within the  scope  of  the  policy  governing  proven  victims  of
    domestic violence, a policy which has been codified in Appendix FM.  As
    there is no policy relating to someone in the appellant's situation, it
    would have been quite improper for the Judge to proceed as if there was
    one; or to find that there were exceptional circumstances  because  the
    appellant's situation was analogous to  someone  who  came  within  the
    scope of the policy.   It  is  trite  law  that  Article  8  is  not  a
    consolation prize to be awarded to those who  cannot  bring  themselves
    within the Rules and/or an applicable policy.

21. It is also argued in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  that
    the appellant had a legitimate expectation of being allowed  to  settle
    in the UK, either as a spouse or on the grounds of accruing  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence from 2009, when  she  first  entered  as  a
    student.  The Judge gave adequate reasons for rejecting  this  line  of
    argument in paragraph [17] of her decision.  She observed that when the
    appellant came as a student in 2009, she knew that she could not settle
    here.  She acknowledged that when the appellant was granted  a  spousal
    visa in 2013, she had an expectation of being allowed to settle here in
    due course. For this reason, the Judge  said  that  she  attached  some
    weight to her private life.  But her  status  was  precarious  because,
    until she was given leave to remain indefinitely, her status was always
    going to be dependent upon another successful application for leave  to
    remain as a spouse, with the attendant risk that  such  an  application
    would be refused.

22. The Judge found that the situation in which the appellant found herself
    was unfortunate, and it was not of her own making.  The  Judge  thereby
    acknowledged that there were  compelling  circumstances  in  the  case.
    Thus, it is not true, as contended in the grounds, that the Judge found
    that there were no compelling circumstances.  The Judge  did  what  she
    was supposed to do, which was to assess the strength of the appellant's
    case under Article 8(1)  against  the  public  interest  considerations
    arising under Article 8(2), and to reach a conclusion as to whether the
    decision appealed against was proportionate or  disproportionate.   The
    Judge's reasoning was sound, and no error of law is made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  was  not
asked to make an anonymity direction for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
Tribunal.  Further, I  do  not  consider  that  an  anonymity  direction  is
warranted.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
