

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07636/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2017                     |On 25 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Felix Kwesi Prah
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For Mr Prah:      Mr D. Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals  against  the  determination  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge whose determination was promulgated on  30
       May 2017. I shall have refer to Mr Prah as 'the appellant' as he was
       before the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who  was  born  on  6  September
       1964.  He is 52 years old.  He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  4
       August 1982 when he was about to attain his 18th birthday.   He  had
       previously spent an earlier period in the United Kingdom,  according
       to paragraph 5 of a witness statement he had made.  His father was a
       diplomat and he had spent some time in a  school  near  Kensal  Rise
       before his father was recalled.


    3. The appellant has an appalling history of offending stretching  back
       to 16 June 1986 at which point he had been in the United Kingdom for
       less than 4 years.  It continued until 17  July  2015  when  he  was
       convicted of threatening to kill the witness who had given  evidence
       against  him  in  one  of  his  many  shop-lifting  escapades.   The
       appellant was sentenced  to  2  years  imprisonment.   His  criminal
       offending, which spans 30  years  and  the  entirety  of  his  known
       presence in the United Kingdom, has resulted  in  his  receiving  28
       convictions  for  61  offences.   (In  his  sentencing  remarks,  Mr
       Recorder Holland QC spoke of there being more than  30  offences  of
       shop-lifting, apparently related to drug abuse.)  He is a persistent
       offender, justifying the respondent's decision to remove him as  the
       Secretary of State was required to do under s.32(5)  of  the  United
       Kingdom Borders Act 2007.

    4. Mr Recorder Holland QC made the following comments  when  sentencing
       the appellant in 2015:

     "The threat to kill was an unpleasant and serious one and  in  its  own
         right might have attracted a different charge...it was designed  to
         be taken seriously and designed to punish [the  witness]  for  what
         you saw as her role in your conviction and imprisonment."

    5. The appellant's past offences included  convictions,  admittedly  in
       2003,  for  blackmail  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  3   years
       imprisonment, burglary (2 years imprisonment concurrent) and  common
       assault (4 months consecutive).


    6. It  is,  therefore,  something  of  a  surprise  to  find  that  the
       appellant's deportation was felt by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
       breach his human rights.  It needs some explanation as to  how  this
       situation arose.

    7. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act,  2002
       (as inserted) requires  a  judicial  decision  maker  to  take  into
       account certain additional considerations when considering Article 8
       in cases involving foreign criminals.  The  appellant  falls  within
       the definition of a 'foreign criminal' having been sentenced to more
       than 12 months imprisonment:

          '(1) The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
      interest.
          (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
      the greater is the
          public interest in deportation of the criminal.
          (3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
      sentenced to a period of  imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the
      public interest requires C's deportation  unless      Exception  1  or
      Exception 2 applies.
          (4) Exception 1 applies where-
              (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
      most of C's life,
              (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
      Kingdom, and
               (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
      integration into the country to
              which C is proposed to be deported.'

    8. The same phraseology now occurs in  that  part  of  the  Immigration
       Rules which deals with deportation:


         '398. Where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, ... the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that
         claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
         it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
         outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraph...399A.
         399A. This paragraph  applies...if  -  (a)  the  person  has  been
         lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life;  and  (b)  he  is
         socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and (c)  there  would
         be very significant obstacles to his integration into  the  country
         to which it is proposed he is deported.'


    9. In Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with  Rules)  [2015]  UKUT
       00415 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal demonstrated  how  these  principles
       should be applied.  The Tribunal said:

         "54. In the claimant's case, the question of whether he meets  the
         requirements of paragraph 399A(b)  requires  us  to  weigh  up  all
         considerations relevant to social and cultural integration into the
         UK.  In the claimant's favour, he has been in the UK since 1991  he
         was 4 and was granted ILR in 1998, which means he has been  the  UK
         lawfully for most of his life. His mother, sister and  half-brother
         were naturalised as British citizens in  2003.  He  did  not  start
         offending until he was around 16. He has been to school in the  UK.
         His mother tongue is English: that such a factor  should  count  in
         the claimant's favour is lent force by the fact  that  s.117B(3)(b)
         of the 2002 Act identifies that persons able to speak English  "are
         better able to integrate into society".  The finding of  fact  made
         by the FtT was that he had shown an acceptance of his  conduct  and
         that he had engaged in programmes that will assist him in deviating
         from criminal conduct in the future.
         55. On the other hand, his history of offending (repeated robbery)
         betokens a serious discontinuity  in  his  integration  in  the  UK
         especially because it shows blatant disregard for fellow  citizens.
         His history of offending includes  a  conviction  for  robbery  for
         which he  received  a  sentence  of  42  months  imprisonment.  The
         significant period of time he has spent in prison in consequence of
         his offending has  excluded  him  from  outside  society  for  that
         period. We also agree with Mr Jarvis that even when not  in  prison
         the claimant's lifestyle over the period  when  he  was  committing
         offences was manifestly anti-social. This lifestyle and his  period
         in  prison  have  contributed  to  his  not  able  to  show  he  is
         financially independent. We have to decide whether he  is  socially
         and culturally integrated in the UK in the present. He is  now  29.
         Whilst his recent acceptance of the  reprehensible  nature  of  his
         criminal conduct is an important factor, we consider  the  negative
         factors we  have  just  mentioned  indicate  that  his  history  of
         criminal offending broke the continuity of his social and  cultural
         integration in the UK and he has not regained it. This  means  that
         currently  he  has  not  shown  he  is  socially   and   culturally
         integrated."


   10. The submissions of the appellant's counsel are recorded in paragraph
       30 of the determination:


         'In terms of social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom, it is submitted the appellant can speak English and he has
         had lawful leave to remain, which suggests that he  has  integrated
         over the passage of time, for this length of time, in terms of  the
         rule.'
   11. This  is  hardly  a  ringing  endorsement  of  social  and  cultural
       integration.  At any rate, it sets the threshold at a level  so  low
       that is almost  meaningless.   Importantly  it  entirely  omits  the
       criminal offending from the balance.


   12.  It  is  plain  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was   almost
       exclusively focused on the length of time the appellant has spent in
       the United Kingdom.  Hence the judge continues in  paragraph  64  of
       the determination:


         "As regards whether  the  appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the United Kingdom, Mr Balroop has rightly said  that
         perhaps  34  or  35  years,   (even   allowing   for   five   years
         incarceration) would suggest that the  appellant  is  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the United Kingdom."


   13. The judge went on to point out, however, there was a marked  absence
       of anyone speaking on behalf  of  the  appellant  in  terms  of  his
       cultural or  social  engagement.  Indeed,  the  appellant  described
       himself as a recluse. The judge continued in paragraph 65


         "Even if he was engaged in the fathering of some  eight  children,
         there is no-one speaking to the Tribunal concerning the appellant's
         engagement with those children or any of the five partners that  he
         named in correspondence with the respondent."


   14. The judge went on to record that there was no evidence that  he  had
       worked or contributed to society in terms of payment of  income  tax
       or National Insurance. He recorded the  number  of  failed  personal
       relationships.


   15. The judge's conclusion is found in paragraph 68:


         "There is a background in terms of the probation report suggesting
         that [his offending] is receding. The appellant  himself  has  said
         that he is slowing down, as it were. Whilst  I  am  concerned  that
         this is only a temporary lapse in his  offending  behaviour,  given
         that the question of his proposed deportation may also have  had  a
         temporary curb on his offending and  addiction,  I  am  nonetheless
         drawn  to  the  conclusion  (in  line  with  Mr  Balroop's  initial
         submission) that given this simple extensive period of time;  three
         decades from the appellant entering the United  Kingdom  whilst  he
         was still  a  minor,  the  appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the United Kingdom."


   16. This approach is fundamentally flawed.  It cannot possibly  be  said
       that a person who has, over almost the entire period of his presence
       in the United Kingdom shown a flagrant disregard to the laws of  the
       country, has become integrated within it. The concept of integration
       contains within it a strong sense that a migrant has become embedded
       in the life of the host country in a positive way and  that  he  has
       contributed to the well-being of the country, not necessarily by any
       acts of great merit or philanthropy but by  the  simple  process  of
       becoming a  good  citizen,  participating  in  the  values  of  this
       community, and thereby strengthening and advancing it. There  is  no
       question of integration in the sense referred to in the Rules if the
       migrant is guilty of serial offending and,  in  this  case,  serious
       serial offending over a long  period  of  time.  His  behaviour  has
       undermined the community, not strengthened it. If his behaviour  has
       undermined  society  and  the  cultural  standards   which   society
       recognises as both  essential  and  requiring  preservation,  it  is
       simply perverse for the judge to have found that  the  appellant  is
       socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.


   17. Mr Balroop submitted, according to paragraphs 54 and 55  of  Bossade
       that  the  judge  properly  carried  out  a  balancing  exercise  as
       envisaged by paragraph 399  by taking into account his  presence  in
       the United Kingdom; his settled status;  his  lawful  presence;  the
       presence of the other  family  members;  his  age  when  he  started
       offending and the fact that he  speaks  English  as  being  positive
       factors in favour  of  his  becoming  integrated  into  society.  He
       submitted that the judge then balanced  these  factors  against  his
       offending and concluded that the balance was in favour of his having
       become integrated into the United Kingdom.


   18. I reject that submission or that this properly reflects  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge's approach. As paragraph  55  of  Bossade  makes
       clear, the criminal offending, the time  spent  in  prison  and  his
       inability to show that he was financially independent were  negative
       factors such that the history of criminal  offending  in  that  case
       broke the continuity of his social and cultural integration  in  the
       United Kingdom which had not been regained.  The same applies in the
       case of this appellant.

   19. Had the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered what the Upper Tribunal
       had said in Bossade, he could not have come to the  conclusion  that
       this appellant was  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
       United Kingdom. He is not. There is no evidence that his presence in
       the United Kingdom over three decades has been anything  other  than
       negative. Nothing in terms of his work, his contribution to  society
       or his acceptance of its values provides any support for  a  finding
       that  he  should  be  treated  as  integrated  into  United  Kingdom
       society such as to render  his  removal  unlawful.   The  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge erred in law.

   20. The three factors set out in s.117C (4) ('Exception 1') must each be
       established.   Having  failed  on  the  requirement   to   establish
       integration, it is not, therefore,  necessary  to  consider  whether
       there are very significant obstacles in the appellant's  integration
       into Ghana. However, given the superficial nature of his integration
       into the United Kingdom, there are no obstacles  in  his  continuing
       the life that he has chosen to lead on return to Ghana.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the obstacles were that  he
       has no family to return to and that he has  spent  little,  if  any,
       time there. But then he has no family here to speak of so, there  is
       no material difference.  The judge conceded that Ghana  is  English-
       speaking and that he was brought up  in  a  Ghanaian  household.  He
       accepted that the appellant was reclusive and would  therefore  lose
       little in terms of returning  to  another  country.  Notwithstanding
       this, he found that the appellant would be 'a stranger in  his  home
       country' and that this amounted to very significant obstacles in his
       integration. I am bound to say that I am unable  to  identify  these
       factors as being obstacles, far less very significant ones.

   22. It was accepted by Mr Balroop that I had all the material  necessary
       for me to remake the decision if I found that there was  a  material
       error of law.

   23. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially  erred.
       I allow the appeal of the Secretary  of  State.   I  set  aside  the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal and  remake  it  dismissing
       the appeal of Mr Prah on all grounds.

DECISION

 1. The judge made an error on a point of law and I allow the appeal of the
    Secretary of State.
 2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
 3. I re-make the decision and substitute a  determination  dismissing  the
    appeal on all the grounds advanced.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              24 August 2017






