
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08933/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2018                     |On 28 December 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                            Mudiwa Hannah Madzima
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, instructed by JHI Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 3 December 1998.
     She came to the United Kingdom on 12 December 2010 with  a  cousin  to
    visit her aunt in London.  Her leave as a visitor was  valid  until  30
    May 2011.  Once in the UK,  she  was  reunited  with  her  mother  (the
    sponsor) who had come  to  the  UK  herself  in  2001.   The  appellant
    remained in the UK as an overstayer after her leave expired on  30  May
    2011.

 2. On 16 May 2017, the appellant made an application for indefinite  leave
    to remain as the child of a parent (her mother) settled in the UK under
    para 298 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Her mother  had
    been  granted  ILR  in  July  2016,  having  previously  been   granted
    discretionary leave on the basis of her relationship with her  husband,
    a British citizen.

 3. On making her application for ILR, the appellant and  her  mother  (who
    accompanied her to the respondent's Premium Service Centre  in  Cardiff
    to make the application) were granted a period of  time  until  4  July
    2017 to submit further supporting documentary evidence  in  respect  of
    her application under para 298.

 4. On 8 August 2017, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application
    for leave under para 298 and on the basis of Art 8 both under the Rules
    (para 276ADE(1)) and outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  hearing  took
    place before Judge M Loughridge on 8 January 2008.  The  appellant  was
    not legally represented and appeared in person.

 6. It was readily apparent before  Judge  Loughridge  that  the  appellant
    could not succeed under  para  298  because  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements in para 298(vii) that she had  been  admitted  to  the  UK
    under either para 302 or Appendix FM or para 319R or para 319X  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  accepted  the  Presenting   Officer's
    submission that she had been admitted as a visitor and that, therefore,
    her appeal could only succeed if she could establish a breach of Art  8
    outside the Rules.

 7. Judge Loughridge found that  any  interference  with  her  private  and
    family life protected under Art 8.1 of the ECHR was  proportionate  and
    therefore not a breach of Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant, now legally represented, sought permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lambert) on 5 June 2018.

10. On 26 July 2018, the respondent filed  a  rule  24  notice  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

11. In addition, on 23 July 2018 the appellant filed  further  submissions,
    specifically in relation  to  Ground  1  following  disclosure  by  the
    respondent pursuant to a Data Protection Act request received on 8 June
    2018.

12. Thus, the appeal came before us.

The Issues

    Ground 1

13. Ms Brown, who represented the appellant and who drafted the grounds and
    the further submission made following the grant of permission, accepted
    that Ground 1 could not be relied upon.  That ground contended that the
    judge had been wrong to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    granted entry clearance under para 302 of the Immigration  Rules  as  a
    child seeking limited leave to enter with a view to settlement  as  the
    child of a parent who herself had limited leave  to  enter.   Ms  Brown
    accepted that as a result of the Data Protection Act disclosure made on
    8 June 2018, the appellant had, indeed, been granted leave to enter  as
    a visitor when she arrived in the UK on 12 December 2010 and  had  not,
    as required by para 298(vii), been granted leave to  enter  under  para
    302 of the Immigration Rules.

14. As we indicated at the hearing, there was some uncertainty,  until  the
    Data Protection  Act  disclosure,  as  to  the  basis  upon  which  the
    appellant had entered the UK on 12 December  2010.   Whilst  that,  no
    doubt, justified the appellant raising Ground 1 in her application  for
    permission  to  appeal,  Ms  Brown  entirely  properly  and   correctly
    recognised that she could no longer place any reliance upon it.

15. Ms Brown,  nevertheless,  placed  reliance  upon  Grounds  2-4.   Those
    grounds may be summarised as follows.

    Ground 2

16. The judge was wrong  to  state  in  his  decision  (at  [4])  that  the
    respondent  had  refused  the   appellant's   application   under   the
    Immigration Rules because the requirement in para 298(vii) was not met.
      In  fact,  the  respondent's  decision  relied,  instead,  upon  para
    298(i)(c) and (d), namely that the appellant had  failed  to  establish
    that her mother had "sole responsibility" for her (para  298(i)(c))  or
    that there were "serious and compelling family or other  considerations
    which make exclusion of [the appellant] undesirable" (para  298(i)(d)).
    Ms Brown submitted that that error was material  as  it  prevented  the
    issues arising under para 298(i)(c) and  (d)  being  addressed  by  the
    appellant and her witnesses at the hearing.

    Ground 3

17. The judge applied too restrictive a notion of what constituted  "family
    life" in finding that the appellant's relationship with her mother  did
    not amount to "family life".  Ms Brown maintained  before  us  that  in
    [21] and [33] the judge erred in law  in  finding  that  there  was  no
    family life between the appellant and her mother on the basis that  she
    was now an adult.

    Ground 4

18. Finally, the judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  findings  which  were
    perverse or unsupported by evidence in three respects.

19. First, in assessing what would  be  the  appellant's  circumstances  on
    return to Zimbabwe, he found that her aunt could provide her, at least,
    temporary  accommodation  and  support  such  that  she  would  not  be
    "destitute or homeless" on return (at [35]).  Relying on  the  grounds,
    Ms Brown submitted that there was no evidence that the appellant's aunt
    was in a position to assist the appellant.

20. Secondly, the judge was wrong to take into account,  in  assessing  the
    public interest, that if the appeal  were  allowed  it  "may  encourage
    others to obtain a secondary education in the UK" (at [36]).  Ms  Brown
    submitted that the circumstances of  the  appellant  were  "unique  and
    almost impossible to deliberately replicate" such that the judge's view
    was "completely baseless" when applied to the appellant.

21. Thirdly, in assessing proportionality, the judge was wrong to take into
    account that it was the appellant's intension to go to university since
    that was only an aspiration and not a fact as at the date  of  hearing.
    It was wrong, therefore, for the judge to  have  regard  to  that  when
    assessing the impact upon her family in the UK by looking at her future
    circumstances on  the  basis  that  she  would  leave  home  to  go  to
    university in the UK or, alternatively, if the decision was upheld, she
    would return to Zimbabwe.

    The Response

22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells relied upon the rule 24 notice.
     He submitted that  the  judge  had  been  correct  to  find  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  and  her  only
    claim was under Art 8 outside the Rules.  He submitted that  the  judge
    had properly dealt with  the  evidence  and  made  sustainable  factual
    findings, including that the decision  to  refuse  her  leave  was  not
    disproportionate and, therefore, was not a breach of Art 8.

Discussion

23. We take each of the three grounds relied upon in turn.

    Ground 2

24. There is no doubt that the judge misstated the  basis  upon  which  the
    respondent in his decision letter concluded that  the  appellant  could
    not succeed under para 298 of the Rules.  At [4] of his  decision,  the
    judge wrongly stated that the refusal  was  under  para  298(vii).   In
    fact, the basis of the refusal was that the appellant had not  produced
    evidence to establish that she met the requirements of  para  298(i)(c)
    or (d).  What the judge said in [4] reflects, instead, the position  of
    the Presenting Officer before the judge.  It is  a  position  which  Ms
    Brown, entirely properly, accepts is correct.  The appellant could  not
    meet the requirement in para 298(vii).  We do  not,  however,  consider
    that the misstatement by the judge of the  basis  of  the  respondent's
    refusal in [4] of his determination was, in any way,  material  to  his
    decision to dismiss the appeal.

25. The judge correctly identified that the appellant  could  only  succeed
    under Art 8 (which was the only relevant ground of appeal) outside  the
    Rules.  He, correctly, approached that issue  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules,  namely  para
    298.   We  do  not  accept  Ms  Brown's  submission  that  the  judge's
    misstatement of the basis  of  the  respondent's  refusal  in  any  way
    prejudiced the appellant  at  the  hearing.   Reaching  a  decision  in
    respect of Art 8 outside the Rules, the judge was required to  consider
    all the appellant's circumstances both  in  the  UK  and  if  she  were
    returned to Zimbabwe.  The public interest was, undoubtedly, engaged on
    the basis that she could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  and
    that the public interest in effective immigration control applied  (see
    s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA
    Act 2002")).  The judge was required to determine  whether  there  were
    "compelling" circumstances such  that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" sufficient to outweigh the
    public interest in effective immigration control (see, R  (Agyarko  and
    Another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11  at  [60]).   Subject  to  the  specific
    points made by Ms Brown in respect of Grounds 3 and 4, it is  clear  to
    us that the judge did consider all the circumstances.  The judge  heard
    oral evidence from the appellant, her mother (the sponsor) and "uncle".
     The judge set out their evidence in some detail at [6]-[13] and  [15].
    He could, of course, not do other than proceed on the  basis  that  she
    did not meet the requirements of para 298(vii).  Ms Brown was unable to
    identify  for  us  any  matter  which  the  appellant  was  denied  the
    opportunity to address before the judge.  For these reasons, we  reject
    Ground 2.

    Ground 3

26. Ms Brown submitted that the judge was wrong to  find  in  [33]  of  his
    determination that the relationships  between  the  appellant  and  her
    family in the UK,  in  particular  her  mother,  stepfather  and  half-
    brothers were: "properly characterised  in  my  view  as  private  life
    rather than family life, bearing in mind that the Appellant is  now  an
    adult."

27. At [21] of his determination,  the  judge  set  out  the  following  in
    relation to "family life" and "private life" under Art 8:

         "21. Family life is normally taken to  mean  relationships  between
             spouses/partners, between parents/children and  between  minor
             siblings. Private life is normally taken to mean  the  network
             of  social  ties  established  by  a  person  outside  his/her
             immediate family,  relationships  between  parents  and  adult
             children and relationships between adult siblings."

    Ms Brown submitted that this statement was not incorrect insofar as  it
    goes but it failed, in the light of the case law, to take into  account
    that family life could exist between an adult child  and  other  family
    members if there was  "evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency,
    involving more than normal emotional ties" (see Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 at [14]).

28. The relevant legal principles in determining  what  constitute  "family
    life" for the purposes of Art 8 is not  controversial.   The  principal
    case law was helpfully summarised in the judgment of Lindblom LJ  (with
    whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) in Rai v ECO, New  Delhi  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 320 at [17]-[20] as follows:

         "17. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life  implies".  Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed  right".



         18.  In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in  Kugathas   had   been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                      reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012]
                      Imm. A.R.1], finding that a significant  factor  will
                      be whether or not  the  adult  child  has  founded  a
                      family of his own. If he is still single  and  living
                      with his parents, he is likely to enjoy  family  life
                      with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom  (in  paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                      suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years
                      old, who resides with his  mother  and  has  not  yet
                      founded a family of  his  own,  can  be  regarded  as
                      having "family life"."

         19.  Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case".  In some instances "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

         20.  To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                      referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the
                      correct approach to  Article  8  in  cases  involving
                      adult children. In the case of adults, in the context
                      of immigration control, there is no legal or  factual
                      presumption as to the existence or absence of  family
                      life for the purposes of Article 8. I point out  that
                      the approach of the  European  Commission  for  Human
                      Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not  include
                      any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on
                      the facts. The love and affection  between  an  adult
                      and his  parents  or  siblings  will  not  of  itself
                      justify a finding of a family life. There has  to  be
                      something more. A young adult living with his parents
                      or siblings will normally have a family  life  to  be
                      respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a  family
                      life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have
                      a family life at midnight as he  turns  18  years  of
                      age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult   living
                      independently of his parents  may  well  not  have  a
                      family life for the purposes of Article 8."

29. In this appeal, Judge Loughridge's statement at [21] that  family  life
    is "normally" taken to mean relationships  which,  in  effect,  do  not
    involve an adult child whilst "private life"  is  "normally"  taken  to
    include  relationships  between,  amongst  others,  parents  and  adult
    children and relationships  between  adult  siblings  is  not,  in  our
    judgment, a statement inconsistent the law as set out above in Rai.  It
    does not exclude the possibility of family life existing with an  adult
    child, such as the appellant.  As the authorities establish,  there  is
    no blanket rule  that  prevented  an  adult  (such  as  the  appellant)
    establishing family life with her family member, including her  mother.



30. In this appeal, the evidence was that  the  appellant  lived  with  her
    mother, stepfather and half-brothers in the same household and had done
    so since shortly after she came to the UK.  It was  also  part  of  the
    evidence that she provided care "fairly extensively" for the two  half-
    brothers.  These circumstances undoubtedly were capable of meeting  the
    "close ties" or relationships involving  more  than  "normal  emotional
    ties" that is the yardstick for establishing "family life" between  the
    appellant (as an adult) and her family.  We are not persuaded, however,
    that the judge's finding was perverse  or  irrational  and,  therefore,
    legally flawed.

31. But, even if it were, any such error  would  not  be  material  to  his
    decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8.   In  Singh  and  Singh  at
    [25], Sir Stanley Burnton (with whom Richards  and  Christopher  Clarke
    LJJ agreed) reasoned that a failure to characterise a  relationship  as
    amounting to "family life" would not affect the legality of  a  judge's
    assessment of proportionality providing that all the  relevant  factors
    were assessed as part of the individual's "private life".  He said this
    at [25]:

         "However, the debate as to the whether an applicant has or has  not
         a family life for the purposes of Article 8 is liable  to  be  arid
         and academic. In the present case, in agreement with Sullivan  LJ's
         comment when refusing permission to appeal,  the  issue  is  indeed
         academic, and clearly so. As the European  Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA, in a judgment which I have found  most  helpful,
         the factors to be examined in order to assess  proportionality  are
         the same regardless of whether family or private life  is  engaged.
         The question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the Court
         is whether those factors lead to the conclusion that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove the applicant from the United Kingdom. I
         reject Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality was flawed because she, on  his  case
         wrongly, based it on the Appellants' private life rather than their
         family and private life. In my  judgment,  she  took  all  relevant
         factors into account, and her conclusion on proportionality is  not
         open to challenge."

32.  In  our  judgment,  that  reason  is  equally  applicable   to   Judge
    Loughridge's consideration  and  assessment  of  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant and her family under the rubric of "private life".

33. First, the judge accepted that the appellant could not  be  blamed  for
    her unlawful status in the UK, as she had come to the UK as a child and
    it was not even her fault that  she  did  nothing  about  that  status,
    despite having discovered it when she was about 14  or  15  years  old,
    until she made her application in May 2017 (at [29]).

34. Secondly, the judge  also  accepted  that  the  sponsor  had  not  been
    deceitful when the appellant came to the UK in 2010 as  a  visitor  and
    remains in the UK (at [30]).

35. Thirdly, at [32] the judge considered the "little weight" provision  in
    s.117B(4) of the NIA Act 2002.  However, given  his  finding  that  the
    appellant was not to blame for her status, he said that:

         "it would be wrong to give her private life only little  weight  in
         consequence of s.117B(4), because the absence of dishonesty on  her
         part mitigates  to  a  considerable  extent  the  effects  of  that
         provision."

36. That approach and  finding,  which  is  consistent  with  the  required
    "flexibility" in applying s.117B following Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018]  UKSC
    58 at [49], afforded full weight to the appellant's "private life".

37. In respect of her private life, the judge dealt with it in [33]-[36] in
    assessing the proportionality of the decision as follows:

         "33. I have little hesitation in concluding that the Appellant  has
             an extensive, and extremely rewarding, private life in the UK.
              I have considered the various documents relating to her  time
             at Hayesfield School. She is described as an independent young
             lady who has a strong moral compass; someone  who  contributes
             well to tutor activities, always wanting to get involved;  and
             a great asset to the school - joyful and hard-working. She has
             worked hard, and has achieved good results in her  exams.  She
             also has good relationships with her family,  principally  her
             mother, step-father and half-brothers but also her aunt and  7
             cousins in Wolverhampton, who she sees  regularly  during  the
             holidays. For the avoidance of doubt, these relationships  are
             properly characterised in my view as private life rather  than
             family life, bearing in mind that  the  Appellant  is  now  an
             adult.

         34.  It is notable that what prompted the application in  May  2017
             was the Appellant's realisation  that  she  wished  to  go  to
             university after completing her A-levels, and that she  needed
             to regularise her immigration status in order to  do  so.   If
             she remains in the UK her plan is to move away from the family
             home, essentially embarking on the next  phase  of  her  life.
             This would inevitably have consequences in terms of her mother
             and step-father needing to make alternative  arrangements  for
             the care of their two children, care which has, to date,  been
             provided fairly extensively by the Appellant.

         35.  It is also relevant that the Appellant remains in contact with
             various individuals in Zimbabwe including her aunt  with  whom
             she lived whilst she was attending school in Harare  prior  to
             coming to the UK. Although it may not be appropriate  for  her
             to stay with her aunt on a long-term basis,  it  seems  likely
             that if she returns to Zimbabwe she will at least have a  roof
             over her head, and provision of the basic  amenities  of  life
             until such time as she is able to establish herself. I  accept
             Mr Arkless's submission that she would not  be  destitute,  or
             homeless.

         36.  I must make a decision based on the facts as they stand at the
             date of the hearing and, as I have said, weighing the  various
             competing factors. It is easy to see why  the  Appellant  says
             that her life is now in the UK. Nevertheless, I conclude that,
             whilst it may perhaps seem rather unfair on  her,  it  is  not
             disproportionate to expect her to leave the UK and  to  return
             to Zimbabwe. I accept that this will involve some interference
             with her  private  life  but  the  importance  of  immigration
             control is such that requiring her removal to Zimbabwe at this
             stage cannot be said to be disproportionate.  It  is  critical
             not to undermine immigration control by cases  where  a  'fait
             accompli' is presented to the Respondent, and such  cases  can
             be legitimately resisted, not least because allowing them  may
             well encourage others to follow a similar course, including to
             obtain a secondary education in the UK just as  the  Appellant
             has  received  and  which,  ultimately,  represents   a   very
             considerable cost to the public  purse.  The  reality  of  the
             situation is that now that she has completed  her  'A'  levels
             she is ready to progress to the next chapter in her life  and,
             whilst it is understandable that she would prefer this  to  be
             in the UK, there is no fundamental reason why it cannot be  in
             Zimbabwe. Indeed, it could be said that now is an  ideal  time
             for her to return to Zimbabwe, between the completion  of  her
             secondary education  and  the  commencement  of  her  tertiary
             education. Article 8 is not a matter of someone being given  a
             choice between two countries and that is, ultimately, what the
             Appellant is effectively asking for. Even though the weight to
             be given to her private life  is  not  materially  reduced  by
             section  117B(4),  the  importance  of   immigration   control
             outweighs her private life in the UK.  For  the  avoidance  of
             doubt I have taken into account the best interests of her  two
             half-brothers, but  those  interests  have  relatively  little
             bearing on the decision in the sense that it will not make any
             significant difference to them whether she returns to Zimbabwe
             or goes  to  university  in  the  UK.  She  can  continue  her
             relationships with them via modern methods  of  communication,
             and visits, just as  she  can  in  respect  of  certain  other
             aspects of her private life.  Overall, therefore, I find  that
             the  decision  is  not  in  breach  of   Article   8   as   an
             unnecessary/disproportionate interference with  private/family
             life."

38. In our judgment, Ground 3 reflects the very "arid and  academic"  issue
    which Sir Stanley Burnton identified at [25] of his judgment  in  Singh
    and Singh.  In our judgment, Judge Loughridge took fully  into  account
    all the circumstances,  including  the  nature  and  substance  of  the
    appellant's  relationships  with  her  family  members  in  the  UK  in
    assessing proportionality albeit under the rubric  of  "private  life".
    For these reasons, we reject Ground 3.

    Ground 4

39. Ground 4 relies rely  upon  a  contention  of  perversity  or  lack  of
    supporting evidence.  None of the three points are,  in  our  judgment,
    made out.

40. First, it was the appellant's evidence that she had lived with her aunt
    prior to coming to the UK in 2010.  Although it was her case before the
    judge that she could not rely on her aunt  "because  she  has  her  own
    family to look after", nor on her uncle whose  family  farm  was  in  a
    rural area (see [15]), the judge found that the appellant  remained  in
    contact with her aunt.  It was, in our judgment, a reasonable inference
    that her aunt who had previously, in effect, brought up  the  appellant
    until she came to the UK would be able, at least on a temporary  basis,
    to support the appellant until such time, as the  judge  put  it,  that
    "she is able to establish herself".  There was no good reason  for  the
    judge to assume  that  the  family  support  which  the  appellant  had
    previously enjoyed until 2010 would no longer be available, at least on
    a temporary basis, on return to Zimbabwe.

41. Secondly, Ms Brown criticises the judge for the  following  observation
    he made in [36] of his determination:

         "It is critical not to undermine immigration control by cases where
         a 'fait accompli' is presented to the Respondent,  and  such  cases
         can be legitimately resisted, not least because allowing  them  may
         well encourage others to follow  a  similar  course,  including  to
         obtain a secondary education in the UK just as  the  Appellant  has
         received and which, ultimately, represents a very considerable cost
         to the public purse."

42. This, in our judgment, is no more than  a  statement,  albeit  using  a
    particular illustration, of the public interest engaged by s.117B(1) of
    the NIA Act 2002, namely in  effective  immigration  control.   It  was
    engaged in respect of the appellant and the judge was entitled to weigh
    this  factor  against  the  appellant's   circumstance   in   assessing
    proportionality under Art 8.2.

43. Thirdly, Ms Brown submitted that the judge was wrong, taking the  facts
    as at the date of the hearing, to look at the future  prospect  of  the
    appellant going to university in the UK.  That,  in  our  judgment,  is
    entirely unsustainable.  The appellant's  own  evidence  was  that  she
    wished to attend university.  It was neither speculation by  the  judge
    nor a failure to assess the appellant's circumstances as at the date of
    hearing, for him to take that into account.   It  was  founded  in  the
    appellant's own evidence and was a relevant matter which the judge  was
    entitled to take into account in assessing the impact upon  her  family
    members (in particular her half-brothers) if she left  home  to  attend
    university in the UK or,  if  the  decision  was  maintained,  she  was
    removed to Zimbabwe.

44. In her oral submissions, Ms Brown made an  additional  submission  that
    the judge had failed properly to have regard to the "best interests" of
    the appellant's half-brothers.  However, she  accepted  that  the  only
    evidence concerning that  issue  was  in  the  evidence  given  at  the
    hearing.  It is plain that the judge took that into account,  including
    that she provided "fairly extensive" care for  the  children  and  took
    into account the impact upon them if she were  removed  (see  [35]  and
    [36] set out above).

45. For these reasons, we also reject Ground 4.

    Conclusion

46. In our judgment, the judge did not materially err in law in  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
    decision stands.

48. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           14, December 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has not been allowed a fee award is not appropriate.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           14, December 2018



