
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08902/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                            |Promulgated                  |
|On 5 March 2020                             |On 20 March 2020             |
|                                            |                             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                 Naima Talib
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. O. Sobowale, Counsel, instructed by NIDO
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against a decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss, promulgated on 13 September 2019, in which he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to
    refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "While the Judge is certainly emphatic on the appellant's lack of
         credibility, it is arguable that insufficient reasons are given to
         justify his conclusions."

The hearing

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Mr. Bates conceded on behalf of the
    Respondent that the decision involved the making of a material error of
    law.  He accepted that there was a lack of adequate reasoning, in
    particular with reference to the finding that the Appellant would not
    face problems with her family in Pakistan.


 4. Given this concession, and in agreement, I stated that I found the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law.  I set the
    decision aside.

Error of Law

 5. It is submitted in the grounds that the Judge failed to consider the
    Appellant's circumstances as a lone woman when finding that the
    Appellant's whole claim was a fabrication.  At [11] the Judge commences
    his reasons and decision.

         "First, the entire claim being put forward by the Appellant is a
         complete fabrication.  It is an elaborate design to hoodwink the
         authorities into thinking that she is a "lone woman" who cannot
         return back to Pakistan as she would be at risk of ill-treatment."

 6. The Judge goes on to set out the Appellant's travel between Pakistan,
    Ireland and the United Kingdom and then states: "Everything else about
    her claim is a complete fiction thereafter".  Later in the same
    paragraph he states that it is "simply not credible" that after her
    husband failed to get a spouse visa to join her in Ireland he got very
    angry and broke off links with her.  There are no reasons given for
    this except for by reference to some WhatsApp messages which the Judge
    finds to be "deliberately contrived".  It was submitted in the grounds
    that there was no Presenting Officer at the hearing and that the
    contents of these WhatsApp messages were never put to the Appellant.
    This finding has therefore been made without an opportunity being given
    to the Appellant to address the Judge's concerns with this evidence.


 7. Later in the same paragraph the Judge finds that "it is plain" that the
    Appellant is still in touch with her husband.  No reason is given for
    this other than the finding that "what she now says is simply not
    credible".  He also finds that it is not credible that the Appellant's
    husband's family were against her marriage to him.  He describes her
    account as "this entire fictitious claim" and states that "a careful
    look at the evidence shows why this is so".

 8. However from [12] onwards there is insufficient reasoning given for why
    the Judge has not found the Appellant's account credible.  There are
    inadequate reasons given for his finding that the Appellant's spouse's
    family was not against the marriage.  At [12] he states that the
    Appellant "eloped" to marry her husband.  He sets out her evidence that
    it was when the application in Ireland was rejected that she started to
    have problems with her husband.  There is nothing inherently incredible
    in this, but the Judge simply finds that it is not credible without
    giving reasons.  He has failed to explain why it is not credible that
    the Appellant's spouse's failure to get a visa so that he could leave
    Pakistan and join her would not have caused problems either with her
    spouse or with her family.

 9. I find that the Judge has given insufficient reasons for rejecting the
    Appellant's account of her family problems, namely the separation from
    her husband, and him being threatened by her family.  It was accepted
    by Mr. Bates that this was the case.  It follows therefore that
    inadequate reasons have been given for the conclusion at [17] that the
    Appellant will not have any difficulty returning because "she has a
    husband to whom she is returning", and a "wider family there which
    poses no threat whatsoever to her".

10. As accepted by the Respondent, I find that the decision involves the
    making of a material error of law.  I have taken account of the
    Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010, paragraph 7.2.  This
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for the
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable
    this appeal to be remade, as the credibility findings cannot stand, and
    having regard to the overriding objective, I find that it is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  de
    novo.

13. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Juss.


Signed                                  Date 16 March 2020
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
