
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU/08633/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At                              |Decision signed:   07.11.2018    |
|On    06.11.2018                      |Sent out: 14.11.2018             |


Before:

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE TURNER

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

Between:



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            SAWEL MWANGI MUIRURI

                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwalla, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Sophie Walker, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

      1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State. However, it
         is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the
         First Tier Tribunal. From now on, therefore, we shall refer  to  Mr
         Muiruri as "the appellant" and to the Secretary of  State  as  "the
         respondent".

      2. The appellant was born on 8 August 1992. He is a citizen of  Kenya.
         He entered the UK in 2004 at the age of 11. That year,  his  father
         applied under the Family Amnesty Scheme, naming the  appellant  and
         his siblings as his dependants. On 28 August  2009,  the  appellant
         was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK  exceptionally
         outside the Immigration Rules at the same time as his father.

      3. On 6  August  2012,  the  appellant  was  found  in  possession  of
         cannabis, for which offence he was fined. Far more seriously, on 21
         April 2015, he carried out a knife attack  in  a  public  park.  He
         stabbed his victim in the face, neck, chest, back and left forearm.
         He pleaded guilty to the offence of  wounding  with  intent  to  do
         grievous  bodily  harm,  and  received  a  sentence  of  six  years
         imprisonment. In addition, he was made the subject of  an  extended
         sentence of two years; but this extension was overturned on appeal.
         The sentence of six years was, however, left undisturbed.

      4. Notice of the decision to deport the  appellant  was  given  on  28
         April 2016. The appellant launched an  appeal,  asserting  that  to
         deport him to Kenya would be in breach of his rights under Articles
         3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

      5. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge rejected the argument  ventilated  in
         respect of Article 3, but went on to  find  that  the  decision  to
         deport was disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.

      6. It is against this decision that the respondent now appeals.

      7. The relevant law is uncontroversial.  The  Nationality  Immigration
         Asylum Act 2002 provides:

             "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving
             foreign criminals.

             The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the   public
             interest.

             The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

             In the case  of  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 4 years or more,  the
             public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
             Exception 2 applies."

      8. It is not disputed that Exception  2  has  no  application  to  the
         circumstances of the present appeal.

      9. Section 117C goes on to provide:

             "(4) Exception 1 applies where:

             C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

             C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

             There will be very significant obstacles to C's integration to
             the country to which C is proposed to be deported."

     10. In this case, however, the appellant faced the more stringent  test
         imposed by section 117C (6) of the 2002 Act:

             "In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  4  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances,  over  and  above  those   described   in   the
             Exceptions 1 and 2."

     11. The Judge correctly observed that, although under section 117C  (6)
         very compelling circumstances were required over  and  above  those
         described in Exception 1, it remained a relevant exercise  for  her
         to consider, as a starting point, whether the exception  would,  in
         fact, have applied. With  reference  to   MA  (Pakistan)  &  others
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (and see also MM  (Uganda)  &  another   [2016]
         EWCA Civ 617), the Judge rightly observed, that, having  considered
         the exception, it would then be necessary to see whether any of the
         facts falling within those exceptions had such  force,  whether  by
         themselves or taken in conjunction with any  relevant  factors  not
         covered by the circumstances  set  out  in  the  exception,  as  to
         satisfy the test in section 117C (6).

     12.  In  her  consideration  of  Exception  1,  the  Judge   concluded,
         uncontroversially,  that  the  appellant   could   not   meet   the
         requirement of having been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of
         his life. He had only lived in the UK for eight and a  half  years,
         which fell short of this requirement.

     13. The Judge went on to consider whether  or  not  the  appellant  was
         socially and culturally integrated in the UK,  in  accordance  with
         the second limb of the first  Exception.  She  found  that  he  had
         satisfied this criterion.

     14. Her decision in this regard is challenged by  the  respondent,  who
         emphasises the following features of the case:

          i)     4(1) The appellant moved out of the family home at the age
             of 16 and has not lived with his family since;

         ii)     4(2) No member of his family attended to give evidence  in
             support of his appeal; and

        iii) 4(3) No member of his family provided a witness  statement  or
             letter of support for use on his appeal.

     15. The Judge  correctly  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  been
         educated in the UK from the age  of  11,  although  his  attendance
         record would appear to be patchy. He had  not  received  full  time
         education in Kenya. On the other hand, the fact that he has spent 3
         years of his life in prison until his  release  earlier  this  year
         must be regarded as a seriously negative factor.

     16. We take the view that the factors militating against a finding that
         the appellant was socially and culturally integrated  into  the  UK
         were so compelling that it was simply not open to the Judge to find
         that this criterion had been satisfied. The determination  on  this
         issue, therefore, amounted  to  an  error  of  law  on  rationality
         grounds.

     17. The Judge went on to find that there were significant obstacles  to
         the integration of the appellant in Kenya in the event of his being
         deported. With reference to the case of Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,
         the Judge held that, when considering whether or not a person  will
         be able to integrate, the question must be addressed as to  whether
         they would be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding  how
         life is carried on in that society with a capacity  to  participate
         in it so as to be able to operate on a day to  day  basis  in  that
         society and to build up within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of
         relationships to give substance to private and family life.

     18. In this regard, the Judge observed that the appellant had not  been
         back to Kenya since he left as a child. He had no family there  and
         nowhere to go. He would not have linguistic barriers to employment,
         but  would  be  challenged  by  a  lack  of  particular  skills  or
         qualifications. He had also suffered from periods of mental illness
         which would further threaten his integration into Kenyan society.

     19. The respondent challenges the Judge's decision on  this  criterion,
         asserting that she had not adequately  considered  whether  support
         would be available through NGOs or other  establishments  in  Kenya
         and that the  Judge  had  failed  to  conduct  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment on this issue. It is contended that,  with  the  requisite
         degree of support, the appellant may well have been able to shelter
         himself, obtain food and meet people to go on to develop meaningful
         relationships.

     20. Although the circumstances of this case fall close to the line,  we
         are not satisfied that the Judge fell into  error  when  addressing
         this criterion.

     21. However, the position is that, as we have found, the appellant  was
         able to satisfy only one of the three criteria under  Exception  1.
         He would have therefore struggled to challenge his deportation even
         in the event that he were to have been sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of under 4 years. Bearing in mind the  requirement  of
         "very compelling circumstances, over and  above  the  expectations"
         provided under Section 117C(6) of the 2002  Act,  we  are  entirely
         sure that the circumstances of  this  case  fell  so  significantly
         short of  meeting  this  threshold  requirement  that  the  Judge's
         decision that it was satisfied cannot be sustained.  No  reasonable
         analysis of the circumstances of  the  appeal  could  justify  this
         decision which is, thus, in error of law.

     22. Counsel on behalf of the appellant was unable to  provide  us  with
         any information to  indicate  that  the  appellant's  position  had
         improved since the matter was heard before the First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge. No purpose would, therefore, be served by ordering that  the
         appeal be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

         NOTICE OF THE DECISION

         The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside. We
         re-make the decision by allowing the appeal and thus upholding  the
         decision to deport the appellant.




      (written by Turner J, and signed on his behalf)

      [pic] (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)




      Dated 07 November 2018

