
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-BW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08301/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2020                          |On 11 December 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [U O]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Gore, instructed by Gans & Co Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who in a decision promulgated on 4 March
2020 allowed the appeal of [UO] against the Entry Clearance Officer's
decision of 10 April 2019 refusing her application for entry clearance to
the United Kingdom under paragraph 314 of HC 395.

2.   I will refer hereafter to [UO] as the appellant, as she was before the
judge, and to the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent, as he was
before the judge.

3.   The appellant, who is a child born on 9 September 2012, sought entry
clearance to the United Kingdom under paragraph 314 on the basis of family
life with her stated adopted mother, Atim [O].

4.   In the application it was stated that the appellant had been adopted
by her adopted mother, Ms [O], when she was 2 days old.  She had been left
at a motherless babies' home when she was born and provided evidence of
this in the form of a certificate.  This certificate stated that she was
taken in on 11 September 2019 by Ms [O].  She had also provided a birth
certificate naming Ms [O], her adopted mother, and her adopted maternal
grandfather as her parents and this was registered six months after her
birth.

5.   She provided adoption documents showing that her stated adopted mother
submitted her application on 6 January 2014, but the adoption was not
granted until 15 March 2017.  As evidence she provided a Family Court order
at Oran Magisterial District Court granting the adoption.

6.   The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that she had been
legally adopted in Nigeria until March 2017 and noted that inter-country
adoptions after 3 January 2014 from certain countries, including Nigeria,
were no longer recognised by the UKVI.  The Entry Clearance Officer also
observed that in addition to the Immigration Rules there were specific
legal requirements which had to be followed by those bringing an adopted
child to the United Kingdom.  These were contained in the Adoption Act 2002
and the Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations 2005.

7.   As any adoptions processed after 3 January 2014 from Nigeria were not
recognised in accordance with the Adoption Order 2013, the appellant's
adoption could not be considered as legal in the United Kingdom.
Department for Education records showed that no Certificate of Eligibility
had been issued to her claimed adopted mother.  She had made no attempt to
begin adoption proceedings in accordance with UK law and therefore the
decision maker noted that she was unable to consider the appellant as the
child of her stated adopted mother and the application was refused under
paragraph 314(v) of the Immigration Rules.

8.   The decision maker went on to say that additionally, she was not
satisfied that the appellant was not adopted for convenience in order to
facilitate admission to the United Kingdom and therefore refused the
application under paragraph 314(x) of the Immigration Rules.

9.   As the appellant had made no mention of applying for entry clearance
for the purposes of being adopted once in the United Kingdom the decision
maker was satisfied that she and the sponsor were applying as legally
adopted mother and daughter and therefore could not be considered under
paragraph 316.

10.  In addition, the application was refused with regard to the financial
requirements set out at paragraph E-ECC.2.1 of Appendix FM and there was
also a refusal in respect of accommodation under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of
Appendix FM.

11.  The decision maker went on to consider whether there were exceptional
circumstances under paragraphs GEN.3.1 and GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM but
concluded that there were no such exceptional circumstances in the
appellant's case.  The decision maker considered the best interests of the
appellant both individually and cumulatively.  It was noted that her stated
adopted mother and sponsor had married her spouse on 13 June 2015 and
relocated to the United Kingdom as a spouse.  In her absence the appellant
had been put in the care of her grandparents (grandmother and adopted
father/grandfather).  They had died, in June and September 2017
respectively.  Death certificates had been provided.  She was now in the
care of her nanny, who was unwilling to continue this living arrangement,
and a statement had been provided from her.

12.  The decision maker went on to say that she acknowledged that the
living arrangements of the appellant were at risk in Nigeria but she had
not been adopted in accordance with UK laws and therefore the UKVI did not
recognise her as the adopted child of her stated mother.  She had not
demonstrated that her stated personal circumstances were exceptional.  The
Entry Clearance Officer was mindful that the sponsor was able to travel to
Nigeria to care for her or make other arrangements for her care and had
made no efforts to adopt her once she was in the United Kingdom and
therefore there were no other entry clearance routes for her to be
considered under at this time.  There were no compassionate factors that
warranted a grant of entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules.

13.  The judge accepted that, as the appellant had not been legally adopted
in Nigeria in 2017, such an adoption from Nigeria was no longer recognised
and the appellant therefore could not meet the requirements of paragraph
314 of HC 395.

14.  The judge was satisfied that the requirements of the Rules in regard
to maintenance and accommodation were now met.

15.  The judge went on to say at paragraph 14  that while the appellant
could not meet the requirements of paragraph 314 of the Immigration Rules
in respect of the Adoption Order, she was persuaded that these were
exceptional circumstances, taking into account that the appellant was at
risk.  It was noted that the risk was accepted by the respondent in the
refusal letter and it appeared that the appellant's grandparents died in
2017 and she had previously been looked after by a nanny but that care was
no longer available, the appellant having now been looked after by another
friend since August 2019.  The judge was persuaded that these were
exceptional circumstances and that the appellant should be reunited with
her mother and stepfather in the United Kingdom.  She took into account
that the financial and accommodation requirements had been met and under
GEN.3.1 and 3.2 of Appendix FM there would be unjustifiably harsh
consequences for the appellant or her family in her being separated.  The
best interests of the child required to be considered under GEN.3.3.  The
appeal was therefore allowed.

16.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to appeal on
the basis that the judge had misdirected herself in law, provided
inadequate reasoning and was guilty of a procedural irregularity in not
adjourning the proceedings.  It was acknowledged with regard to the final
point that it was not specifically asserted in the absence at the hearing
of a Presenting Officer.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

17.  In his submissions, Mr Clarke noted what had been said in the decision
letter and also in the conclusions of the Entry Clearance Manager who
reviewed the matter on 16 October 2019 and concluded among other things
that with regard to paragraph 309A of HC 395 it could not be said that a de
facto adoption had taken place as the sponsor had not spent the last twelve
months immediately preceding the application living with the appellant.
Further consideration was given to the issues of exceptional circumstances
and the best interests of the child and the decision was maintained.

18.  It could be seen from paragraph 95 of the application that the
appellant and the sponsor had lived together for some thirteen months by
the time when the sponsor came to the United Kingdom in October 2013.  He
said that there was no challenge to the conclusion as to the effect of the
2013 Order.  The Schedule did not include Nigeria.  The appeal clearly
could not succeed on the basis of a de facto adoption for the reasons set
out by the Entry Clearance Manager.

19.  It was clear from paragraph 309B of HC 395 that inter-country
adoptions which are not a de facto adoption under paragraph 309A are
subject to the Adoption and Children Act 2002 and the Adoptions with a
Foreign Element Regulations 2005.  As such, all prospective adopters must
be assessed as suitable to adopt by a competent authority in the UK, and
obtain a Certificate of Eligibility from the Department for Education,
before travelling abroad to identify a child for adoption.  The Certificate
of Eligibility must be provided with all entry clearance adoption
applications under paragraphs 310 to 316F.  It was clear that this
provision, which underpins section 83 of the Adoption and Children Act
2002, existed due to the need to maintain the safeguarding of children
crossing borders to come to the United Kingdom.  Whether the child would
have been brought to the United Kingdom for the purposes of adoption or it
would be an external adoption in accordance with the provisions of section
83(3), this could not be a Convention adoption as Nigeria was not a
signatory to the Convention.  In that case, subparagraphs (4) and (5) were
applicable.  The relevant Regulations referred to in section 83(5) were the
Adoption (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013.  It was necessary
also to bear in mind (7) and (8) of section 83 of the 2002 Act, making it
clear that an offence would be committed if a person brings or causes
another to bring a child into the United Kingdom at any time in
circumstances where the section applies if any requirement imposed under
subsection (4) or condition required to be met under subsection (5) is not
met and this is punishable on summary conviction or on conviction on
indictment to imprisonment or a fine or both.

20.  Regulation 4 of the 2005 Regulations set out the conditions applicable
in respect of a child brought into the United Kingdom and these were the
conditions provided for in section 83(5) of the 2002 Act.  It was therefore
clear that the statute provided for regulations and the requirements to be
able to verify the suitability for local authorities to bring children to
the United Kingdom and there was no such evidence here and no certificate
of obtaining a paragraph 309 certificate.

21.  Turning to the judge's decision, she had observed that the Rules were
not met as the adoption was not recognised in the United Kingdom.  She then
made the findings on accommodation and support.  Thereafter at paragraph 14
she made findings about risk and the fact that the appellant was being
looked after by a friend.  The judge had not reasoned the findings with
regard to exceptional circumstances and risk.  The issue was essentially
one of the need to consider the Immigration Rules with the criteria set out
there.  This had not been done and there was no consideration as to what
the risk the judge spoke of was.  This had to be taken into account in
evaluating proportionality.  There was no consideration of the public
interest or the primary legislation and the safeguarding measures.  The
decision was wholly unsustainable and should be set aside.

22.  In her submissions, Ms Gore accepted that most of Mr Clarke had said
about the Regulations was not in dispute.  The judge had accepted that the
appellant could not succeed under paragraph 314.  She had, however,
focussed on what the Entry Clearance Officer had accepted and took it into
consideration in assessing the best interests of the child.

23.  The appellant was 7 at the time of the appeal.  Her parents were
recorded as the sponsor and the maternal grandfather.  It was not a case
therefore where the appellant was coming to the United Kingdom to be
adopted but she had been a member of the sponsor's family being named on
her birth certificate and this gave parental responsibility.  She had been
released to her adopted mother on the second day of her life.  The case was
in a class of its own.  She had been the sponsor's child since the age of
2.

24.  With regard to the procedures in the United Kingdom for adoption not
being complied with, as that was so, the judge had focussed on what the
Entry Clearance Officer accepted.  He had in fact stated the nature of the
risk, at paragraph 14 of the decision, this having been accepted by the
Entry Clearance Officer.  The grandfather on the birth certificate had died
and the nanny was not prepared to continue, so the Entry Clearance Officer
had accepted that the living arrangements were at risk.  There was a
temporary arrangement for a friend to take over.  The judge's decision was
therefore based on what the Entry Clearance Officer accepted.  The judge
had looked at the essential issue, which was that the appellant was a child
of 7 whose living arrangement was at risk.  It should be questioned whether
it was proportionate to concentrate on the formalities.  The sponsor and
the appellant had lived together for thirteen months and the sponsor had
sole responsibility.  This should be put into the balance on one side of
the scale and risk on the other side.  A finding was made with regard to
her best interests to be with the mother.  Whether there was an error in
that respect was not material.  The child would be at risk and the judge
had concentrated on that.  There was no issue here of an absence of
connection or a lack of sole responsibility or trafficking.  It would be
disproportionate to concentrate on a formality that did not really apply.
The sponsor was not bringing the appellant to the United Kingdom to adopt
her but she was a member of the family.  The Certificate of Eligibility was
irrelevant in the circumstances of the case.

25.  Mr Clarke had referred to whether the sponsor should be required to
return to Nigeria to live with the appellant but that was not a material
consideration.  The judge had found that the living arrangements were
appropriate in the United Kingdom and there were adequate funds.  There was
no home or job in Nigeria for the sponsor.  Such a requirement would be
unreasonable and the answer was obvious.  It would be disproportionate to
leave the child and prolong the current situation in circumstances where
the Entry Clearance Officer had accepted what she did.

26.  By way of reply, Mr Clarke argued that it was relevant to bear in mind
that if the appeal were allowed this would impose a criminal liability on
the sponsor under section 83(7).  If the checks were not done, that was a
criminal offence.  This was clearly relevant.  There had been no
consideration of insurmountable obstacles.  The guidance in Agyarko [2017]
UKSC 11 made it clear that there was a relevant factor for consideration
with regard to proportionality and it was a matter considered in the
decision letter.

27.  I reserved my determination.

28.  I have set out above in the course of my summary of Mr Clarke's
submissions the relevant legal principles in this case.  It is clear, as
identified by the Entry Clearance Manager, that the adoption in this case
cannot properly be regarded as a de facto adoption since it is a
requirement under paragraph 309A of HC 395 that during their time abroad
the adoptive parent or parents must have lived with the child for a minimum
period of eighteen months of which the twelve months immediately preceding
the application for entry clearance must have been spent living together
with the child.  It is clear that in this case the sponsor and the
appellant have not lived together since the sponsor came to the United
Kingdom in October 2013.

29.  Thereafter the provisions of paragraph 309B apply.  Nigeria is not a
signatory to the Hague Convention, and this is a case to which section 83
of the Adoption and Children Act 2002 applies.  The relevant Regulations
referred to in subsections (4) and (5) of section 83 are to be found in the
Adoption (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013.  This is not an
overseas adoption since Nigeria is not a country listed in the Schedule to
the Regulations.  Thereafter it is necessary to consider the Adoptions with
a Foreign Element Regulations 2005, which prescribe the conditions for the
purposes of section 83(5) of the Act in respect of a child brought into the
United Kingdom in circumstances where section 83 applies.  These are
summarised at paragraph 309B for the assessment of suitability of
prospective adopters who have to obtain a Certificate of Eligibility from
the Department for Education and provide such certificate with all entry
clearance adoption applications under paragraphs 310 to 316F.  It is
relevant also, as Mr Clarke reminded me, to bear in mind the criminal
sanction set out at section 83(7) of the 2002 Act applying in circumstances
where a person brings a child into the United Kingdom where the section
applies if there has been a failure to comply with any condition required
to be met by inter alia subsection (5).

30.  Ms Gore's argument is that in essence the judge was entitled to bypass
the regulatory framework since she had accepted that the requirements of
paragraph 314 of HC 395 could not be met, on the basis that the appellant
was at risk, as had been observed by the decision maker in the
circumstances where her grandparents having died and the nanny no longer
being available, she was being looked after by another friend.

31.  I do not consider, focussed and articulate though Ms Gore's
submissions were, that this argument can be sustained.  There is a clear
regulatory framework in this case, and it is impossible to ignore Mr
Clarke's observation that to allow the appeal would in effect place the
sponsor in a position where she would be likely to be committing a criminal
offence under section 83, a point which was not considered by the judge.
Quite apart from this, the judge was, in my view, not entitled to focus, as
she did, purely on the issue of risk, bearing in mind that the risk had
been identified, and as this is an Article 8 appeal it is necessary to bear
in mind the public interest side of the argument and the proportionality of
the decision.  The judge in effect said very little.  She identified the
risk and was persuaded as a consequence that these are exceptional
circumstances and there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
appellant or her family in being separated.  No consideration was given to
any insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued in Nigeria.
There may well be some force to the points argued by Ms Gore in this regard
as concerns the sponsor's work and living arrangements, but these were not
matters that were considered by the judge.  In my view, the extent to which
the decision needs to be reconsidered is such as to make it one that is
appropriate for a full reconsideration in the First-tier Tribunal, and it
is accordingly remitted for a full rehearing at Taylor House before a judge
other than Judge Sweet.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed   Date 24 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

