
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08923/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House               |Determination & reason Promulgated   |
|On 17th August 2021                  |On 19th August 2021                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                 THAN SINGH
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Mavrantonis, of Counsel, instructed by Farani
                    Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1957. He arrived in  the
       UK in August 2018 as  a  visitor  with  leave  to  enter  until  4th
       February 2019. On the 4th February 2019  he  applied  for  leave  to
       remain on Article 8 ECHR private life grounds. His  application  was
       refused on 2nd May  2019.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
       dismissed on human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi
       in a determination promulgated on the 17th October 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted and for the reasons set out  in  my
       decision at Annex A I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
       in law and set aside the decision and all of the findings. In  light
       of the decision in R (JCWI) v President of UTIAC  [2020]  EWHC  3013
       Admin I sought the opinion  as  to  whether  they  parties  had  any
       objection to the error of law decision  having  been  taken  on  the
       papers under Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Neither  party  raised
       any objections.

    3. The matter comes before me now to remake the appeal. I accepted  the
       submission for the appellant that he  is  a  vulnerable  witness  on
       account of his being a frail wheelchair  user  having  a  number  of
       serious physical medical conditions, which I set  out  below,  which
       are not disputed by the respondent. The hearing was  conducted  with
       straight-forward open questions by the legal representatives,  which
       were kept to the necessary minimum,  and  with  a  break  after  the
       evidence and prior  to  the  submissions.  The  appellant  used  the
       Tribunal Punjabi interpreter to give  his  evidence,  and  confirmed
       that he understood him. There were  some  initial  issues  with  the
       Punjabi interpreter finding the appellant hard to hear as  he  spoke
       too quietly, but these were overcome. The appellant was too tired to
       remain for all of the  submissions,  and  it  was  agreed  with  his
       counsel that he would leave prior to the end of the submissions with
       his friends and carers Mr and Mrs Kapoor.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    4. The evidence of the appellant in his  written  statements  and  oral
       evidence is, in summary, as follows. He is  63  years  old.  He  has
       visited  the  UK  numerous  times,  and  also  travelled  to   other
       countries, and always left promptly in  accordance  with  his  visit
       visas in the past. After entering the UK in August 2018 however  his
       health deteriorated rapidly. He suffered  a  blocked  artery/  heart
       attack after entry  which  necessitated  paramedics  attending,  his
       going to hospital and having a blood transfusion and 3 stents  being
       put in his heart to unblock  it.  He  is  currently  suffering  from
       amongst other conditions chronic kidney disease  and  diabetes,  and
       takes 6 types of medication.  He feels  very  blessed  by  the  care
       given to him by his friends Mr and Mrs Kapoor whom he  was  visiting
       as a friend at the time of his heart attack. Since he became  unwell
       they have taken him into their home like a father. The appellant  is
       not biologically related to Mr and Mrs  Kapoor.  His  wife  died  in
       India a long time ago, and his son and his son's wife have neglected
       him for many years, and if he  returned  there  he  would  sick  and
       alone. He used to live with his son prior to entering the UK. He had
       previously owned a clothing shop, and has given  this  shop  to  his
       son. His son is not willing to have him back to live in his home  in
       India however because of a problem between his  son  and  his  son's
       wife. His son has told him not to come back to his place and to stay
       in the UK after he became unwell. The appellant cannot turn  to  his
       two daughters for help as it is not their role, it is  his  son  who
       ought to be his carer. He has not spoken to his daughters for  quite
       a while, and his son no longer speaks to him.  He needs care because
       even matters such as getting out of bed or up from the sofa  take  a
       lot of effort and planning for him. He  needs  help  with  dressing,
       combing his hair, showering and can only walk about  30  steps  with
       any ease. His eyesight is worsening due to his diabetes. He believes
       that he is not fit to travel because he does not have  the  strength
       to face the return journey to India. He found it very  difficult  to
       travel to the Tribunal (in central London)  from  Hounslow  for  the
       hearing due to his ill-health.

    5. In their joint statement Mr Kulbir Singh Kapoor and Mrs Lakhbir Kaur
       Kapoor confirm, in summary as follows. They make their statement  in
       support of  their  friend  the  appellant.  They  are  both  British
       citizens, and the appellant is father figure to them. They  see  him
       as noble, wise and a blessing to their  lives.  Their  children  are
       also very fond of him and see him as a grandfather.   They  met  the
       appellant in India many years ago. Their son became  ill  whilst  he
       was in India and the appellant  arranged  money  and  the  necessary
       medical treatment for him. The appellant has lived with  them  since
       his arrival for his visit in 2018 and  they  look  after  his  daily
       needs in the UK including helping with washing; going to the toilet;
       dressing; and cooking him food that he can digest. They believe that
       it would be extremely harsh to remove him to India because he  would
       be alone in India without anyone to help him as  his  son  will  not
       provide help, and they can provide for him in their own home without
       recourse to any public assistance.

    6. Mr Kulbir Singh Kapoor  gave  oral  evidence  and  added,  in  short
       summary, the following. He and his  wife  are  not  related  to  the
       appellant., they are just friends having met in India as set out  in
       his statement. The appellant has a long history of visits, and never
       wanted to stay beyond his visa until now as he has nowhere  else  to
       go. Things changed due to the appellant having a heart attack  after
       his arrival, and due to his decline since that time. He used  to  be
       able to walk but now he cannot do things such as do up his  buttons.
        The appellant's health has worsened over  the  past  month,  he  is
       weaker and they have had to take him to hospital, initially this was
       because the appellant's GP said he needed a  blood  transfusion  but
       the  hospital  decided  that  he  needed  medication  instead.   The
       appellant fell in the bathroom two days ago due to his legs becoming
       weak. Mr Kapoor said that he pays for the appellant's medication  at
       the pharmacy. His evidence is that the appellant's son  is  refusing
       to take his calls, and has changed his phone number,  although  they
       do know the new number and so the social worker was able to speak to
       the appellant's son.  Mr Kapoor said that at the current time he has
       sufficient funds to support the appellant even  in  India,  although
       this might change and if he were there it would  be  more  expensive
       for him, but he would be concerned that it would  be  very  hard  to
       send the money safely and arrange someone to care for the  appellant
       in India, whereas this is something he and his  wife  are  able  and
       willing to do for their friend in their own home with ease.

    7. Dr A Bonsu provides a medical  report  dated  16th  June  2021  with
       respect  to  the  appellant  based  on  his  medical  notes  and  an
       examination. She lists his medical history  as  showing  he  suffers
       from:  diabetic  mellitus;   diabetic   nephropathy;   hypertension;
       ischaemic heart disease; acute  coronary  syndrome;  cerebrovascular
       incident; maculopathy; and  memory  concerns.  She  notes  that  the
       appellant was in hospital for three days in June 2021 for  urosepsis
       and normocytic anaemia. A  letter  from  the  nephrology  clinic  at
       Ashford and St Peter's Hospitals dated March 2021 concludes that the
       appellant has significant progressive kidney disease and  is  likely
       to reach end stage renal failure in the near future. On  examination
       she finds him frail and elderly: he could walk slowly with  a  stick
       but has significantly swollen legs, shortness of breath and  extreme
       fatigue.  Her opinion is that he  has  heart  failure  coupled  with
       anaemia and hypertension which would put him at  increased  risk  of
       cardiac arrest and thrombosis during a flight. He has renal  disease
       nearing the point where he will need dialysis  which  mean  that  he
       could dehydrate during a flight and have acute renal failure. He has
       to inject with insulin multiple times a day for his diabetes and  he
       is unable to administer this due to his  vision  impairment,  memory
       problems, lack of manual dexterity and  frailty  and  without  these
       injections he would not be able to maintain  his  blood  sugars  and
       could become hyperglycaemic and have a collapse or  cardiac  arrest.
       Her conclusion is that she would not recommend that he fly as he  is
       high risk of harm and death from so doing.

    8. The opinion of Dr Sethi dated 27th April 2019 , the appellant's  GP,
       which was before the First-tier Tribunal, was that the appellant was
       not currently fit to travel due to his deteriorating chronic  kidney
       disease which needed to be reviewed by a specialist in  the  context
       of his having acute kidney injury and  chronic  kidney  disease.  An
       updating report from Dr Sethi dated 4th May 2020 indicated that  the
       appellant's renal function has deteriorated since October 2019,  and
       that when considered in relation  to  all  the  appellant's  medical
       conditions:  "His  condition  continues  to  stay  unstable  and  is
       vulnerable and therefore not fit to  travel."   Dr  Sethi  writes  a
       further report  dated  22nd  April  2021  which  confirms  that  the
       appellant has ischaemic heart  disease,  acute  kidney  disease  and
       diabetes. His right eye has a drop in  vision  and  he  is  awaiting
       further investigations with the vitro-retinal  specialist,  for  his
       chronic kidney disease, with cardiology for chest pain, and for  his
       progressive and probable end stage renal failure. He does not appear
       to have dementia but  to  be  suffering  from  stress,  anxiety  and
       depression.

    9. The report of the independent social worker Ms S Deacon  dated  28th
       June 2021 was made by reviewing the  various  medical  records,  the
       Home Office refusal letter, the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
       Tribunal Obhi and my decision on error of  law,  and  by  interviews
       with the appellant, his friend and carer Mr Kapoor, the  appellant's
       GP Dr Sethi and the appellant's son in Delhi. She concludes that  Mr
       and Mrs Kapoor and their children are the appellant's primary source
       of emotional and  practical  assistance;  they  share  a  close  and
       supportive relationship; and are committed to caring for him  as  an
       elder in their family. Their children treat him as a grandfather  as
       they do not have a biological one. The appellant's own  son  is  not
       prepared to care for his father and there are no alternative  family
       in India who will do this. As a result if the appellant were removed
       this would raise significant concerns about his  physical  condition
       and impact detrimentally on his mental health. Mr & Mrs Kapoor  have
       explained that they  could  not  pay  for  the  appellant's  medical
       expenses, rent, care and food in India, as having the  appellant  in
       their own home is much cheaper as he is sharing their home, food and
       being cared for by them. Ms  Deacon  refers  to  country  of  origin
       evidence which suggests that the needs of geriatric Indians are  not
       being adequately met. In the context of the appellant's  compromised
       levels of emotional and physical resilience Ms Deacon concludes that
       there is  a  greater  than  normal  family  dependency  between  the
       appellant and Mr and Mrs Kapoor. That his own son is not willing  to
       provide family support, and  that  return  to  India  would  have  a
       catastrophic effect on his ability to survive due to  his  isolation
       there.

   10. In the submissions of Mr Tufan for the respondent reliance is placed
       on the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  of  2nd  May  2019  and  oral
       submissions. It is not accepted that the Upper  Tribunal  can  apply
       the "limbo" argument based on RA (Iraq) v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  850
       as this is a judicial review argument  and  not  applicable  to  the
       framework of a statutory appeal. In any case the appellant has  s.3C
       leave and so  is  not  suffering  as  a  result  of  the  particular
       conditions of his leave to remain, and also  there  is  no  evidence
       that his removal was remote as there was no evidence that  he  might
       not get better and become able to fly.

   11. In summary it is argued for the respondent, that the appellant would
       not have very significant obstacles to integration  if  returned  to
       India as he could rely upon the assistance of his son and  in  light
       of his citizenship; and given he has lived in that country  for  the
       vast majority of his life, and given he has linguistic, cultural and
       social ties to that country.  It  is  argued  that  there  was  some
       difference in the  evidence  about  whether  the  appellant  was  in
       contact with his son, as initially Mr Kapoor had said  the  son  had
       changed his phone number so there  was  no  contact,  but  had  then
       corrected his evidence to say that this number was available to them
       as it had been provided to the independent social worker. It is  not
       believable, particularly absent a statement from him, that  his  son
       would not care for the appellant given that the appellant has  given
       him his shop, and even if there is a dispute  with  the  appellant's
       daughter-in-law about him being in the house the son  could  arrange
       some sort  of  other  care  for  his  father  in  a  home  or  other
       accommodation  with  carers.  Even  if  it  was  believed  that  the
       appellant would have no support from his son his carer in the UK, Mr
       Kapoor, had agreed that he could send money for him to be cared  for
       in India  so  this  would  suffice  in  terms  of  showing  no  very
       significant obstacles to integration in India.

   12. It is not accepted there are any  exceptional  circumstances  so  it
       would not be a breach of Article 8  ECHR  looked  at  more  broadly.
       Consideration is given  to  the  medical  evidence  but  it  is  not
       accepted that the appellant would  suffer  an  early  death  without
       dignity if returned to India, nor that he would  experience  intense
       suffering or a foreshortened life. This is because it is argued that
       all of the appellant's conditions can be treated in India  as  India
       has a functioning health system, and there is no  evidence  that  he
       cannot access his medication and any necessary palliative or medical
       care. It is not accepted  that  there  is  sufficiently  precise  or
       detailed information showing that the appellant is not  well  enough
       to travel.

   13. It is submitted for the appellant in the skeleton argument of  Mr  M
       Mavrantonis and in his oral submissions, in summary, as follows. The
       appellant does not argue an Article 3 ECHR  medical  claim  in  this
       appeal. He argues that he is entitled to  succeed  on  two  grounds.
       Firstly, it is argued that the appellant is not, on the  balance  of
       probabilities, removable due to being unfit to fly. Secondly, it  is
       argued, that the removal of the  appellant  would  be  a  breach  of
       Article 8 ECHR because he can show  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration if removed, and therefore that he meets the  Immigration
       Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and also because his removal is not
       proportionate when looked at more widely in Article 8 ECHR terms.

   14. In relation to the issue of  removability  and  "actual  limbo"  the
       appellant relies upon the four stage test in RA (Iraq) v SSHD [2019]
       EWCA Civ 850. The first stage requires a distinction between  actual
       and prospective limbo, limbo meaning a  person  for  whom  there  is
       limited prospect of his or her ever being removed/deported from  the
       UK despite this being the wish of the respondent. Actual limbo being
       where the individual has no leave and cannot work or get benefits or
       services; and prospective limbo being  where  currently  he  or  she
       currently has these things but in the future there is a threat  that
       they will be withdrawn. The second stage is that  of  assessing  the
       remoteness of the deportation/removal. It must be apparent that  the
       appellant cannot be removed/deported in the immediate or foreseeable
       future; then there must be no steps that can be taken to  facilitate
       the removal/ deportation; and, finally, there must be no  reason  to
       anticipate that there will be a change in the situation. Overall, it
       must be the case that the prospects of removal are remote. The third
       stage is that there must be a fact sensitive analysis  of  the  time
       spent in the UK, immigration history and family  circumstances;  the
       nature of any offending; the prospects of removal; and  whether  the
       individual  is  obstructing  the  removal/deportation.  Fourthly   a
       balancing exercise must be conducted weighing the public interest in
       maintaining immigration control against the  appellant's  Article  8
       ECHR rights. The case of R (oao AM)  v  SSHD  (legal  'limbo')[2021]
       UKUT 62 IAC holds that a truly  exceptional  legal  limbo  case  may
       succeed on human rights grounds.

   15.  This  appellant   suffers   from:   diabetic   mellitus;   diabetic
       nephropathy; hypertension; ischaemic heart disease;  acute  coronary
       syndrome;  maculopathy;  memory  concerns;  upper  gastro-intestinal
       bleed; urosepsis, stage 3 AKI, normocytic anaemia  and  intravitreal
       haemorrhage. The appellant is  not  fit  to  fly  according  to  the
       evidence of Dr Sethi of April 2021, and his evidence in May 2020. Dr
       Bonsu says in her medical opinion of June 2021 that the appellant is
       an increased cardiac arrest and thrombosis risk if he  were  to  fly
       and should not travel at all unless  it  is  necessary  such  as  to
       hospital appointments. She says that flying places him  at  risk  of
       dehydration and therefore acute renal failure on the  flight:  being
       unable to maintain his blood sugars he would be  likely  to  develop
       hyperglycaemia which could result in collapse and cardiac arrest.

   16. It is argued that the four stage test in RA (Iraq) is  relevant  and
       is met. Mr Mavrantonis argued that although RA (Iraq) and R (oao AM)
       v SSHD (legal 'limbo') are judicial review decisions that this is an
       appeal against a refusal of a human rights decision, and the  ground
       of appeal is simply that the decision to  refuse  his  human  rights
       application made by the Secretary of State is unlawful under s.6  of
       the Human Rights Act 1998, applying s.82(1)(b) and  s.84(2)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He  argues  therefore
       that a freestanding 'limbo' argument could succeed however  he  also
       argues that it does not matter if this is not the case  as  all  the
       same factors come into play  when  looking  at  the  appeal  in  the
       'normal' Article 8 ECHR ways with reference to the Immigration Rules
       at paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) and outside of those Rules.

   17. It is argued that the limbo argument succeeds because,  firstly,  he
       is in prospective limbo because there is a threat that he would lose
       the services he currently receives due to s.3C leave. Secondly there
       is a settle situation with respect to the appellant's  health  which
       means he cannot be removed in the immediate or  foreseeable  future,
       as this is the opinion of the two medical experts. Thirdly when  the
       fact sensitive  analysis  is  conducted  the  appellant  is  not  an
       overstayer and has no criminal record, is paying privately  for  his
       medical treatment and has not  deliberately  caused  his  health  to
       decline so he can remain  in  the  UK,  and  thus  his  removal  can
       properly be said to be remote. As a result it would be a  breach  of
       Article 8 ECHR to remove him as the public interest does  not  weigh
       as heavily as the interference with the appellant's Article  8  ECHR
       rights for these reasons and those set out below.

   18. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), it is accepted that this  is
       an  elevated  threshold  and  will  not   be   satisfied   by   mere
       inconvenience or upheaval. In the UK the appellant is cared  for  by
       Mr Kapoor and his wife, who are his family friends. In India he  has
       had no help from his son from whom he is  estranged.  The  appellant
       needs help with personal  care,  cooking,  medication,  washing  and
       bathing. He is a diabetic who needs to inject insulin, but he cannot
       do this himself because he  is  visually  impaired,  frail  and  has
       memory issues. Without the help the appellant receives in the UK the
       independent social worker, Ms S Deacon, in her report of  28th  June
       2021 concludes that his physical safety and mental health  would  be
       likely to be detrimentally affected. Even if Mr  Kapoor  or  perhaps
       the appellant's son might be able to pay for care  in  India,  which
       was not an issue raised in the reasons for refusal letter, he  would
       not be integrated there being cared for by  strangers.  His  private
       life world consists of his home and family life  type  relationships
       with Mr & Mrs  Kapoor,  where  he  is  treated  with  respect  as  a
       grandfather: this is his  societal  integration  since  his  medical
       decline. He would be deprived any sort of private life if sent  back
       to an existence only with strangers in India. It is argued therefore
       that  the  appellant  would  have  very  significant  obstacles   to
       integration and is entitled to succeed in his Article 8 ECHR  appeal
       as a result.

   19. If looked at  on  wider  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules then all of the factors, with the risks of  travel
       and the remoteness of removal, must be weighed, along with the  lack
       of any private/family life if the appellant were to be  returned  to
       India, if this were possible, and his probable isolation  there  and
       how this would impact detrimentally on his mental health.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   20. I find that it is not open to the appellant  to  argue  that  he  is
       entitled to succeed in this appeal by virtue of the 'limbo' argument
       as set out in RA (Iraq) alone, as opposed to some elements  of  that
       argument and the associated factual considerations coming into  play
       within the consideration of the Article 8 ECHR appeal  by  reference
       to the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and more  widely
       on Article 8 ECHR grounds. This is because a human rights  claim  is
       defined at s.113 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
       as: "a claim made by a person that to remove him from or require him
       to leave the United Kingdom  or  refuse  him  entry  to  the  United
       Kingdom would be unlawful under s.6 o the Human Rights Act".  It  is
       refusal  of  an  application  asserting  that  removal  from  or   a
       requirement to leave the  UK  would  breach  the  appellant's  human
       rights that gives  the  statutory  right  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal as per s.82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act. An appeal to  the  Upper
       Tribunal cannot therefore determine wider breaches of Article 8 ECHR
       in relation to this appellant beyond those relating to  his  removal
       and/or a refusal of a right to stay.   This  position  is,  I  find,
       consistent with what is said by the Court of Appeal  in  R  (on  the
       application of) Muhammad Aleem Mujahid v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 449.

   21. I turn therefore to consider the appeal by reference firstly to  the
       Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  and  whether  the
       appellant would have very significant obstacles  to  integration  in
       India. The idea  of  "integration"  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
       judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be  enough  of
       an insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in that
       other country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it,  so
       as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able
       to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society  and  to  build  up
       within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to  give
       substance to the individual's private or family life' Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v. Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.

   22. I have outlined the medical and social work  evidence  above  and  I
       find that weight can be given to all  of  that  evidence  as  it  is
       supplied by appropriate experts who are aware of  their  obligations
       to the Upper  Tribunal.  I  also  find  that  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant and Mr Kapoor is credible, and reliance can be placed upon
       it. I accept that Mr Kapoor did have to clarify  his  evidence  with
       respect to the telephone number of the appellant's son, but  he  was
       ultimately clear that it was available  to  him  and  the  appellant
       although they were not in touch. I found  Mr  Kapoor  to  be  candid
       about the fact that he  could  and  would  financially  support  the
       appellant in India, at the  current  time  at  least,  despite  this
       costing more than providing for him in his own home. Whilst Mr Tufan
       submitted that it was strange  that  the  appellant's  son  was  not
       willing to care for him given the appellant had gifted him his  shop
       it was clear that it was put forward that this was not happening due
       to pressure from his son's wife. The evidence of the  witnesses  was
       consistent with what had previously been said in statements and with
       each other. Ultimately, I find that there  was  nothing  implausible
       about it.

   23. On the facts of this case it is contended, based on the  opinion  of
       Dr Bonsu, that the appellant would  firstly  have  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in India as he would be at  "high  risk  of
       harm and death" on the long haul flight back to  India  due  to  his
       risk  of  hyperglycaemia  from  the  appellant's  diabetes   causing
       collapse or cardiac arrest; due to a risk of kidney failure  due  to
       becoming dehydrated on the plane  given  his  deteriorating  chronic
       kidney disease and likely end stage renal failure;  and  due  either
       thrombosis or cardiac arrest on the flight due to his heart disease.
       Her opinion is that she would not recommend that the  appellant  fly
       at all. In light of this medical evidence I find that on the balance
       of probabilities  that  an  airline  would  not  agree  to  fly  the
       appellant to India and that this fact and/or the fact that he  would
       be likely to arrive at the very least having suffered severe harm to
       his physical health would mean that he would have  very  significant
       obstacles in integrating in his home country due to the  potentially
       fatal impact on his physical health.

   24. Secondly, it  is  contended  that  the  appellant  would  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration because  on  arrival  he  would
       have no  appropriate  care  in  the  context  where  he  is  heavily
       dependent on others (at present his friends the Kapoors) for all his
       needs: namely well-being,  accommodation,  food,  heating,  personal
       care, cooking administration of medicine,  washing  and  bathing.  I
       accept the submission of Mr Tufan that the evidence  of  Mr  Kapoor,
       that he could currently pay for a care  package  in  India  of  some
       type, whether in private accommodation or in a care home, and  would
       be willing to do so due to his commitment to  the  appellant,  means
       that some of these obstacles fall away. I  find  however  that  what
       money  could  potentially  buy  would  not  be  sufficient  to  give
       substance to his private life for the following reasons.

   25. The appellant is an extremely  unwell,  fragile  and  exhausted  man
       suffering from serious heart disease, renal disease and diabetes. He
       presented to Dr Bonsu as frail, elderly walking slowly with a  stick
       and needing a wheelchair should  he  need  to  leave  the  home  for
       hospital appointments, with significantly swollen legs, shortness of
       breath and extremely fatigued. His level of fatigue was  also  clear
       from his attendance at the Upper Tribunal. He has known the  Kapoors
       for many years and in the UK he is integrated into their family, and
       has been since the dramatic decline in his health  since  his  heath
       attack in October 2018. They provide for all  of  his  physical  and
       medical needs but also provide him with a family, and he feels  safe
       and secure with them. It is the conclusion of the independent social
       worker, Ms Deacon, having talked directly to the appellant's son  as
       well as  having  interviewed  the  entire  Kapoor  family  that  the
       appellant lacks alternative familial  relationships  in  India,  and
       that his return there would leave him isolated whereas in the UK  he
       has "love, comfort and on-going companionship of  a  physically  and
       emotionally available surrogate family,". It is the opinion  of  the
       social worker that the isolation the appellant would have without  a
       biological or surrogate family would "have a catastrophic effect  on
       his ability to survive". I find that given the appellant's level  of
       physical ill-health caused by multiple serious health conditions and
       his lack of potential family to turn to in India that he  would  not
       be able to build, within a  reasonable  time,  a  variety  of  human
       relationships to give substance to his private/ family  life.  As  a
       result I find for this reason too that he is entitled to succeed  in
       this  appeal  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
       Immigration Rules.

   26. In case I am wrong I go on to consider the appeal more widely  under
       Article 8 ECHR. If the appellant cannot  show  compliance  with  the
       Immigration Rules then his private life ties with  the  UK  must  be
       balanced  against  the  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of
       immigration control  and  the  removal  of  those  who  cannot  show
       compliance with  the  Immigration  Rules.  Applying  s.117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 weight  must  be  given
       against him to the fact that he cannot  speak  English,  but  it  is
       neutral matter that he is financially independent, as he is entirely
       financially support by the Kapoors. Only little weight can be  given
       to his private life ties which have been made during his  period  of
       precarious residence. Little weight is not no weight however  and  I
       do accord some weight in his favour as I find that his private  life
       ties with the Kapoors are akin to family life ties: I find that  the
       appellant is in the position of  an  adopted  father/grandfather  in
       their family and is treated in all respects as such  with  the  same
       love and life-long commitment that a  biological  father/grandfather
       would receive, as is evidenced by the witnesses and from the  social
       work report. Also in the appellant's favour is  the  fact  that  the
       process of removal, if it were to take place, via a long-haul flight
       would be likely to cause him  serious  harm  due  to  his  extremely
       fragile health for the reasons outlined above in my discussion under
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and  based  on  the
       opinion of Dr Bonsu. Ultimately, I find that  the  risk  of  serious
       harm/ or fatality being the impact  on  the  appellant's  health  of
       removal combined with the limited weight I can given to his  private
       life ties to the UK are sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest
       factors outlined above. The appeal therefore succeeds on this  basis
       too.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal and all of the findings.

      3. I remake the appeal by allowing it under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed    Fiona Lindsley                     18th August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Annex A: Error of Law Decision:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1957. He arrived in  the
       UK in August 2018 as  a  visitor  with  leave  to  enter  until  4th
       February 2019. On the 4th February 2019  he  applied  for  leave  to
       remain on Article 8 ECHR private life grounds. His  application  was
       refused on 2nd May  2019.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
       dismissed on human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi
       in a determination promulgated on the 17th October 2019.

    2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Appleyard on 28th February 2020 on all grounds on the basis that  it
       is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in the medical
       assessment and in concluding that the appellant  could  be  removed,
       and by failing to look at relevant case law, namely RA(Iraq) v  SSHD
       [2019] EWCA Civ 850.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and  justly
       directions were sent out to the parties by email on 20th April  2020
       seeking written submissions on the assertion of an error of law with
       a view to determining that  issue  on  the  papers,  and  giving  an
       opportunity for any party who felt that a hearing was  necessary  in
       the interests of justice to make  submissions  on  that  issue  too.
       Submissions were received from both parties  in  response  to  these
       directions.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  it  is  in  the
       interests of justice to decide this matter without a hearing and  if
       so to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has  erred  in  law,
       and in turn if that was the case whether the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal should be set aside.

    5. The respondent, in the submissions of Ms S Jones, Senior  Presenting
       Officer dated 30th April 2020, does not seek to argue that the issue
       of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  and  whether  the
       decision should be set aside could not be dealt with on the  papers.
       Counsel for the appellant, Ms M Gherman, argues in  her  submissions
       of  27th April 2020 that it would be appropriate  to  have  an  oral
       hearing as, on the basis of general  arguments  about  the  superior
       nature of an oral hearing to a process of written  submissions,  the
       appellant would be denied procedural fairness on  an  issue  of  key
       importance in his life if a paper decision were made. I am satisfied
       that it is possible to deal with this matter fairly on  the  papers,
       and proceed in this way on the basis that  no  reasons  relating  to
       this appellant's particular appeal are identified as making a  paper
       determination of this matter fair and just and as I  do  not  accept
       that paper decisions on these issues are universally unfair.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor and  then  had  a  serious
       cardiac arrest: he is diagnosed as having ischaemic  heart  disease,
       acute kidney injury, type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease and  an
       intravitreal haemorrhage of his right eye.

    7. In the grounds of  appeal  it  is  argued  in  summary  as  follows.
       Firstly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law because there  is
       a failure to apply relevant legal authority, as set out in  RA(Iraq)
       v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 850, and recognise that this appellant is  in
       a state of limbo as the medical evidence is that he is  not  capable
       of being removed presently and there is no  prospect  of  him  being
       removed in the foreseeable  future.  As  he  is  not  removable  for
       reasons outside of his control; as he has an unblemished immigration
       history and has committed no criminal offences; and as there  is  no
       prospect of his imminent removal and he is paying privately for  his
       medical care he should have been found to succeed in  an  Article  8
       ECHR balancing exercise.

    8. Secondly, it  is  argued  for  the  appellant  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  unlawfully  refused  to  adjourn  the  hearing  which  was
       procedurally unfair. Two applications were made on the basis of  the
       appellant's confused mental state at  the  hearing.  An  adjournment
       should have been granted so that expert medical  evidence  could  be
       obtained to see if the appellant suffered from a condition  such  as
       dementia.

    9. Thirdly, it is argued that there was a failure to give  reasons  for
       material findings of fact with respect to the relationship with  the
       appellant's three children and  his  relationship  with  UK  friends
       which were vital to the determination of the appeal given  his  need
       for extensive day to day care.

   10. In the submissions of Ms S Jones, Senior  Presenting  Officer  dated
       30th April 2020 it is argued, in short  summary,  applying  RA(Iraq)
       that there has been no impact on the appellant's private life of not
       granting leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  as  he  doesn't
       claim benefits and can obtain his private health care.  It  is  also
       not accepted that the prospect of removing the appellant  is  remote
       for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 44  of
       the decision. There is a  proper  balancing  exercise  conducted  at
       paragraph 48 of the decision, and so the approach of the  First-tier
       Tribunal accords  with  a  lawful  Article  8  ECHR  proportionality
       exercise. It is argued for the respondent that the adjournments were
       fairly refused on the basis of the medical evidence  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. It is also argued that sufficient reasons  are  given
       by the First-tier Tribunal for the findings made.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. I do not find that the appellant has shown that the refusal  of  the
       adjournment was materially unfair as there is no evidence  that  the
       appellant was and is suffering from dementia. I would have  expected
       evidence from a suitably qualified medical expert to have been filed
       with the Upper Tribunal  and  served  on  the  respondent  with  the
       grounds of appeal or shortly thereafter, and as there has been  more
       than sufficient elapse of time for this to happen I  find  that  the
       appellant has failed to show that the refusal of the adjournment was
       a material error by the First-tier Tribunal.

   12. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was  in  September  2019,
       and the appeal was lodged in October 2019, and permission to  appeal
       was granted on 28th February 2020. Whilst I accept that on the  face
       of the answers and the evidence of the friends  on  balance  at  the
       hearing fairness required an adjournment, given the applications  by
       counsel for this, so as to give the  appellant  the  opportunity  to
       obtain medical evidence, the failure  to  follow  this  up  until  a
       letter was obtained from the GP Dr Sethi in  May  2020  saying  only
       that the issue of  potential  memory  loss  and  dementia  had  been
       brought to his notice, and will require further assessment and might
       require referral to a memory clinic does not  suffice  to  show  any
       material error by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  time  of  the
       hearing. If the memory loss issue was a real one for  the  appellant
       and his interactions with others at the time of the  hearing  before
       the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  find,  that   given   his   extensive
       interaction  with  medical  professionals,  this  would  have   been
       investigated in the autumn of 2019 and a referral to  obtain  expert
       evidence made at that time.

   13. I find however that the First-tier Tribunal did err in  law  in  the
       consideration of whether the appellant is in limbo due to his  being
       unfit to travel in the context of his  extensive  medical  problems.
       The opinion of Dr Sethi, the appellant's GP, which  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, was that the appellant was not currently fit to
       travel due to his deteriorating chronic kidney disease which  needed
       to be reviewed by a specialist in the context of  his  having  acute
       kidney injury and chronic kidney disease.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismisses this evidence on the basis that Dr Sethi fails  to  "state
       why or how he could travel with safeguards put in". On the  face  of
       the evidence Dr Sethi did not believe that travel could be made safe
       at that time, so I  find  that  this  evidence  is  discounted  with
       insufficient reasoning.

   14. An updating report from Dr Sethi dated 4th May 2020, lodged with the
       submissions of Ms Gherman, which I admit as it is  relevant  to  the
       issue of the materiality of any error on this issue, indicates  that
       the appellant's renal function has deteriorated since October  2019,
       and that when considered in relation to all the appellant's  medical
       conditions:  "His  condition  continues  to  stay  unstable  and  is
       vulnerable and therefore not fit to travel."

   15. I therefore find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       failing to given reasoned consideration to a material issue, namely,
       whether the appellant's case could succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds
       given that there was evidence he was unable to fly at that time  and
       therefore there was evidence that he was arguably in  actual  limbo,
       and thus  that  the  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  ought  to  have  been
       considered with reference to RA (Iraq), in the context  of  my  also
       finding that any such appeal could not be said to be bound to  fail.



   16. I also find that the findings that  the  appellant's  son  in  India
       would continue to assist him, and had not abandon him if he were  to
       return and that he does not have a family life relationship with the
       UK family who care for him are insufficiently reasoned at paragraphs
       40 and 43 of the  decision.  In  this  context  I  decide  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal and all findings should  be  set
       aside, and that matter should  be  reheard  de  novo  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal with no findings preserved.


    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal and all of the findings.

      3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.


Directions - Remaking

1.   Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal might properly be held remotely,
    by Skype for Business, on a date to be fixed within the period July  to
    October 2020.

2.   No later than 14 days after these directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (the date of sending is on the  covering  letter  or  covering
    email):

    (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email  any  objection  to  the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

    (b)  without prejudice to the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

         (i)  Skype contact details and a contact telephone number  for  any
             person who wishes to attend the hearing remotely, which  might
             include  the  advocates,  the   original   appellant   or   an
             instructing solicitor; and

         (ii) dates to avoid in the period specified.

3.   If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  will
    consider  the  submissions  and  will  make  any   further   directions
    considered necessary.

4.    If  there  is  no  objection  to  a  remote  hearing,  the   following
    directions supersede any previous case management directions and shall
    apply.

    i. The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note:  No
    1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic when  complying  with
    these directions.

    ii. The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and  serve  on  each
    other (a) an electronic skeleton  argument  and  (b)  any  rule  15(2A)
    notice to be relied upon within 28 days of  the  date  this  notice  is
    sent.

    iii. The appellant shall be responsible for compiling  and  serving  an
    agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely  on
    at the hearing. The bundle should be compiled and served in  accordance
    with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at least 7 days before  the
    hearing.

5.   The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
    reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.

6.   Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line. Attachments must not exceed 15 MB. This address is not  generally
    available for the filing of documents.

7.   Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
    original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use
    of any address


Signed    Fiona Lindsley                     16th June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

