
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  HU/08436/2016
                                                HU/08437/2016, HU/08439/2016
                                                HU/08440/2016, HU/09182/2016
                                                HU/09166/2016, HU/09139/2016
                                                             & HU/09147/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2018                  |On 02 January 2019                   |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                (1) AZIZ [B]
                              (2) ABDALLAH [W]
                                  (3) [A N]
                                  (4) [R B]
                                (5) UMAR [S]
                                (6) RYNEE [K]
                              (7) BENJAMIN [A]
                               (8) MARVIN [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    None.
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing their appeals against the decision  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer made on 22 February 2016 to refuse their applications for entry
    clearance for the purposes of settlement as, in the case of  the  first
    appellant (the partner of a refugee); and, in the case of the remaining
    appellants, as the children of  a  refugee  who  meet  inter  alia  the
    requirements of 352D(iv) of the Rules - namely that they were  part  of
    the family unit of the person granted  asylum  at  the  time  that  the
    person granted asylum left the country of their habitual  residence  in
    order to seek asylum.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellants are all nationals of Uganda.  Their case  is  that  they
    are related to the sponsor, a recognised refugee,  as  set  out  below.
    The first appellant, "AB", is the  sponsor's  second  husband  who  she
    married after the death of her first husband.  The first husband, "CK",
    is said to have died on 10 October 2007, and the  sponsor  is  said  to
    have married AB on 15 December 2009.

 3. The sponsor says she had six children by her first husband,  CK.   They
    were born respectively in 1979, 1981, 1984, 1986, 1998 and  1999.   The
    two youngest, "RK", born on 20 February 1998 and "BA", born on 3 August
    1999, are the sixth and seventh appellants.

 4. The sponsor says that AB brought with him to join the  family  unit  in
    December 2008 two children by his previous marriage:  "RB"  born  on  2
    February 2002 and [RS] born  on  25  March  2005.   RB  is  the  fourth
    appellant.

 5. The remaining four appellants are said to be the  adopted  children  of
    the sponsor and AB.  The sponsor says that AB adopted "AW" (born on  28
    April 1999) and "AN" (born on 5 December 2002) following the  death  of
    their parents in December 2002.  They were two orphans of his  deceased
    brother.  She says that BA assumed parental  responsibility  for  them.
    AW is the second appellant, and AN is the third appellant.

 6. The sponsor says that on 12 December 2000 her brother, Joseph  Kaliisa,
    died leaving behind two children, "US", born on 10  January  1998,  and
    "MK", born on 15 November 2000.  US is the fifth appellant  and  MK  is
    the eighth appellant.  The sponsor  says  that  she  was  granted  full
    parental responsibility over US and  MK  by  the  leader  of  her  clan
    following her brother's burial.  On that day, she says that US  and  MK
    became part of her family unit.

 7. She says that after she settled in with  AB,  he  suggested  that  they
    formalise their adoption of AW, AN, US  and  MK.   Accordingly,  on  20
    February 2009 the Chief  Magistrates'  Court  at  Gulu  had  officially
    granted her and AB full joint parental responsibility over  these  four
    appellants by way of adoption orders.

 8. The application forms submitted  by  the  appellants  all  contain  the
    information that the sponsor had been issued with a Ugandan passport in
    Kampala on 12 December 2012; that she had  arrived  in  the  UK  on  16
    November 2013; and that she  had  subsequently  been  accorded  refugee
    status on a visa that was valid until 12 December 2020.

 9. On 22 February 2016 an Entry Clearance Officer issued separate  notices
    of refusal to each appellant.  The four appellants claiming to  be  the
    adopted children of the sponsor were refused on  the  grounds  set  out
    below.

10. The ECO did not accept that the sponsor  was  their  parent.   Although
    they  had  submitted  a  Ugandan  adoption  order  in  support  of  the
    application, the ECO was not satisfied that the document  was  genuine.
    It purported to have been issued in 2009,  but  its  general  condition
    contradicted this.  The Court had granted AB and  the  sponsor  custody
    for him/her based on the fact  that  their  parents  had  died.   Their
    parents' deaths were not registered until 26  October  2015,  almost  6
    years after the adoption order was made.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that a competent authority would award custody of a child based on  the
    death of his/her parents, where there was no evidence that the  child's
    parents were dead.  He also noted that the sponsor, when asked  if  she
    had any children during her asylum interview, did not  mention  his/her
    name.  Also, their birth certificates were issued long after the  event
    of their births.  As such, it was merely a record of what the Registrar
    had been told.  Given all the above, the ECO was not satisfied that the
    appellant in question was the child of a person granted refugee status,
    or that he/she was under the age of 18 years, or that he/she  was  part
    of the sponsor's family unit before the sponsor fled to the UK.

11. The two appellants who had applied on the basis that  the  sponsor  was
    their birth mother, were refused  on  the  ground  that  they  had  not
    provided satisfactory evidence of this.

12. In the case of BA, he had submitted a birth  certificate  issued  on  2
    April 2015, almost 16 years after the event  of  his  birth,  and  very
    shortly after the sponsor was granted refugee status.  Given  the  ease
    with which such documents were obtained in  Uganda,  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the information in the certificate  was  reliable.   The
    sponsor had arrived in the UK on 16 November 2013, and had been granted
    asylum on 25 February 2015.   She had then waited almost a year  before
    deciding that she would apply for him to be reunited with her.  It  was
    reasonable to expect that if she was his mother, she would have applied
    to be reunited with him immediately.  He also noted that there  was  no
    evidence, aside from  the  birth  certificate,  that  he  had  met  the
    sponsor.  There was also no evidence of any contact  that  he  had  had
    with her, either before or after she had arrived in the UK.

13. AB was refused entry clearance due to an asserted lack of  evidence  of
    there being a marital relationship between him and the sponsor.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appeals of the appellants came  before  Judge  Telford  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 28 November 2017.  The respondent was represented by Ms
    Lake,  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer.    There   was   no   legal
    representation on behalf of the appellants.  The sponsor was,  however,
    present at the hearing, and she gave oral evidence and  she  relied  on
    the contents of her witness statements and the documents which she  had
    filed.  This comprised a main appellant's bundle (AB1) comprising pages
    1-234; a relatively small supplementary bundle comprising  pages  1-32,
    and containing DNA test results showing that the sponsor was the  birth
    mother of RK and BA; and a letter  dated  27  November  2017  from  the
    solicitors who had acted for the sponsor in her asylum claim.

15. In his subsequent decision, the Judge addressed  the  contents  of  the
    letter from the solicitors  at  some  length  in  his  account  of  the
    proceedings, which he gave at paragraphs [4]-[16].  The Judge expressed
    disagreement with the view expressed in the letter that  it  would  not
    have been unusual for the sponsor not to have supplied the Home  Office
    - when making her asylum claim - with the names of  the  children  that
    she said were part of her family unit which  she  had  left  behind  in
    Uganda.  Also, he commented on the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  only
    chosen to disclose the first few pages of her full SEF interview:  "The
    [sponsor] did not prefer to supply a full record of the interview.  The
    sponsor did not provide it.  The [sponsor] did not seek any adjournment
    to provide such a formal record.  That record too would include at  the
    outset an area of time where family members could be  provided  and  at
    the end an opportunity  to  provide  any  further  information  thought
    necessary.  I find that the respondent would  not  have  prevented  the
    sponsor  as  applicant  providing  any  information  she  or  her  then
    solicitors so wished, and that would include the opportunity  to  refer
    to family members at the time she was in Uganda."

16. The Judge continued in paragraph [15]:

         "The [sponsor] had said that  following  marriage,  remarriage  and
         living with her parents and other relatives, and due  to  mortality
         of adults in the wider family, she had to look after a wide  family
         which changed  in  terms  of  membership  from  time  to  time  (my
         emphasis).  The [sponsor] did not wish for any adjournment today to
         obtain any further documents as she had attended in July 2017  only
         for the case to be adjourned."

17. At paragraph [17], the Judge summarised the issues,  and  at  paragraph
    [18] he summarised the evidence.  He began his  findings  at  paragraph
    [19] with a general finding, before going on to give extensive  reasons
    in respect of each class  of  appellant  at  paragraphs  [20]-[51]  for
    upholding the refusal of their respective applications under the Rules.
     At paragraphs [52]-[56], he addressed the appellants' Article 8 claims
    outside the Rules compendiously.

18. The Judge's general finding in paragraph [19] was as follows:

         "I find that this appeal is not made out on the available  evidence
         before me for the appellants and the appeal fails under  the  Rules
         and human rights.  In all cases, I initially consider the  position
         as regard to the available evidence before the ECO as at  the  date
         of decision.  I then proceed to look at any further evidence  which
         has since been adduced to see if that can shine any  light  on  the
         situation as it appertained at the date of decision.  I then go  on
         to weigh that evidence to see if it is reliable given the number of
         different factors involved which can affect the weight I can  place
         on it, including the lack of explanation as to why  late  documents
         were produced, and the sequence of events, the prevalence of  false
         documentation in Uganda, and any inconsistencies in  the  evidence.
         I consider the case of each individual appellant.  I then bring  to
         that the overview of this appeal as brought essentially through the
         sponsor and the first appellant."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

19. The application for permission to appeal was apparently settled by  AB.
    He pleaded that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  giving  inadequate
    consideration to the evidence before him (Ground 1); making  inadequate
    findings on facts before him (Ground 2); setting the standard of  proof
    too high (Ground 3); failing to  make  findings  on  facts  before  him
    (Ground 4); making findings not supported by the evidence  (Ground  5);
    and making incorrect factual findings (Ground 6).

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

20. On 12  October  2018,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  granted
    permission to appeal as she was of the view that the grounds of  appeal
    raised arguable  errors  of  law  which  might  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. The sponsor and the first appellant was notified of the date, time  and
    place of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal by a  notice  issued  on  29
    October 2018 which was sent by second class post to the contact address
    given in the application  for  permission  to  appeal,  which  was  the
    sponsor's home address in Stratford, London E15.  There  was,  however,
    no appearance by the sponsor or by a legal representative instructed on
    behalf of the appellants.  As I was satisfied that the first  appellant
    and sponsor had been given  adequate  notice  of  the  hearing,  I  was
    satisfied that it was in the interest of justice to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the sponsor.

22. Ms Kiss invited me to dismiss the appeal on the grounds that the  error
    of law challenge was no more than an expression  of  disagreement  with
    the findings that were reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence for
    the reasons which he gave.



Discussion

23. The Judge found against the appellants because  he  did  not  find  the
    sponsor or AB to be credible on the relevant core issues arising  under
    the Rules, notwithstanding the fact that the  sponsor  had  provided  a
    considerable number and range of documents to support the case advanced
    by the appellants.

24. In respect of the documents relied on as showing that the  sponsor  had
    married AB in 2008, and that they had  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage thereafter, the Judge found at paragraph [38] that "these  are
    reverse engineered documents  designed  to  show  the  existence  of  a
    marriage and family life prior to the sponsor leaving her home  country
    to seek asylum."

25. With regard to the sixth and seventh appellants, RK and BA,  the  Judge
    accepted that the sponsor was their birth mother, but  did  not  accept
    that it had been satisfactorily demonstrated that they were part of the
    sponsor's family unit when she left Uganda to claim asylum, as  opposed
    to being part of someone else's family unit,  such  as  a  family  unit
    presided over by the sponsor's  mother.   The  Judge  arrived  at  this
    adverse credibility finding on the basis that there was  a  discernible
    inconsistency between what the sponsor had said in her asylum interview
    and the information that she was said to have been  given  to  her  own
    solicitor as recounted in the sister's letter of 27 November 2017.  The
    Judge also drew an adverse inference from  the  non-disclosure  of  the
    entire record of the asylum interview, as well as a failure to  produce
    the formal screening interview which had  taken  place  on  2  December
    2013.

26. With regard to the screening interview record,  in  oral  evidence  the
    sponsor claimed that she had given all the names of the  appellants  to
    the Home Office on two occasions: firstly, in a phone call made  on  18
    November 2013, and secondly, at  the  screening  interview  which  took
    place on 2 December 2013.  The Judge recorded, at paragraph [26] of the
    decision, that she had been given a chance to make  an  application  to
    obtain  any  further  evidence  of  this,  and  she  had  refused  that
    opportunity, although she had been made aware by  the  respondent  that
    this was a point that they might rely on 'today', as  indeed  they  had
    done in submissions.

27. With regard  to  the  answers  given  by  the  sponsor  in  the  asylum
    interview, the Judge said at paragraph [45] that it  was  indicated  at
    AIR Q17 that the sponsor's  mother  (the  children's  grandmother)  had
    taken care of a number of children  including  those  of  the  sponsor.
    This was due to a number of factors including the death of  the  father
    of the sponsor, the death of the father of the children of the sponsor,
    the death of other relatives, and her remarriage to a man who  had  his
    own children.  She had named only two children in care  at  that  time.
    She stated that her own children were with her.  But  the  sponsor  did
    not put a date on when it was that they had all come  together  as  one
    big family: "However, it is also clear from what she says about her own
    troubles at that time, including being arrested  for  long  periods  of
    time, leading to her successful asylum claim, that it  was  her  mother
    and other relatives who looked after her children.  It  is  also  clear
    that not all of the record of the interview has  been  put  forward  in
    evidence by the [sponsor].  It ends at Q18 but there are  plainly  more
    questions after that point in time  which  usually  indicate  questions
    about dates they have been together, who had  what  role  and  for  how
    long, and who was caring for whom."

28. In her witness statement signed on 10 June 2017, the sponsor said  that
    she was arrested and detained by the Ugandan Government in August 2012.
     She left all the dependent children in the care of her second husband.
     They continued to live in the matrimonial home in Kasubi  village  and
    he continued to provide for them.  When she  escaped  from  prison  and
    came to the UK to claim asylum in November 2013, her husband  continued
    to live with the children.

29. It is not pleaded that the Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are
    perverse or irrational.  In essence, the error of law challenge is that
    the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  not  finding  the
    supporting documentary evidence to be persuasive.

30. Having carefully reviewed the grounds of  appeal  and  the  documentary
    evidence in AB1, I am not persuaded that Grounds 2-6 are  made  out.  I
    agree with Ms Kiss that they are an  expression  of  disagreement  with
    findings that were open to the Judge for the reasons he gave.  However,
    I am persuaded that Ground 1 is made out.

31. I find that an error of law is made out  with  regard  to  the  Judge's
    failure to engage with apparently contemporaneous evidence pointing  to
    the  sponsor  cohabiting  with  AB  and  at  least  one  of  the  child
    appellants, US, in the period up to and including August 2012, which is
    when the sponsor says she was first detained.

32. The bank statement evidence in respect of a  joint  account  apparently
    held by the appellant  and  the  sponsor  shows  regular  deposits  and
    withdrawals by the sponsor up until 1 August 2012.  There was  then  no
    further activity on her part for the period thereafter until  the  last
    entry on the statement which is 30 October 2013 when AB  withdrew  most
    of the balance in the account.  AB1 also contains utility bills in  the
    name of the sponsor and AB, evidencing  cohabitation.   These  are  not
    specifically identified by the Judge as having been reverse engineered,
    and the same applies to payment receipts issued over an extended period
    by the  schools  apparently  attended  by  the  child  appellants.   Of
    particular note are the copy receipts at page 60 of AB1.  On  the  face
    of it, they show that the sponsor paid a term's fees for US at Katikamu
    Senior Secondary School on 8 February 2012 and also on 15 August 2012.

33. The Judge is not bound to comment on every piece of evidence,  and  the
    documentary evidence to  which  I  have  referred  above  by  no  means
    addresses all the legitimate concerns raised by the  Judge  as  to  the
    make-up of the sponsor's family unit before she left Uganda in order to
    claim asylum.  It was open to the Judge to find that the membership  of
    the sponsor's family unit appeared to have changed from time to time. I
    consider that  the  Judge  was  justifiably  frustrated  at  not  being
    provided with all the documentary material generated by  the  sponsor's
    asylum  claim,  including  her  screening  interview,  her  substantive
    interview and any witness statements she had made so as to give  him  a
    full  picture  of  the  sponsor's  asylum  narrative  and  the  precise
    composition of her family unit, particularly in the period from  August
    2012 until her flight from the country. However, one crucial aspect  of
    his credibility assessment presents as unfair and unbalanced, which  is
    the Judge's apparently exclusive focus on  documents  which  have  been
    generated long after the  event,  such  as  birth  certificates,  while
    appearing to ignore documents which present as  having  been  generated
    contemporaneously, and thus which have a far greater inherent probative
    value. Alternatively, if he was of the view that  such  documents  were
    reversed engineered - in other words, forged - he did not give adequate
    reasons for reaching this conclusion.

34. The effect of the error is to render unsafe the adverse findings on all
    the appellants, and so the decision must be set aside and  remade.  Due
    to the  extent  of  fact-finding  which  is  required,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is the appropriate forum for remaking.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision must be set aside and remade.

Directions

These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for  a
de novo hearing (Judge Telford not compatible), with none  of  the  findings
of fact by the previous Tribunal being preserved.


Signed                              Date 14 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

