
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08827/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2020                 |On 9th November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               OLUWAROTIMI [A]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, appealed against the respondent's
    decision of 17th  April  2019  to  refuse  his  application  for  entry
    clearance to the UK under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules as the
    child of a parent settled in the United Kingdom.  Resident Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Zucker ("Judge Zucker") dismissed  the  appeal  for
    the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 31st January 2020.  On
    7th June 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.


 2. On 5th August 2020, the parties were  sent  directions  made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington setting out her provisional view that in light
    of the need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19,  it
    would be appropriate to determine whether the making of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point of  law,
    without a hearing. She made directions for  the  parties  to  file  and
    serve further submissions and, if a party considers that a  hearing  is
    necessary, for the party to submit reasons for that view no later  than
    21 days after the notice was sent to the parties.


 3.  In  written  submissions  dated  13th  August  2020,  the  appellant's
    representatives confirm that the appellant agrees to the  appeal  being
    determined  on  the  papers,  and  based  upon  the   parties   written
    submissions.  On 17th August 2020, the respondent  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal,  by  email,  the  respondent's  rule  24  response.   In  the
    respondent's response, the respondent accepts the judge made a material
    error of law in his decision.   I  consider,  firstly,  whether  it  is
    appropriate to determine the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  without  a
    hearing. Rule 34(1) confers a power to do so. By r34(2), I am  required
    to consider the views of the parties. I have borne in  mind  the  over-
    riding objective and I have  also  considered  what  was  said  by  the
    Supreme Court in Osborn v The Parole Board  [2014]  1  AC  1115.  I  am
    satisfied that it is in accordance with the  overriding  objective  and
    the interests of justice for there to be a timely determination of  the
    question whether there is an error of law in the decision of  the  FtT.
    Taking into account the position  adopted  by  the  respondent,  it  is
    entirely appropriate for the error of law decision to be determined  on
    the papers, to secure the proper administration of justice.


 4. The respondent, rightly in my judgement, concedes the decision of Judge
    Zucker should be set aside, and in the circumstances I can deal with
    the issues very briefly.


 5. In the respondent's decision of 17th April 2019, three reasons appear
    to have been provided for refusing the application.  First, the
    respondent noted that in support of his application for entry
    clearance, the appellant had not provided the required valid medical
    certificate confirming that he has undergone screening for active
    pulmonary tuberculosis and that he is free from this disease.  Second,
    the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant or his sponsor were
    the individuals who provided their DNA samples and the respondent
    therefore questioned the authenticity of the results provided by DDC
    (DNA Diagnostic Centre).  The respondent was not satisfied that the
    appellant and his sponsor are related as claimed.  Third, the
    respondent was not satisfied that there are serious and compelling
    family or other considerations which make the appellant's exclusion
    undesirable.  The decision to refuse the application for entry
    clearance was maintained following review by the Entry Clearance
    Manager on 16th October 2019.


 6. In his decision promulgated on 31st January 2020, Judge Zucker stated
    that the tuberculosis screening medical certificate, was a document
    that the appellant was required to "present at the time of
    application", as set out in paragraph A39 and Appendix T of the
    immigration rules. He noted that the requirement is a mandatory one,
    and at paragraph [6] of his decision, stated that Article 8 is not a
    general dispensing power.  He said that in circumstances where a fresh
    application can be made whilst the appellant is still a minor, the
    correct way to proceed is for a fresh application to be made.


 7. In the respondent's rule 24 response, the respondent concedes Judge
    Zucker erred in failing to make findings as to the relationship between
    the appellant and his sponsor, and to consider whether the decision to
    refuse entry clearance is in the end disproportionate, when the
    tuberculosis screening certificate had been provided by the appellant
    to the Tribunal, albeit, it had not been presented at the time of
    application.


 8. The only ground of appeal available  to  the  appellant  was  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC
    11 confirms that the fact that the immigration  rules  cannot  be  met,
    does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full  merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate  issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between  the  individual  and
    public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.


 9. I accept that the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law
    and that the appropriate course is for the decision of Judge Zucker to
    be set aside.  As to disposal, I agree that the appropriate course is
    for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo with no
    findings preserved.  I have decided that it is appropriate to remit
    this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
    September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


10. For the avoidance of any doubt, as set out in the respondent's rule 24
    response, Judge Zucker did not find that the appellant and his sponsor
    are related as claimed.  At the hearing of the appeal, the appellant
    will be required to address each of the reasons advanced by the
    respondent for refusing the application.


11. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


12. The appeals are allowed and the decision of Resident Judge of the FtT
    Zucker promulgated on 31st January 2020 is set aside.


13. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
    with no findings preserved.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         4th November 2020


             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
