
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08556/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 9 July 2019                       |           On 17 July 2019           |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CUTTS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


   0. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Hamilton promulgated on 10th December 2018 whereby the Appellant's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision was dismissed.


   0. The appeal is out of time by approximately 3 months. In the course of
      the hearing we reconstituted ourselves as a FtT bench in accordance
      with Samir (FtT Permission to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003 and
      extended time within which to appeal. We did so for the reasons we
      then gave. Applying the principles set out in Secretary of State for
      the Home Department v SS (Congo) & others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 we were
      satisfied:


        i) Firstly that the delay in bringing the appeal was significant
           relevant to the 14 days within which the Appellant should have
           appealed.


       ii) Secondly that there were good reasons for it. The circumstances
           of the appeal are highly unusual. Put simply we can see why the
           Appellant had sought to withdraw his human rights appeal before
           the FtT. This was because he had an extant Judicial Review
           application in which he contested the assertion of the Secretary
           of State that he had used deception in a TOEIC ETS test sat on
           20th June and 13th October 2012. He understood that he could not
           establish that he had been living in the UK in accordance with
           the Immigration Rules until his judicial review was determined
           and did not therefore believe he could succeed in the appeal.
           The Appellant did not appreciate that the FtT might refuse his
           application to withdraw his appeal and hear the case in his
           absence or that the Secretary of State would rely on the
           decision made by the FtT when challenging his Judicial Review
           application. In addition to these factors there has been a
           highly material change in the law upon which the judge of the
           FtT relied in rejecting the Appellant's application to withdraw
           and to proceed in his absence.


      iii) Finally we were mindful of the overriding objective set out in
           Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
           that this Tribunal must deal with the case fairly and justly. We
           were satisfied that, in the unusual circumstances of this case,
           such made it appropriate to extend time.


Procedural chronology


   0. Given the grounds of this appeal it is necessary to set out the
      chronology of the case in a little detail.


       iv) The Appellant, a Pakistani national, was born in October 1984.
           He entered the United Kingdom in May 2008 on a student visa,
           valid until 30th September 2011. There followed various
           applications for further leave to remain. These involved sitting
           a TOEIC ETS test on 20th June and 13th October 2013.


        v) On 27th November 2014 he was served with an IS151A in which the
           Secretary of State alleged that he had used deception in the
           course of those tests.


       vi) In February 2015 the Appellant challenged that decision by way
           of Judicial Review. This application was refused on 12th August
           2016.


      vii) On 26th April 2017 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on
           human rights grounds. This was on the basis that since 2013 he
           had been in a relationship with a British national.


     viii) On 26th March 2017 his application was refused by the Secretary
           of State on the grounds:


              a) That his presence was not conducive to the public good;


              b) That his relationship could continue abroad;


              c) That there were no very significant obstacles to his
                 integration into Pakistan;


              d) That there were no exceptional circumstances.


       ix) The Appellant appealed this decision to the FtT on 6th April
           2018.


        x) On 24th April 2018 the Tribunal directed the Appellant to
           provide copies of all documents upon which he wished to rely as
           soon as they were available.


       xi) Meanwhile the Appellant had applied to reinstate the Judicial
           Review Application which had been dismissed in 2016. By Order
           dated 20th June 2018 the Upper Tribunal notified him that this
           application had been stayed pending the decision of the Court of
           Appeal in R (on the application of Rajib) and others v SSHD
           C8/2016/1036A relating to the reopening of cases following a
           change in the law. This case was due to be heard on 6th November
           2018.


      xii) On 3rd October 2018 the Appellant sought an adjournment of the
           appeal. He argued that his Judicial Review claim was pending. If
           he succeeded in that claim he would arguably hold lawful leave
           to remain from May 2008 which would mean he would qualify for
           Indefinite Leave to Remain on the grounds of his 10 year
           residence. This application was refused on 8th October 2018 and
           his appeal was listed for hearing.


     xiii) The Appellant sought then on 11th October 2018 to withdraw his
           appeal.


      xiv) On 10th December 2018 the judge of the FtT promulgated his
           decision to refuse the Appellant's application to withdraw his
           appeal, to hear the appeal in the Appellant's evidence and to
           dismiss the appeal.


       xv) On 6th March 2019 the Appellant received a letter from the
           Secretary of State indicating that he objected to his
           application to re-instate his Judicial Review application. He
           relied in part on the finding of the FtT on the issue of
           deception.


           The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal


   0. On 15th October 2018 the Appellant's appeal hearing was listed before
      the FtT. He did not attend, nor was he represented. It is clear from
      paragraph 13 of the decision promulgated on 10th December 2018 that
      the Tribunal had received no documents from the Appellant. There was
      before the FtT a letter dated 21st October 2018 from those
      representing the Appellant stating his wish to withdraw the appeal.

   1. The judge, applying the law as set out in the judgment of the Upper
      Tribunal in TPN (FTT appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295,
      held in paragraph 23 that:

         "Appellants do not have a right to withdraw their appeals. They may
         only do so with permission. In order to obtain permission they must
         provide a satisfactory explanation for their withdrawal
         application. Failure to do this will almost inevitably lead to the
         application being denied."


      He found that it was reasonable to infer that a represented Appellant
      had competent representatives who were aware of this and who would
      have advised him accordingly. On this basis he found that the
      Appellant was aware of the hearing and had chosen not to attend.


   0. The judge held that the Appellant had shown no good reason for
      granting him permission to withdraw his appeal. It was wrong in
      principle to allow an appeal to be withdrawn on the mere prospect of a
      change in the law. There was no way of knowing when the Court of
      Appeal would hand down its decision or when the Appellant's
      application to reinstate Judicial Review proceedings would be
      considered. In addition, the Appellant had failed to provide details
      of the basis for his Judicial Review application and why the issues
      the Upper Tribunal would have to determine could not be determined
      within the appeal listed that day.


   0. For all these reasons the judge held at paragraph 33 that it was fair
      and in the interests of justice to proceed in the Appellant's absence.


   0. The judge then went on to consider the appeal and the evidence upon
      which the Secretary of State relied to establish that the Appellant
      had used deception in his tests. Neither party was present and so no
      oral submissions were made. In the course of his decision the judge
      set out the relevant law and the test which he had to apply. He
      assessed the evidence contained in the bundles provided by the
      Respondent and found, at paragraph 60, that he had discharged the
      evidential burden of proof. He said this:

         "The Appellant has not provided any evidence to rebut the
         allegation of dishonesty. I am therefore satisfied on the balance
         of probabilities that the Respondent has shown that the Appellant
         obtained his English language certificate from LST by fraud. It
         follows the Appellant used fraud/deception/dishonesty when he
         submitted this certificate in support of his application for
         further leave to remain in the UK."

      In reaching his decision on proportionality the judge held at
      paragraph 68 that the public interest in maintaining immigration
      controls and "deterring the sort of abuse the Appellant was involved
      in is very strong indeed." (our emphasis).

The change in the law with regard to applications to withdraw appeals.


   0. The procedure for the withdrawing of an appeal is set out in Rule 17
      of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
      Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. In summary this states that a party may
      give notice of the withdrawal of their appeal and, whether done in
      writing or orally, must specify the reasons for it.


   0. It is common ground that the FtT judge correctly stated the law as it
      was at the time when he held that appellants did not have the right to
      withdraw their appeals but could only do so with the permission of the
      Tribunal on receipt of a satisfactory explanation for so doing.
      Failure to do this would almost inevitably lead to the application
      being denied. This was the ratio in the TPN case.


   0. However, in Waseem Anwar v SSHD [2019] UKUT 00125 (IAC), a recent and
      subsequent decision of the President and Vice President of the Upper
      Tribunal and the President of the First-tier Tribunal, Immigration and
      Asylum Chamber promulgated on 4th March 2019, it was held that TPN
      misconstrues rule 17 of the FtTIAC Rules. In paragraph 46 of the
      judgment the Upper Tribunal sets out its conclusions that:


      xvi) The decision whether to withdraw the appeal is for the
           appellant;


     xvii) That decision does not require judicial approval in order for it
           to be effective;


    xviii) If an issue arises as to whether a withdrawal was in fact the
           appellant's decision (i.e. whether it was valid), it is for a
           judge of the First-tier Tribunal to decide it; as to which the
           reasons for withdrawal may assist.


   0. At paragraph 41 the Upper Tribunal considered the position, as was the
      case in this appeal, should the notice of withdrawal not be
      accompanied with reasons. In those circumstances the Tribunal, as with
      any failure to comply with a requirement of the FtTIAC Rules, has
      power under rule 6 to take such action as it considers just, which may
      include waiving the requirement or requiring the failure to be
      remedied. In practice the Tribunal's administration can be expected to
      request reasons where none have been provided.


   0. In paragraph 45 of the judgement the Tribunal held that where the FtT
      considers that the reason given for withdrawal raises an issue as to
      whether the appellant's notice of withdrawal is in fact legally valid
      or where it is subsequently asserted that it was not validly given the
      FtT should exercise its case management powers under rule 4 to decide
      the matter. The task for the judge in those circumstances is to
      pronounce on the issue of validity. This would normally involve a
      hearing.


   0. It is common ground that this judgment represents a material change in
      the law.


Grounds of appeal


   0. The Appellant contends that the judge of the FtT applied the incorrect
      test and misunderstood the law. Although his reliance on TPN as
      correctly stating the law at the time cannot be criticised it is now
      plain from Anwar that this test was wrong. This is declaratory of the
      law as it always should have been interpreted.


   0. The FtT judge's assertion that the Appellant did not have the right to
      withdraw his appeal without permission was therefore an error of law.
      It was material because the judge then went on to hear and dismiss the
      appeal.


   0. In the absence of reasons for his withdrawal the judge should have
      called for such under rule 6. If he had any doubts as to its validity
      the correct course would have been for him to have directed the
      parties to a hearing to determine the matter.


   0. By failing to allow the withdrawal and continuing to hear the appeal
      which he was not entitled to do, the judge caused real prejudice to
      the Appellant by, in his absence, making a finding of deception on his
      part.


   0. In the circumstances the Upper Tribunal is asked to set aside the
      decision below and to remit the case to the FtT to be heard by a
      different judge.


Respondent's submissions


   0. The Respondent submits that the judge correctly applied the law as it
      was at the time of the hearing. The judge cannot be said to have erred
      in failing to apply case law that came into existence some 3 months
      after the appeal was determined.


   0. Even had the case of Anwar been applied the judge's conclusions would
      not have materially been affected. The Appellant had failed to give
      any reasons as to why a withdrawal was sought. In those circumstances
      he could not have found the withdrawal was legally valid.


   0. The Appellant was legally represented and could have been expected to
      know that he may not have been granted permission to withdraw his
      application. He knew of the appeal date and could have attended. In
      his absence the judge cannot be criticised for proceeding in his
      absence.


Discussion


   0. There can be no doubt that the decision in Anwar represents a material
      change in the law. We agree with the submissions of the Appellant that
      this decision is declaratory of the law as it should always have been
      interpreted.


   0. The Upper Tribunal has now made it plain that a decision to withdraw
      does not require judicial approval. In our view in this case, had the
      judge below applied the law as stated in Anwar, he could not have
      denied the Appellant permission to withdraw his appeal. We accept that
      the absence of reasons for withdrawal may well have caused him concern
      as to its validity. As Anwar makes clear, in those circumstances he
      should have called for an explanation and, if in doubt, have directed
      the parties to attend to address him on the issue. There is nothing to
      suggest, had he done so, that he would have inevitably found the
      withdrawal invalid.


   0. It follows that we are satisfied that the FtT judge applied the wrong
      test. His assertion that the Appellant did not have the right to
      withdraw his appeal was a material error of law. We can see no
      circumstances, had he applied the correct test, in which he could then
      have proceeded to hear the appeal, make the factual findings that he
      did and to dismiss the appeal. The appeal must succeed on this ground
      alone.


   0. Even if we are wrong in our view expressed in paragraph 23 that the
      decision of the Tribunal in Anwar is declaratory of the law as it
      should always have been interpreted and therefore in our conclusion
      that the judge applied the wrong test, we would nonetheless allow this
      appeal. This is because the judge's decision to proceed with the
      appeal in the Appellant's absence was in all the circumstances of this
      case in our view procedurally unfair. His failure, when considering
      whether it was in the interests of justice to proceed in absence, to
      consider the seriousness of the allegation to be tried, the likely
      impact of the lack of evidence on his final decision and the
      consequences to the Appellant of an adverse finding amounts to an
      error of law.


   0. Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
      and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 sets out the over-riding objective
      which is by Rule 2(1) to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly
      and justly which includes by Rule 2(2)(a) dealing with cases in ways
      which are proportionate to the importance of the case and the
      complexity of the issues.


   0. Rule 28 deals with the hearing of an appeal in a party's absence. It
      reads as follows:


         "28.     If a party fails to attend a hearing the Tribunal may
         proceed with the hearing if the Tribunal -


             (a) is satisfied that the party has been notified of the
             hearing or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the
             party of the hearing; and


             (b) considers that it is in the interests of justice to
             proceed with the hearing."


   0. The judge at paragraphs 22-33 of his decision sets out his reasons for
      determining that it was fair and in the interests of justice to
      proceed in the absence of the Appellant in this case. These relate
      principally to the fact that he was aware of the hearing, of the fact
      that permission to withdraw the appeal may not be allowed and that he
      had failed to serve any documents having been invited so to do. At no
      point in the decision does the judge consider the importance of the
      case, the complexity of the issues or the prejudice to the Appellant
      in proceeding in his absence.


   0. This was an appeal which involved an allegation by the Secretary of
      State that the Appellant had engaged in deception in his English tests
      in 2013. The effect of a finding of deception was set out by the Court
      of Appeal in Ahsan and others v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at paragraph
      20. In that paragraph Lord Underhill stated that it was common ground
      that a finding of "deception" would prejudice the chances of an
      Appellant obtaining leave to enter the United Kingdom in the future.
      Where a person has previously used deception in order (broadly) to
      obtain leave there will be a mandatory ban on the grant of leave to
      enter or remain for a period of between one and ten years, the length
      of the period depending on whether they left the UK voluntarily and at
      their own expense. Even in circumstances which do not attract a
      mandatory ban, leave to enter or remain will "normally" not be granted
      where there has been such deception and there are aggravating
      circumstances. The court held in paragraph 21 that more generally it
      is self-evident that an official finding that a person has cheated in
      the way alleged in these cases may become known to others, in which it
      is likely to be a source of shame and to injure their reputation. It
      is clear from these paragraphs, if it was not before, that a finding
      of deception is a serious matter with profound consequences for the
      person involved.


   0. As the judge noted in paragraph 59 of his decision the authorities,
      including R (on the application of Abbas) v SSHD [2017] EWHC 78
      (Admin), have made clear that in ETS/TOEIC cases there is a three
      stage approach to the evidence. First it is for the Secretary of State
      to discharge the evidential burden of proof that there was deception.
      If that is done it is then for the Appellant to provide plausible
      evidence to rebut the allegation of dishonesty. The final burden of
      proof is on the Respondent to establish, on the balance of
      probabilities, that an Appellant's prima facie innocent explanation is
      to be rejected. This is the approach that he adopted in this case. As
      he stated "the Appellant has not provided any evidence to rebut the
      allegation of dishonesty". On that basis he found for the Respondent
      and dismissed the appeal.


   0. Such a determination was, in the absence of the Appellant, almost
      inevitable. It is difficult to see how an absent appellant who has
      provided no evidence could ever rebut such an allegation. It is for
      this reason that in our view judges should exercise great care before
      determining that proceeding in absence is "in the interests of
      justice". This is particularly so in the context of a decision which
      has such serious consequences.


   0. We are not saying that a judge can never proceed in absence where an
      allegation of deception is made by the Secretary of State. We are
      however of the view that a judge should do so with a degree of
      caution. In this case the judge had no explanation at all for the
      failure of the appellant to attend. We consider that he should, in the
      exercise of his case management powers, have directed that the parties
      attend for oral submissions to be made in order that he could satisfy
      himself that the Appellant understood the consequences of failing to
      call any evidence on the question of deception.


   0. Further, we see nothing in the judge's decision to show that when
      considering the interests of justice, he considered the seriousness of
      the allegation, the likely impact of the lack of evidence on his final
      decision and the consequences to the Appellant of an adverse finding.


   0. For these reasons the judge, in our view, failed to give adequate
      reasons as to why it was in the interests of justice for him to
      proceed in absence and such was an error of law. We also consider it
      procedurally unfair in all the circumstances of this case that he
      proceeded in absence without any attempt to hear from the Appellant on
      the point. For these reasons we allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision
The decision by the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law. The decision is set-aside.
The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before
a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hamilton.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant in
this appeal is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Mrs Justice Cutts DBE                        Date: 12/07/19
