
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08651/2019
                                                               HU/08653/2019
                                                               HU/08656/2019
                                                               HU/08658/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Civil Justice Centre (remote     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing)                             |                                     |
|Heard on: 9th September 2020         |On 11th September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     UM
                                     C1
                                     C2
                                     C3
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara, Counsel instructed by Western Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are respectively a mother and her three children who are
    today aged 12,9 and 8. They are all nationals of Pakistan. They  appeal
    with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    AJM Baldwin) to dismiss their linked human rights appeals.

 2. The subject of the Appellants' appeals is that they wish to come to the
    United Kingdom to settle with their Sponsor, Mr [SM]. It is  said  that
    Mr [M] and the first appellant UM are married and that he is stepfather
    to the three children.  They all applied for entry  clearance  in  that
    capacity. The Entry Clearance Officer considered the applications  with
    reference to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and having  done  so
    refused them for the following reasons:

      i) There was no evidence to show that UM and her Sponsor  had  met  in
         person [E-ECP.2.5].

     ii) It had not been established that the relationship  between  UM  and
         her Sponsor is genuine and subsisting. Although his passport showed
         that he had been to Pakistan, this did not  establish  any  contact
         with UM. Call logs between the two had been produced but these only
         related to the three months prior  to  the  application  for  entry
         clearance being made.   Money  transfers  made  from  the  Sponsor,
         allegedly to support his new family, were made direct  to  his  own
         father.  There was no evidence produced of any intervening devotion
         between the couple, nor was there any photographic evidence of  the
         relationship produced [E-ECP.2.6, E-ECP.2.10]

    iii) Court documents supplied in  respect  of  the  children  show  that
         following her  divorce  from  her  first  husband  UM  was  granted
         guardianship over her children but that she required the permission
         of the court to take them out of Pakistan

    It should be noted that the Entry Clearance Officer expressly  accepted
    that the financial requirements of the rules in  respect  of  dependent
    family members were met; nor are there any issues as to 'suitability'.

 3. Judge Baldwin heard oral evidence from Mr [M] who was cross examined by
    a Home Office Presenting Officer.  He was told  that  the  Sponsor  was
    unable to show that he had been in regular contact with his wife  prior
    to July 2018 because his mobile phone from that period had broken -  he
    had taken it to the Apple Store but  had  been  advised,  in  a  report
    produced,  that the data was unrecoverable.   The  Tribunal  was  shown
    other evidence  relevant  to  the  relationship  with  the  Appellants,
    including money transfers, photographs and a copy of Mr [M]'s  passport
    showing exit and entry stamps to Pakistan.  As to the reason  that  the
    money was sent  to  his  father  rather  than  his  wife,  the  Sponsor
    explained that this was a cultural norm as it was not  considered  safe
    or appropriate for a single woman to be collecting cash from the  money
    transfer centre.

 4. Of that evidence Judge Baldwin found that the burden of proof  had  not
    been  discharged.   He  found  the  Sponsor's  evidence   wanting,   in
    particular in the fact that he had not mentioned  until  prompted  that
    the children had attended the wedding.  The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    wedding does not appear to have been celebrated with much  vigour,  and
    certainly that there was no photographs of  it:  "the  failure  of  the
    Sponsor and the Appellants to obtain or try to obtain a single marriage
    photograph would suggest that the marriage may well  not  have  been  a
    meaningful event for either of them".     The Sponsor's  reluctance  to
    send money directly to his wife suggests that "it is not really for her
    benefit". The remainder of the decision  is  focused  on  the  evidence
    relating to the children's status in Pakistan  and  the  terms  of  the
    custody agreement that UM has reached in the  Pakistani  courts.  Judge
    Baldwin was not satisfied that their biological father, or  the  court,
    had given consent to them leaving the country.   He  expressed  concern
    that upon reading the documents from the Pakistani  court  it  was  not
    apparent whether UM had informed that court  that  she  had  remarried.
    With that in mind Judge Baldwin was not satisfied that it would  be  in
    the best interest of these children to move to the United Kingdom.

 5. The grounds seek to challenge the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions  as
    follows:

      i) The Judge reached a number of adverse findings about the  Sponsor's
         evidence  without  giving  him  notice  of  those  concerns  or  an
         opportunity to respond;

     ii) The Judge misunderstood the court  documents  from  Pakistan  which
         confirm that UM  is  the  legal  guardian  and  that  there  is  no
         objection by their biological father to them leaving Pakistan;

    iii) There was no logic in the  Judge's  commentary  that  UM  does  not
         appear to have informed the Pakistani court that she has remarried.
         That was irrelevant to the matter in hand;

     iv) Failure to take material evidence into account/explain what  weight
         should be attached to that evidence, viz photographs of the  family
         together in Pakistan.

    Error of Law: Discussion and Findings

 6. This is a strange case in that the attention of the parties, and indeed
    the First-tier Tribunal, appeared to have been  largely  focused  on  a
    matter that was not of immediate relevance under  Appendix  FM,  namely
    the  position  in  Pakistani  law  of  the  children  and  UM's   legal
    guardianship over them.   Much of the decision below is taken  up  with
    an  examination  of  those  matters,  and  with  a   'best   interests'
    assessment. That was all completely irrelevant if the primary matter in
    issue could not be resolved in the Appellants' favour.

 7. That issue was whether this is a genuine and subsisting  marriage,  and
    by extension whether the Sponsor and UM intend to live permanently with
    one another in the United Kingdom.   A  related  point,  not  expressly
    addressed by the First-tier Tribunal, was whether the parties  to  this
    marriage had ever actually met.  The basis of  the  ECO's  refusal  was
    simply that insufficient evidence had been produced  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof on those matters. No more needed to be said, and on the
    scant evidence produced with the applications,  that  was  a  perfectly
    reasonable decision.

 8. Before the First-tier Tribunal the same questions fell to be addressed,
    this time through the prism of 'human rights' and the evidence latterly
    produced. The matter of whether  the  parties  had  ever  actually  met
    appears  to  have  fallen  by  the  wayside  with  the  production   of
    photographs of the family taken together during a post-refusal visit to
    Pakistan by the Sponsor.   In respect of their intentions going forward
    the evidence was however singularly lacking. The statements made by  UM
    and the Sponsor are, given the basis of the refusal,  curiously  silent
    on the matter of how they met, why they decided to get married or  what
    they wanted in the future. The marriage is presented  very  much  as  a
    transaction. Whilst that would  not  render  it  legally  invalid,  nor
    sociologically unusual, in the  circumstances  where  their  intentions
    were specifically being challenged, it was imperative that these issues
    were addressed in the evidence.    Mr  Bellara  pointed  out  that  the
    Sponsor did appear to give oral evidence, and that he could  have  been
    asked about his personal history - why he decided to marry UM and so on
    - but that takes the case  no  further  forward.  The  requirements  of
    Appendix FM are there for all to see and it is  for  the  applicant  to
    discharge the burden of proof.     That the evidence was  not  produced
    is fatal to these appeals.

 9. I do however consider it appropriate to say something  about  the  case
    overall.

10. Before me the parties were in agreement that the entire  issue  of  the
    children's ability to leave Pakistan was something of  a  red  herring,
    since it was expressly accepted that they met all of the  'suitability'
    requirements in  Appendix  FM  and  it  can  be  assumed  that  had  HM
    government wanted to include a public interest  requirement  concerning
    foreign law in the rules it would have done so. I suspect that  if  any
    such requirement was ever considered it was ruled out on the basis that
    it would be entirely impracticable. It is for instance arguable that an
    order by a court in Sweden banning a mother from travelling abroad with
    her children would be a matter that a British immigration officer would
    be entitled to take into account  when  considering  whether  to  grant
    those children permission to enter the United Kingdom.  That is because
    the  Swedish  system  is  similar,  in  terms   of   'best   interests'
    considerations, to our  own.   Whether  the  same  could  be  said  for
    children coming from a country  where  Islamic  rules  of  guardianship
    operate is rather more debatable.  A family court in Pakistan might for
    instance routinely impose upon a mother an order preventing the removal
    of children from the jurisdiction, but make  no  such  automatic  order
    against a father.   It would  be  highly  inappropriate  for  decision-
    makers in this country to regard such an  order  as  determinative,  or
    even pertinent, to our assessment of  a  child's  best  interests.   It
    seems to me that in those circumstances the question of whether UM  can
    ever actually board a plane to the United Kingdom is a matter for  her,
    the Pakistani courts and the airport authorities. If she does  not  get
    the appropriate order, she will not be able to leave.  For  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to have treated the possibility that that might happen as
    relevant to these appeals was an error.

11. The second point I would like to make is  this.  There  was  absolutely
    nothing about this case which I regarded as suspicious. It is  entirely
    in keeping with Pakistani cultural norms that the Sponsor  sends  money
    to his father rather than his wife.  The  evidence  that  it  would  be
    considered inappropriate and unsafe for her to collect a  large  amount
    of cash is wholly credible. Nor do I regard  there  as  being  anything
    peculiar in the low-key nature of this second  marriage.  Whilst  first
    marriages are, where possible, celebrated with largesse, it  is  common
    for second marriages to consist of nothing  more  than  a  nikah  being
    contracted with no guests, other than the obligatory  adult  witnesses.
     The applications, and  appeals,  have  failed  not  because  there  is
    anything inherently problematic about them, but because the  Appellants
    just did not provide  the  required  evidence  to  meet  the  terms  of
    Appendix FM. Should the Appellants wish to  make  applications  in  the
    future they may wish  to  consider  my  observations.  If  they  cannot
    provide photographs or text messages from the Sponsor's phone,  perhaps
    they can retrieve them from other  people,  or  from  UM's  phone.  The
    Sponsor and UM may wish to explain in written statements how they  know
    each other or on what basis they were introduced, and why they  decided
    to marry.   Statements from other friends or family members about these
    matters might be helpful.

    Anonymity Order

12. Three of the Appellants are minors.   Having had regard to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies
         to,  amongst  others,  both  the  Appellants  and  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings"




    Decision and Directions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld and the  appeals  are
    dismissed.

14. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          9th September 2020
