
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/08722/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th February 2019                         |On 11th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR JATINDER [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Farmer) allowing the  appeal  of  Jatinder
    [K] against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  28th  March  2018
    refusing him leave to remain on  account  of  his  family/private  life
    (Article 8).

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and  to  Jatinder  [K]  as  "the
    Appellant" reflecting their respective positions before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of India who entered the UK in July 2009 and
    has remained here since that date.  He has  made  various  applications
    since that time but suffice to say for the purposes of this decision in
    May 2016 he made application  for  leave  to  remain  and  it  is  this
    application, the refusal of which, is the subject of these proceedings.

 4. There were two strands to  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    application:

      i) the Appellant had used deception by way of a proxy  test  taker  in
         June 2012, when taking the English language test; and

     ii) based on (i) above, the Appellant could not satisfy the requirement
         for leave to remain as the partner of a person settled and  present
         in the UK.   His  application  in  this  regard,  was  based  on  a
         relationship with a woman by the name of [HN].

The FtT Hearing

 5. By the time of the appeal hearing in November 2018, matters  had  moved
    on  so  far  as  the  Appellant  was  concerned.   In  particular   the
    relationship between the Appellant and Ms [N] had broken down  and  the
    Appellant had formed a new relationship with Ms [K].  She is  a  person
    settled in the UK with indefinite leave to remain.  A  child  (SH)  was
    born of that relationship in May 2018 and SH is a British citizen.

 6. The FtTJ noted that the issues before him therefore were as follows:

      i) did the Appellant use deception by way of a  proxy  test  taker  in
         June 2012; and

     ii) are the requirements of EX1(b) met now that there is  a  qualifying
         British child which brings into  issue  the  "reasonableness  test"
         under Section 117B(6)?

 7. Having heard from the Appellant and his  partner  Ms  Kaur,  the  judge
    found that the Appellant had offered an  innocent  explanation  showing
    that he had not employed deception when  taking  the  English  language
    test and furthermore it would not be reasonable to expect SH  to  leave
    the UK and accompany his father to India.   He  therefore  allowed  the
    appeal "under the Immigration Rules."

 8. The Respondent sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  two
    grounds:

      i) the FtTJ's approach to  the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning  the
         innocent explanation, was flawed.  It was asserted  that  the  FtTJ
         gave too much weight to the Appellant's English  language  ability.
         It was contended that the test is not whether the Appellant  speaks
         English well  but  whether  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  he
         employed deception; and

     ii) there was a failure to assess the family circumstances in the light
         of the recent decision in KO Nigeria [2018] UKSC 53.  A  point  was
         also raised  that  the  FtTJ  had  failed  to  recognise  that  the
         Appellant's appeal could only be brought  on  the  basis  of  human
         rights. The FtTJ's finding that the appeal was  allowed  under  the
         "Immigration Rules" was in error and demonstrated and that the FtTJ
         had failed to carry out a proper proportionality exercise.

 9. Permission having been granted the  matter  thus  comes  before  me  to
    decide if the decision contains such material error that it must be set
    aside and re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Mr Duffy appeared for the Respondent and Miss Jones  for  the
    Appellant.  At the outset of the proceedings, Mr  Duffy  outlined  that
    permission had been granted on two grounds as set out above. (No  point
    was being taken on the FtTJ's error in allowing the  appeal  under  the
    "Immigration Rules" rather than under the Human Rights Act.)  Mr  Duffy
    indicated in any event that he was not pursuing the second ground.  His
    submissions, therefore, were confined to ground one.  They followed the
    lines of the grounds seeking permission.  He emphasised that  the  FtTJ
    had failed in his approach to the evidence by giving too much weight to
    the Appellant's current English language ability. The judge should have
    focused on the  question  of  why  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant precluded the use of a proxy test taker.

11. Miss Jones in response said that the Secretary of  State's  submissions
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the reasoned findings made
    by the judge.  She pointed out that the  judge  had  properly  directed
    himself setting out the issues before him [6] and was clearly aware  of
    where the burden of proof lay [7].  There  was  no  misdirection.   The
    Secretary of State's  challenge  was  essentially  a  reasons  one  and
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the clear findings made by
    the FtTJ.  Those findings were ones which were fully  open  to  him  to
    make.

Consideration of Error of Law

12. I find force in Miss Jones's submissions.  I find that the FtTJ has set
    out clearly the task before him and from a reading of the decision, has
    demonstrated that he has kept this in mind.

13. It is clear that the FtTJ found the Appellant to be a credible  witness
    in that the Appellant was able to go into substantial detail concerning
    the test he took, why he selected the test centre he  did  and  how  he
    accessed the centre.  It is correct that the judge took account of  the
    fact that the Appellant, in giving his evidence, had a good command  of
    the English  language  and  gave  his  answers  clearly.  This  may  be
    considered unsurprising in that over 5 years  have  elapsed  since  the
    date of the test. However, set against that the judge reminded  himself
    that the Appellant's current level of proficiency is not indicative  of
    historic proficiency.  Having assessed the evidence  which  was  before
    him, the judge found that the Appellant's answers in examination/cross-
    examination satisfied the minimum level of plausibility required [14].

14. In coming to his findings I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtTJ  looked  at
    matters holistically drawing upon the Appellant's reasons for  choosing
    the test centre he did, his remembrance of the route he took to get  to
    the test centre together with the  detail  he  gave  of  the  procedure
    during the test itself. The Appellant demonstrated a  good  command  of
    English albeit the alleged deception took place six years ago.

15. I find that the Respondent's first ground is not made out.  The judge's
    reasons as set out in [11] [13] and [14]  are  clear  cogent  ones  and
    cannot be characterised as either perverse  or  irrational.   They  are
    findings which were open to him to make on the evidence before  him.  I
    find that his approach to the evidence was entirely consistent with the
    principles set out in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 229.

16. Accordingly I find, given that ground two is no longer  being  pursued,
    it follows that  the  decision  of  FtTJ  Farmer  promulgated  on  21st
    November 2018 contains no error of law requiring it to  be  set  aside.
    The decision therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Jatinder [K] against the  Secretary  of
State's decision refusing to grant him leave did not involve the  making  of
an error on a point of law.  The decision stands.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First tier Tribunal in  the  decision  promulgated
on 21st November 2018 stands.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
