
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08620/2015
                                                               HU/08623/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2017                   |On 11 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                     X L
                                     P D
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gill QC, instructed by Stephen & Richard,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with leave against a decision of FtT  Judge  Hall
    promulgated on 19 December  2016  in  which  he  refused  their  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing their application
    for leave to remain in the UK based on family and private  lives.  Both
    appellants are Chinese citizens and are married  to  one  another.  The
    first appellant  is  a  female  born  20  September  1947.  The  second
    appellant is a male born 20 October 1947.

 2. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 11 April 2000 with a visitor's
    visa valid until 25 August 2000. She has remained in the UK  unlawfully
    since the expiry of her visa. The second appellant arrived in the UK on
    6 July 2004 with a visa valid until 11 December  2005.  On  1  December
    2004 the second appellant applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    work permitted employment. That application was  refused  on  21  April
    2005. The second appellant has remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully  since
    then.

 3. On 11 April 2015 the first  appellant  was  served  with  a  notice  of
    liability to remove from the UK. The second appellant was served with a
    similar notice  on  5  June  2015.  The  appellants  made  the  current
    application for leave to remain on 23 July 2015.

 4. The first appellant was born in China and lived there until  1998  when
    she moved to Trinidad before coming to  the  UK  in  2000.  The  second
    appellant was born in China and lived there until 1990.  He  worked  in
    Peru for two years and then worked  in  Trinidad  from  1993  to  2001.
    Thereafter he worked in the United States before moving to  the  UK  in
    2004.

 5. The appellants have four  adult  children,  all  of  whom  are  British
    citizens. One son is currently in Peru. The others live in the UK.  The
    appellants live with their eldest daughter and her family and have done
    so since arriving in the UK. Her daughter's date of birth is [ ]  1972.
    She is married and they have three children who at the date of  hearing
    were aged 16, 12 and 10. All are British citizens.

 6. Another daughter born [ ] 1978 is married with three children and lives
    30 minutes' drive away from the appellants. They are British  citizens.
    There is a son in Peru. The youngest son is married and at the date  of
    the hearing was in the process of moving to London. Again, he  and  his
    wife are British citizens.

 7. The reason given by the appellants for overstaying is that their eldest
    daughter  suffers  from  paranoid  schizophrenia  for  which   she   is
    prescribed  anti-psychotic  medication.  She  struggles  to  cope  with
    looking after the children and doing  housework.  Her  husband  runs  a
    takeaway food shop and spends little time with his wife and family. The
    appellants support their daughter  by  undertaking  the  housework  and
    looking after the grandchildren.

 8. In his decision Judge Hall found that the appellants had established  a
    private  life  in  the  UK  since  their  arrival  in  2000  and   2004
    respectively. Article 8 was therefore engaged on a private life  basis.
    He found that they had not established a family  life  with  the  adult
    children with whom they did not reside. However they had established  a
    family life with the eldest daughter and with the  three  grandchildren
    with whom they  live.  Accordingly  Article  8  was  engaged  with  the
    daughter and grandchildren on a family basis.

 9. The appellants accepted that they could not satisfy the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules. Accordingly the issue was
    whether they could succeed in the appeal outside the rules.  The  Judge
    considered  whether  or  not  the  appellants  were  in   a   'parental
    relationship'  in  terms  of  section  117B(6)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). Applying  the  guidance
    in R (RK) v SSHD (s117B(6): parental relationship IJR  [2016]  UKUT  31
    (IAC) he determined that neither appellant had 'stepped into the shoes'
    of the parent and accordingly that section did  not  apply.  The  Judge
    accepted that it would be in the best interests of  the  children  that
    the appellants remain in  the  country.  While  noting  that  the  best
    interests of the children were a primary consideration  they  were  not
    paramount  and  could  be  outweighed  by  other   considerations.   He
    considered that he  required  to  find  'compelling  circumstances'  to
    justify a grant of leave outwith the rules: SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387. The Judge considered the criteria in s 117B of the  2002  Act.  He
    found that there were no compelling reasons to justify a grant of leave
    outwith the rules. The weight that must be given to the public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control outweighed the  weight  to
    be given to the best interests of the grandchildren and the daughter.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions for Appellants

10. The appellant submitted lengthy grounds of appeal.  There  are  six  in
    number and can be summarised as follows.  The first is  to  the  effect
    that the judge erred in law in his approach to  s117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act. Secondly it was submitted that the Judge erred in failing to  hold
    that the decision under challenge was not in accordance  with  the  law
    because the Secretary of State had failed to consider the provisions of
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  (the
    2009 Act). He had further erred in not considering it himself.  Thirdly
    the judge had failed to assess the best interests adequately.  Fourthly
    he  failed  to  assess  public  interest  properly.  Fifthly  he  acted
    unreasonably in holding that the appellants had  not  shown  that  they
    fell within para 276 ADE(1)(vi). Finally the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to strike a fair balance under Article 8(2) ECHR.

11. Mr Gill QC submitted that the Judge had taken too narrow an approach to
    the term 'parental relationship' in s117B(6). It was not  the  same  as
    parental responsibility which was a term of art; see Children Act  1989
    section 3. The term parental relationship had to be  interpreted  in  a
    manner  which  was  consistent  with  the  welfare  principle  and   in
    accordance with Article 8; ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4; In  Re  G  [2006]
    UKHL 43, [2006] 1 WLR 2305 Baroness Hale examined the different ways in
    which a person could become a  natural  parent  of  a  child  including
    social and psychological parenthood (para 35). In Re B  [2009]  UKSC  5
    Lord Kerr giving the judgement  of  the  Supreme  Court  said  that  in
    private law disputes about residence the child's  best  interests  were
    the paramount consideration. In RK Judge Grubb had  asked  whether  the
    claimant had 'stepped into the shoes' of the  parent.  While  that  was
    fine as far as it went a parental  relationship  did  not  require  the
    natural parent to  play  no  role  in  the  upbringing  of  the  child;
    grandparents could form a parental relationship along with the  parents
    themselves. Article 8 had to be interpreted in a manner consistent with
    the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child which amongst other things
    placed a duty on member states to consider the best  interests  of  the
    child as a primary consideration.

12. On ground 2 it was submitted that neither the Secretary  of  State  nor
    the FtT had made any reference to section  55  of  the  2009  Act.  The
    importance of this provision was emphasised in ZH (Tanzania)  at  paras
    23 and 24. Any decision taken without regard to the need  to  safeguard
    and promote the welfare  of  the  children  involved  will  not  be  in
    accordance with law.

13. Turning to ground 3 Mr Gill submitted that too often  lip  service  was
    given to the best interests of the child. At  paragraph  62  the  Judge
    finds that the best interests of the children would be  served  by  the
    appellants remaining in the UK. But it does not deal with the  possible
    effects on the children if the appellants were removed.  In  this  case
    the best interests appear to be easily overcome by the need to maintain
    effective immigration control without fully considering the  impact  on
    the children. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 Lord  Hodge  noted  that
    although the best interests of the children can be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other considerations no other consideration can be
    treated as more significant.

14. On ground 4 Mr Gill submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    properly assess the public interest.  There  was  not  just  a  private
    interest in play but a public interest in British children  growing  up
    in the best possible circumstances in the UK. The  public  interest  in
    the removal of the appellants was extremely low for the  reasons  given
    by Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 at paragraphs 13  to  16.
    There had been a great delay by the Secretary of State as a  result  of
    which a strong bond had been established between the appellants and the
    children. Even  if  the  appellants  had  not  established  a  parental
    relationship for the purposes of section 117B(6)  they  were  the  main
    carers of the children. The public interest in removing the  appellants
    was thus extremely low.

15. So far as ground 5 was concerned Mr  Gill  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal and did not make any further submission.

16. On ground 6 Mr Gill submitted that by relying on  the  guidance  in  SS
    (Congo) that compelling circumstances were required before a  grant  of
    leave to remain could be made outwith the rules the  Judge  had  fallen
    into error. SS (Congo) had been overturned in  the  Supreme  Court;  MM
    (Lebanon) 2017 UKSC 10. The position was as  it  always  was  in  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11. The failure to properly address the best  interests  of
    the children meant that the Judge had failed to realise that there  was
    such a strong interest in protecting their welfare that a  very  strong
    set of countervailing considerations were required  to  outweigh  these
    best interests. The only countervailing consideration was the  fact  of
    overstaying. The Judge had placed little weight  on  the  private  life
    because he felt mandated to do so by the provisions of section 117B(4).
    But this provision  was  not  a  definitive  statement  of  the  public
    interest; Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803  at  para  52.  This  error  was
    compounded by the failure to take into account the delay on the part of
    the  Secretary  of   State.   The   decision   was   unreasonable   and
    disproportionate because in addition to the above factors the interests
    of all  the  family  looked  together  was  extremely  high;  the  best
    interests of the children cared for by the appellants  amounted  to  an
    extremely strong and primary consideration the strength  of  which  had
    not been understood by the Judge; the public interest in protecting the
    best interests  of  the  children  was  high  but  ignored;  the  Judge
    unreasonably considered that contact could be maintained  by  means  of
    modern  communication;  the  public  interest  in  ensuring  that   the
    appellant's eldest daughter was cared  for  and  assisted  by  her  own
    family members was ignored; and there was no relevant  public  interest
    in the economic well-being of the country favouring expulsion.

Submissions for Respondent

17. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was  no  material  error.  While  she
    accepted that Article 8 was engaged the two appellants had  arrived  in
    the UK in 2000 and 2004 respectively. They had been here illegally. The
    second appellant had put in an appeal  to  remain  but  that  had  been
    refused. He was expected to leave but had elected to stay. He had  been
    in receipt of NHS treatment which  had  not  been  paid  for.  The  two
    biological parents had not abdicated responsibility. The mother was not
    incapable of looking after the children. There was no evidence that the
    appellants  had  taken  any  major  decision  in  the  lives   of   the
    grandchildren. RK was the correct  approach.  The  appellants  had  not
    stepped into the shoes of the parents. There was no difference  between
    the phrases 'parental responsibility' and 'parental relationship'. Both
    phrases were used by Judge Grubb in RK. While it was  true  that  there
    was no mention of section 55 of the 2009 Act in the decision letter the
    focus of the appeal had changed.  It  was  clear  that  the  Judge  had
    fulfilled the obligations in section 55 without actually  referring  to
    its terms.

Discussion and Decision

18. In RK Judge Gibb considered whether or not a grandparent who cared  for
    her grandchildren, her daughter suffering from multiple  sclerosis  and
    Lupus, could be in a parental relationship for the purposes of  section
    117B(6). He considered that it was not necessary for an  individual  to
    show  that  they  had  parental  responsibility   before   a   parental
    relationship could be said to exist. What  was  important  was  whether
    they had taken on the role that a parent usually plays in the  life  of
    the child.  He  considered  that  in  order  to  establish  a  parental
    relationship the individual must 'step into the shoes of  the  parent'.
    Where a  non-biological  parent  caring  for  a  child  claims  such  a
    relationship its existence  will  depend  upon  all  the  circumstances
    including whether or not  there  are  others  (usually  the  biological
    parents) who have such a relationship with  the  child.  He  considered
    that it would be unlikely that that a person would be able to establish
    such a  relationship  where  the  biological  parents  continue  to  be
    involved  in  the  child's  life  as  the  child's  parents.  In  those
    circumstances it will be difficult, if not impossible, to  say  that  a
    third party has stepped into the shoes of the parent.

19. We consider that Judge Grubb's  analysis  of  the  argument  cannot  be
    faulted.  The  difficulty  with  Mr  Gill's  submission  is   that   it
    concentrates on the quality of the  relationship  rather  than  on  the
    parental part of the phrase. In Re  G  [2006]  UKHL  43  Baroness  Hale
    examined the, at least, three  ways  in  which  one  could  become  the
    natural parents  of  a  child.  The  first  two  can  be  described  as
    biological but the  third  way  she  termed  social  and  psychological
    parenthood. She described it as the relationship which develops through
    the child demanding and the parent providing  for  the  child's  needs,
    initially at the most basic level of feeding, nurturing, comforting and
    loving  and  later  at  the  more  sophisticated  level   of   guiding,
    socialising, educating and protecting. She  quoted  with  approval  the
    definition of "psychological  parent"  from  the  influential  work  of
    Goldstein, Freud and Solmit, Beyond the Best  Interests  of  the  Child
    (1973) as follows

         "A psychological parent is one who,  on  a  continuous,  day-to-day
         basis,   through   interaction,   companionship,   interplay,   and
         mutuality, fulfils the child's psychological needs for a parent, as
         well as the child's physical needs. The psychological parent may be
         a biological, adoptive, foster or common law parent."

20. Many people may be involved in the upbringing of  a  child.  These  may
    include family members such as aunts  and  uncles,  siblings  and  step
    siblings depending on the age difference, grandparents and  others.  It
    may also extend to others outside the family such  as  family  friends,
    neighbours or teachers. The strength of the relationships between  such
    individuals and the child will vary greatly. But for  the  relationship
    to take on a parental character it will  be  necessary  to  demonstrate
    that it has the qualities averted to by Baroness Hale.  We  agree  with
    Judge Grubb that it will be very difficult to demonstrate the existence
    of such  a  relationship  when  the  biological  parent  is  exercising
    parental responsibility on a day to day basis.  Moreover  it  seems  us
    patronising to suggest that simply because the  biological  parent  has
    health problems which necessitate a greater involvement in the care  of
    children by other family members than might otherwise be the case  that
    the parent is less able to fulfil that parental role.

21. In any event the evidence accepted by the Judge in this case falls some
    way short of establishing that relationship. At paragraph 51 the  Judge
    finds that while the appellants have been of considerable assistance to
    their daughter and son in law they have not stepped into the shoes of a
    parent. He did not accept that they took  important  decisions  in  the
    well-being of the children. There was no evidence from the schools they
    attend that the grandparents are regarded as the parents and it was the
    son  in  law  who  attended  schools  parents'   evenings.   In   those
    circumstances we consider that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    conclusion that the appellants did not have a parental relationship for
    the purposes of section 117B(6).

22. That said the relationship between the appellants and the  children  is
    particularly strong. As the  Judge  found,  and  Ms  Isherwood  rightly
    conceded, Article 8 is  engaged  because  of  the  family  relationship
    between the grandparents and children.  Such  a  relationship  was  not
    found to exist with the grandchildren  of  their  other  children.  The
    appellants live with their daughter, son  in  law  and  children  in  a
    family setting and they are intimately involved in the running  of  the
    household and the care of the children. The first appellant  has  lived
    in the family since about the time the first of the  grandchildren  was
    born. The second appellant came to this country when  the  first  child
    was 4 and about the time of the birth of  the  second  grandchild.  The
    third was born in 2006. Accordingly the appellants have been a constant
    presence in the lives of the grandchildren throughout their lives.

23. The appellant's role in the upbringing of their grandchildren  and  the
    strength of the relationship is demonstrated by  the  evidence  of  the
    children. The oldest describes how they have helped him develop from an
    early age and eased his transition from a young child to teenager.   He
    said that their mother has been ill mentally and  physically  since  he
    could remember but his grandparents had prepared meals,  done  laundry,
    shopping and keeping the house clean. The middle  child  described  his
    grandparents as the most important people in  his  life.  His  happiest
    memories were of them. He described how his mother's  illness  impacted
    on her; she was amongst other things temperamental but his grandparents
    were there to calm her down and remind her to take her  medicine.  They
    taught him to work and study hard. He said he could  not  imagine  life
    without them and he had cried a lot in secret  since  the  people  from
    immigration had come to their house. The third child,  who  is  now  10
    years old says that she fears that there will be no one to  look  after
    them. All of them  demonstrate  a  deep  love  and  affection  for  the
    appellants. It is clear that the effect of removal of the  grandparents
    on the children would be substantial.

24. Mr Gill submitted that the Judge had viewed the best interests  of  the
    child from an adult perspective; he  had  not  sought  to  analyse  the
    effect on the children of removing the appellants from their lives. Nor
    had he examined the effect on the daughter and subsequent  consequences
    for the  children.  We  consider  that  there  is  substance  to  these
    submissions. While Judge Hall acknowledges that the best  interests  of
    the children are a primary consideration  it  is  not  clear  how  that
    translates in the balancing act. It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  best
    interests of the children are a primary consideration and then pass  on
    to considerations which are said to outweigh them. In doing so  however
    it is necessary to consider the full impact of a decision which is  not
    in accordance with the children's best interests before concluding that
    they are outweighed by other considerations.

25. The Judge applied the guidance in SS (Congo)  to  look  for  compelling
    circumstances to grant leave outwith the  rules.  The  decision  in  SS
    (Congo) was overturned by the Supreme Court in MM  (Lebanon).  Mr  Gill
    submitted that the position is now as it had been  in  Huang.  That  is
    perhaps  a  simplification  of  the  position  as  articulated  in  the
    judgement of Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath. Nevertheless it appears to us
    that the central issue in considering the appellants Article 8 claim is
    whether a fair balance has been struck between the  personal  interests
    of the family and the public interest in controlling  immigration;  see
    paragraphs 43 and 44 of the  judgement  in  MM  (Lebanon)   drawing  on
    Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17.

26. In striking that balance it is of course necessary to consider, as  the
    Judge did, the provisions of section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.  He  was
    correct to find that neither  appellant  can  speak  English  and  that
    neither  is  financially  independent.  Accordingly  the  criteria   in
    subsections (2) and (3) are not  met.  It  is  also  correct  that  the
    appellant's private life in this country  has  been  established  while
    they were in this country illegally. Accordingly,  applying  subsection
    (4) little weight should be given to this aspect. However this is not a
    statement of the public interest; Rhuppiah para 52.

27. While these are factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  overall
    assessment they do not in themselves have the same weight that needs to
    be accorded the best interests of the children.  At  paragraph  71  the
    Judge finds that the weight that must be given to the  public  interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control outweighs the weight to be
    given to given to the best interests of the appellant's  grandchildren.
    It is accordingly the fact that both that both appellants have, as  the
    Judge finds at paragraph  70,  blatantly  disregarded  the  Immigration
    Rules that tips the balance against the appellants.

28. It is  of  course  true  that  the  appellants  have  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Section  117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act  provides  that   the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
    However  the  weight  to  be  given  to  that  must   depend   on   the
    circumstances. In this case the first appellant had been in the  UK  as
    an overstayer for 15 years before the  Secretary  of  State  sought  to
    remove her. The second appellant has  been  here  10  years  since  his
    application to remain in the UK was refused. Again no attempt was  made
    by the Secretary of State to enforce immigration  control  against  him
    until 2015.

29. In EB (Kosovo) Lord Bingham noted the effect of delay as  a  factor  in
    the decision making process. He said that a relationship  entered  into
    at a time when the applicant's immigration status is precarious may  be
    imbued with a sense of impermanence, "But  if  months  pass  without  a
    decision to remove being made, and months become years,  it  is  to  be
    expected that this sense of impermanence will fade and the  expectation
    will grow that if the authorities had intended to remove the  applicant
    they would have taken steps to do so. This result depends on  no  legal
    doctrine but on an understanding of how, in some cases, minds may  work
    and it may affect the proportionality of removal." This observation  is
    clearly directed to adult  relationships  where  both  parties  may  be
    assumed to know of the precarious nature of the applicant's status.  In
    this case however the delay has allowed a  strong  family  relationship
    with children to be formed. They will have had no understanding of  the
    fact that their grandparents had no right to be in  the  country.  They
    will have seen them as the people who loved them, nurtured them, played
    with them, ensured they attended to their homework and  assisted  their
    ill mother with household tasks. In those circumstances it seems to  us
    that the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  ensuring
    effective immigration control is less than it would normally be if  the
    Secretary of State had enforced immigration control earlier.

30. The grandchildren are British citizens as are their parents. They  have
    a strong bond with the appellants which goes beyond that which  usually
    exists  between  grandparents  and  grandchildren.  Because  of   their
    mother's illness they have relied on them on a daily  basis  throughout
    their lives. That is emphasised in  the  evidence  before  the  FtT.  A
    letter from a Dr Khayyatt,  a  psychiatrist  treating  the  appellant's
    daughter, dated 21 September 2016 notes that she is well  supported  by
    her parents husband and family to maintain  her  mental  well-being.  A
    letter from a psychiatric nurse, Jane  Morgan  dated  10  October  2016
    noted that she had been visiting the appellants' daughter for the  last
    11 years. During this time she had  had  a  number  of  relapses  which
    appeared to have been brought on by stress. She had  got  to  know  the
    appellants. One of them usually opened the door  to  her.  They  had  a
    strong bond with their daughter. They helped with household chores  and
    cooking as well as looking after the children. The daughter relied upon
    the appellants for physical and emotional supported. She concluded that
    if the appellants were to be deported she would lose this  support  and
    the stress would be detrimental to her condition.

31. Accordingly the impact of  the  removal  of  the  appellants  would  be
    twofold. First there would be a direct impact on the children who would
    lose a mainstay of their physical and emotional support and  which  has
    been there all their lives. Secondly there would be an impact on  their
    daughter who would also lose the physical and  emotional  support  that
    her parents have given her throughout her  time  as  a  mother  and  be
    detrimental to her condition. That would have a knock on effect on  the
    children who, as well as having to deal with the stress of losing their
    grandparents would have to deal  with  the  stress  of  their  mother's
    illness exacerbated by the loss of her parents.

32. The Judge notes that if the appellants are removed to China contact can
    be maintained through modern means of communication. No doubt  that  is
    true but we agree with Mr Gill when he said that it was unrealistic  to
    expect family life to be conducted by Skype.

33. For these reasons we consider that the Judge erred in his assessment of
    the balance to be struck between the  rights  of  the  family  and  the
    public interest. We agree with the Judge that the best interests of the
    children are served by the appellants remaining in the UK.  However  we
    consider that by not  considering  the  impact  on  the  children  both
    directly and indirectly he did not  give  sufficient  weight  to  their
    interests. We further consider that in the circumstances of  this  case
    too great a weight  was  placed  on  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.  The  public  interest  does  not  always  require
    removal. Section 55 of the 2009 Act requires that immigration decisions
    have regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
    children in the UK. In this instance we are satisfied that  the  public
    interest favours the appellants remaining in the UK.

34. We find that the removal of the appellants would be contrary to Article
    8 ECHR and section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 11 December 2017

Rt Hon Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
