

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08729/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 29 August 2017                   |On: 30 August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          shameen parvez pokeerbux
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, instructed by SG Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Pokeerbux's  appeal
against the decision to refuse his human rights application  for  indefinite
leave to remain on long residency grounds.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and  Mr  Pokeerbux  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 21 June 1979. He arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 14 September 2004 and was given leave to  enter  as  a
student. He was subsequently granted further periods of leave to  remain  as
a student until 31 August 2010. On 24 February 2011  the  appellant  applied
for a residence card as the partner of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
rights in  the  UK,  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  His
application was refused on 29 June 2011,  but  subsequent  to  a  successful
appeal  against  that  decision  his  application  was  reconsidered  on  30
September 2011 and he was issued  with  a  residence  card  valid  until  30
September 2016.

On 7 May 2015 the appellant applied for settlement based on ten years'  long
residence in the UK. His application was refused on 8 October  2015  on  the
basis that he had failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
immigration  rules,  specifically  paragraph   276B(i)(a)   and   (v).   The
respondent considered that  the  appellant's  period  of  continuous  lawful
residence in the UK had been broken from the expiry of his leave  to  remain
until 29 September 2011, the day before  he  was  issued  with  a  residence
card. The respondent noted that the appellant claimed  to  have  been  in  a
relationship with  an  EEA  national  from  2008  to  the  present  day  but
considered  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  of  a   subsisting
relationship with the EEA  national  and  evidence  to  show  that  she  was
exercising treaty rights from the date of issue of the residence card  until
the current date. As such, it was not  accepted  that  the  appellant  could
rely upon being the partner of an EEA national as contributing  to  the  ten
year period of lawful leave. The respondent went on to consider whether  the
appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and   paragraph
276ADE(1)  and  concluded  that  he  could  not.  The  respondent  found  no
exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of   leave   outside   the
immigration rules.

The appellant appealed against that decision on human  rights  grounds.  His
appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell on 8  November  2016.
It was argued before the judge by the respondent that  the  appellant  could
not meet the requirements of the immigration rules owing  to  the  break  in
his continuous lawful residence between August 2010 and  September  2011,  a
period of 13 months. Judge Buckwell noted the determination  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal in the appellant's previous appeal in which the  Tribunal  had
found, in its decision of 12 September 2011, that  the  appellant  had  been
cohabiting with his  EEA  national  partner  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship since 2008. Judge  Buckwell  accepted  the  evidence  that  the
appellant's EEA national partner had been exercising treaty  rights  in  the
UK from August 2010,  when  his  leave  to  remain  expired.  He  concluded,
therefore, that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  a  ten  year  period  of
continuous lawful residence in  the  UK,  initially  under  the  immigration
rules and thereafter as the family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
treaty  rights.  He  found  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276A and he allowed the appeal.

Permission was then sought by the respondent to appeal that decision on  the
basis that the judge had materially erred in  law  by  allowing  the  appeal
under paragraph 276B, whereas he could only have allowed the appeal  to  the
extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law and he ought  to
have remitted the matter to the Secretary of State.

Permission was granted on 6 July 2017.

The matter came before me and both parties made submissions.

It was agreed by all parties that the only ground  of  appeal  open  to  the
appellant under section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Act 2002,  as
amended, was that the decision was unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998 and that a remittal to  the  SSHD  on  the  basis  that  the
decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  as  asserted   in   the
respondent's grounds, was not an option available to the judge.

It was  Mr  Hawkin's  submission  that  since  the  respondent  consistently
asserted that the immigration rules were human  rights  compliant  and  that
they set out the overall balance between an individual's  human  rights  and
the public interest, the appellant's ability to  meet  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules was sufficient  in  itself,  in  this  case,  for  the
appeal to be allowed on human rights grounds. As Mr  Hawkin  submitted,  the
respondent had raised no public interest points in the refusal decision  but
had refused the appellant's application solely on the basis of  a  break  in
the continuity of lawful residence following the  expiry  of  his  leave  to
remain and a lack of evidence of his EEA national exercising  treaty  rights
since the issue of the residence card to him on 30 September  2011,  matters
which had been determined by the judge in his favour.

Having heard Mr Hawkin's  submissions  and  been  directed  to  the  judge's
acceptance that there was evidence to show the  exercise  of  treaty  rights
from August 2010 by the appellant's EEA national partner,  Mr  Singh  agreed
that  the  judge  had  been  entitled  to  find  that  the   appellant   had
demonstrated ten years of continuous lawful residence in the UK.  Whilst  he
submitted  that  the  appeal  should  not  have  been  allowed   under   the
immigration rules, as that was no longer a ground of appeal available  under
section 84, he agreed with Mr  Hawkin's  submission  that  that  was  not  a
material error and that there was no need  to  set  aside  Judge  Buckwell's
decision.

Accordingly, in light of the parties' agreement, and for the reasons  given,
I do not consider there to be any material error of law in Judge  Buckwell's
decision requiring it to be set  aside.  The  decision  should  be  read  as
allowing the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  It  will  now  be  for  the
Secretary of State to take the  appropriate  course  on  the  basis  of  the
findings made by the judge.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of  law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
therefore stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede         Date: 29 August 2017
