
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08422/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2021                     |On 18 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            DAVID OLESEGUN IDOWU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Thomas of Compass Immigration Law LTD
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Birrell ('the Judge'), promulgated on  22  September
        2020, in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on  human
        rights grounds.
     2. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  a
        Resident Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 20 October 2020 of the
        basis it is said to be arguable, particularly in light of  what  is
        said  at  paragraphs  6  and  7  of  the  application,   that   the
        proportionality assessment was flawed.




Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 19 May 1970, who was
        refused entry clearance on the basis of  family  and  private  life
        with his partner, who is also his sponsor, and two named  children.
        The application was  refused  pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  and  also
        paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  The  Judge  summarises
        the key points of the refusal letter at [3] in the following terms:


           a) the appellant  did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements
              because of his previous immigration history.
           b) It was an aggravating factor that the appellant  had  used  a
              false identity to gain employment in the UK.
           c) The appellant did not  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
              Appendix FM and had not  provided  the  mandatorily  required
              evidence from the Sponsor's employer or the payslips for  the
              period of six months prior to the date of application.
           d)  The  appellant  did  not   provide   an   English   language
              certificate.
           e) There were no exceptional circumstances that would mean  that
              refusal led to unjustifiably harsh consequences.
           f) The appellant had provided no evidence of  contact  with  his
              sons. Apart from some photographs and therefore  it  was  not
              accepted that the appellant has had a significant role in his
              children's lives.


     4. The Judge had the benefit of considering not only  the  documentary
        evidence relied upon by the appellant but also seeing  and  hearing
        oral evidence from the sponsor and from one of the  children,  JOI,
        including their reaction to cross-examination,  which  enabled  the
        Judge to form a view relation to the reliability  or  otherwise  of
        their evidence.
     5. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [28] of the decision under
        challenge in which it was noted that it was not disputed  that  the
        appellant is the father of two British children as a  result  of  a
        relationship with the sponsor whilst he was in  the  UK  illegally.
        Those children were born in 2004 and 2007. The Judge  accepts  that
        the appellant is the father of the children and  that  family  life
        recognised by article 8 exists [32].
     6. The Judge was satisfied that removal will have consequences of such
        gravity so as to potentially engage the operation of article 8 [33]
        and that such interference is in accordance with the law  and  that
        any such interference is necessary in a democratic  society  having
        legitimate aims pursuant to one of the legitimate aims set  out  in
        article 8(2), namely the economic well-being  of  the  country  and
        also the right of the state to control the entry  of  non-nationals
        into its territory [35].
     7. The Judge considers the fifth of  the  Razgar  questions,  that  of
        whether any interference is proportionate from [36].
     8. The Judge sets out the correct legal self-direction  at  [41]  that
        the correct starting point  in  considering  the  welfare  of  best
        interests of the child will  be  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
        interests to live with and be brought up by his or her parents. The
        Judge notes in the  same  paragraph,  however,  that  although  the
        children were brought up by both parents until the  appellant  left
        the UK in 2011, beyond the appellant being their father, there  was
        no evidence of that or even that they lived in a  common  household
        or that he played any role in their lives.  The  Judge  notes  that
        since 2011 the documentary evidence of the appellant's role is very
        limited and there was nothing from any expert to suggest  that  the
        absence of the father has had an adverse impact on  the  children's
        welfare as the sponsor is clearly  a  well  motivated  and  devoted
        mother.
     9. The Judge notes at [42] the child who gave oral evidence had stated
        he would like his father to be with the family and  have  a  closer
        relationship with him and his brother and that on balance it is  in
        the children's best  interests  to  have  their  father  with  them
        because that is the norm, although the Judge does record  a  caveat
        that this is not "overwhelmingly so".
    10. The Judge thereafter considers the relevant parts of section 117 of
        the 2002 Act before setting out the conclusions between [50  -  51]
        in the following terms:


        50.  Drawing these threads  together  when  considering  where  the
             balance lies between the best interests of the children on the
             one hand, where I have set out above that the  best  interests
             of the children are to be brought up by both parents, and  the
             importance of maintaining immigration control on the other,  I
             recognise  that  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public
             interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that  the
             seventh of  the  principles  in  the  Zoumbas  code  does  not
             preclude an outcome whereby the best interests of a child must
             yield to the public  interest.  This  approach  has  not  been
             altered by Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
             Act 2002. Thus I am entitled to  give  significant  weight  at
             this stage to the public interest in  maintaining  immigration
             control and it is in this context that I  remind  myself  that
             the Appellant entered the UK illegally, worked illegally,  had
             healthcare he did not pay for,  failed  to  attend  an  appeal
             hearing and left the country without notifying the Respondent.
             His behaviour was serious and albeit it  was  some  years  ago
             those  breaches  are  old  because  the  Appellant  no  longer
             remained in the UK.


        51.  There is no suggestion that the Sponsor and her  children  who
             are  British  citizens  should  live  with  the  appellant  in
             Nigeria. The Respondent's case is that they should  remain  in
             the UK visiting the Appellant as they have done  in  the  past
             and maintaining contact by phone  and  the  Internet.  I  have
             considered whether this would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences for the two children as their  relationship  with
             their father would have to be maintained at a distance, as  it
             has done in the past. There  is  nothing  in  the  independent
             evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  the  absence  of  the
             Appellant from the children's daily lives in the UK has had or
             will continue to have an adverse impact on them. While I  have
             sympathy with C1's desire to have his father with him  in  the
             UK. I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  met  the
             evidential burden of establishing that refusal  will  lead  to
             unjustifiably harsh  consequences  or  that  this  amounts  to
             compelling  reasons  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
             maintaining immigration control.


    11. The Judge's conclusion therefore was that on the facts it  had  not
        been made out that there will be an unlawful breach  of  article  8
        ECHR.
    12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds. The first
        asserting an adequate assessment of the  proportionality  issue  in
        failing to fully engage with the documentary evidence and the  oral
        evidence of the child C1 and the sponsor,  and  that  in  doing  so
        failed to properly  address  the  question  of  the  two  children,
        especially in light of the fact the  second  child,  C2,  had  been
        diagnosed with autism and learning difficulties,  for  the  reasons
        set out in further detail in  the  application  for  permission  to
        appeal.
    13. The Secretary of State has  filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  30
        October 2020, asserting the Judge directed  herself  appropriately,
        that the Judge fully considered the best interests of  children  as
        part of the proportionality assessment, that there was no need  for
        the Judge to recite all the evidence referred to in the application
        for permission to appeal, especially when it is clear the Judge did
        have regard to it and  that  the  question  of  the  weight  to  be
        attributed to that evidence was a matter for the Judge.



Error of law


    14. It is understandable that the children may  want  their  father  to
        live with them in the United Kingdom, but it is not  made  out  the
        Judge failed to take the evidence from the children into account or
        that the Judge failed to read or factor into her assessment of  the
        evidence in the  Education,  Health  and  Care  Needs  Plan  (EHCP)
        prepared  by  Bolton  Council  in  relation  to  the  second  child
        containing the diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder.  It  is  also
        not made out that the Judge failed  to  read  or  factor  into  the
        assessment the letter  from  Jillian  Davies.  The  Judge  was  not
        required to set out in detail in the decision the contents of  such
        documents, provided they were considered with the  required  degree
        of anxious care, which I find to be the case.
    15. The fact the decision is contrary to that sought by  the  appellant
        and/or the children does not mean all the evidence was not properly
        taken into account. The Judge  in  the  determination  specifically
        makes reference to both the appeal bundle and supplementary  appeal
        bundle and notes  that  the  contents  of  those  bundles  and  the
        skeleton argument was specifically relied upon by Mrs Thomas in her
        submissions.
    16. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny and undertook an assessment of  the  merits  of
        the human rights claim in a properly structured manner by reference
        to the Razgar test. The Judge's findings are supported by  adequate
        reasons and the weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for
        the Judge.
    17. The fact the Judge's decision is contrary to  that  sought  by  the
        appellant does not mean that the weight given to  the  evidence  by
        the Judge was in any way irrational, unreasonable, or unfair.
    18. At [6] of the appellant's grounds is an assertion the  Judge  erred
        at [40] in claiming the EHCP  did  not  refer  to  the  appellant's
        father or suggest he had played any role in their  life,  when  the
        appellant is mentioned in the various pages quoted in that section.
        I find such submission misrepresents the Judges actual comment.  It
        is accepted the appellant is mentioned in the report as the  father
        of the children and that the child identified the  appellant  as  a
        person who supports him, which was evidence clearly  considered  by
        the Judge. What the Judge was looking for within  that  report  was
        sufficient evidence to show the appellant had played  a  sufficient
        role in the children's life such that the  impact  of  his  absence
        upon the child's future would support the  appellant's  claim.  The
        Judge's observation that insufficient evidence was  made  available
        to support the claim the only finding available to the Judge was to
        allow the appeal is a finding clearly within  the  range  of  those
        available to the Judge on the evidence.
    19. The Judge  was  aware  of  the  historic  timeline.  The  fact  the
        appellant's overstaying occurred some  years  ago  is  specifically
        mentioned in the decision.
    20. The Court of  Appeal  has  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  those
        considering whether to grant permission to appeal should not import
        their own view of  the  merits  of  the  claim  into  the  decision
        actually made. In this appeal, it is  quite  clear  the  Judge  did
        consider the evidence adequately, has given sufficient  reasons  in
        support of the findings made, and that the decision to dismiss  the
        appeal is within the range of findings clearly open to the Judge on
        the evidence. Whilst the appellant disagrees, I do not find it made
        out the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to the decision
        to dismiss the appeal sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
        interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 11 March 2021








