
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08553/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 8 February 2019                   |On 01 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               Ms MAJIDAN BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 11 September 2018 Judge  Turnock  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of
    Pakistan, against the decision made by the respondent on 26 March  2018
    refusing to grant leave to remain on private and family  life  grounds.
    The appellant, who is aged 72, last came to the UK on a visit visa on 7
    June 2017.

2.   The main points raised in the appellant's grounds as  amplified  by  Mr
    Khan were that the judge had erred in:

    (1)  conflating the test of very significant obstacles under  paragraph
         276ADE with the different, more demanding, test  of  insurmountable
         obstacles;


    (2)  failing to properly consider the affidavit evidence regarding  the
         appellant's circumstances in Pakistan and the extent to  which  her
         needs were not being met there, together with her own evidence that
         she now had no place to live; and


    (3)  failing to consider the Article 8 rights of the grandchildren.


3.   I record my gratitude to  Mr  Khan  and  Mr  Tan  for  their  excellent
    submissions.

4.   It is apposite to take grounds (2) and (3) first.   As  regards  ground
    (2), I am not persuaded that  the  judge  misunderstood  or  failed  to
    properly weigh all the evidence relating to  the  appellant's  previous
    circumstances in Pakistan or her likely circumstances on  return.   The
    judge summarised the contents of these affidavits  in  some  detail  at
    paragraphs 44-49.  It was  entirely  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses for the judge to find that the  evidence  did  not  establish
    that the appellant had been abandoned by her second son. The affidavits
    were essentially aimed at explaining why family members there could  no
    longer look after and support her; they did not suggest that if she had
    no-one else to turn to they  would  turn  their  back.   Further,  this
    evidence did not explain why the appellant would have  transferred  her
    property to her second son in December 2016 if she had not received  an
    assurance that they would not abandon her.  The  judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellant's daughter who did not say that  the  appellant  had
    been abandoned, only that the appellant's son in Pakistan and his  wife
    are too busy and do not look after her.

5.    I  also  consider  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  extent  of   the
    appellant's care needs to be congruent with the evidence considered  as
    a whole.  Mr Khan submits that the judge failed to have regard  to  the
    appellant's practical day-to-day needs, but it seems to me that that is
    exactly what the judge did, stating at paragraph 56-58 as follows:

         "56.  The  Appellant  clearly  understands  how  life  in  Pakistan
             operates.  The Appellant is not in good health, but it is  not
             suggested that she cannot communicate with other  citizens  of
             Pakistan.  The Affidavits produced  from  witnesses  currently
             residing in Pakistan confirm that to be the case.   The  issue
             is whether her current health conditions and claimed  lack  of
             support mean that although  she  would  have  the  ability  to
             communicate and integrate she would  not  be  able  to  do  so
             practically because she  would  be  unable  to  take  care  of
             herself and has no-one who could provide that support for her.


         57.  The medical evidence sets out the health  problems  which  the
             Appellant faces although the detail of  the  impact  of  those
             upon her is not provided.  The Report  simply  concludes  that
             'These multiple medical problems affect her daily life and she
             should be considered for help and support'.


         58.  The Appellant did have accommodation in Pakistan and it is not
             submitted that would not be  available  on  her  return.   Her
             evidence was, however, that the accommodation was not suitable
             for her needs and there is a lack of  support.   However,  the
             Appellant did return to Pakistan on 17 November 2016  and  the
             evidence is not clear as  to  what  caused  the  situation  to
             deteriorate to such an extent that when she returned to the UK
             on 7 June 2017 Mrs  Bibi  expressed  the  concerns  which  are
             outlined in her statement.   The  Appellant  claims  that  the
             attitude of her son changed  following  the  transfer  of  the
             property in Pakistan  to  him,  but  that  took  place  on  23
             December 2016 which was some 6 months prior to her  return  to
             the UK in June 2017".


6.   Mr  Khan  takes  issue  with  the  judge's  focus  on  the  appellant's
    situation under the dependent relatives rule at  paragraph  77,  but  I
    agree with Mr Tan that in the context of the Article 8  proportionality
    assessment that was a relevant consideration, since if  the  judge  had
    been satisfied that she met those Rules, that would  have  reduced  the
    public interest in requiring her to go back to make an entry  clearance
    application.

7.   Mr Khan takes issue with the judge's assessment that the appellant  had
    not established that her physical and mental condition meant  that  she
    could not manage in Pakistan without outside care.  However, I consider
    that the judge's assessment at paragraph 79 that:

         "79. I find that this is a finely balanced case.  There are factors
             in favour of granting leave, but I do not  consider  they  are
             such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   factors.    In
             particular I had regard to that  the  absence  of  independent
             evidence as to the impact  on  the  Appellant  of  her  health
             conditions and the lack of independent evidence of the absence
             of health care facilities in Pakistan.  On the  basis  of  the
             material before me she would not be  able  to  succeed  in  an
             entry clearance application.  The Immigration Rules should not
             be circumvented by the application of Article 8 in the absence
             of compelling circumstances."


    was consistent with the evidence viewed  as  a  whole.   As  the  judge
    correctly highlighted in paragraph 77, there was  no  medical  evidence
    from a  doctor  or  other  health  professional  that  the  appellant's
    physical and mental condition meant that she could not perform everyday
    tasks.

8.   On the issue of the availability of  outside  care,  it  must  also  be
    borne  in  mind  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant   was
    financially dependent on her sponsor and found  at  paragraph  78  that
    they are able to provide financially for  her.   At  paragraph  42  the
    judge recorded the sponsor's evidence as being that although he  had  a
    big mortgage and his expenditure had gone up, "they would do what  they
    could".  I note further that the judge considered it  significant  that
    the appellant had been able to return to  Pakistan  in  November  2016.
    Although the judge made no specific finding on the issue, the  evidence
    before him did not establish that on return to Pakistan  the  appellant
    would not receive any more financial support  from  the  sponsor.   (If
    necessary the sponsor would also be able to assist in  finding  persons
    able to provide help with her care, or in  finding  persons  who  could
    help her find such persons.)

9.   As regards ground (3), the simple  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the
    appellant has not been a regular part of the grandchildren's lives  and
    her own evidence was that she still wanted to  live  in  Pakistan:  see
    paragraph 34.  There is no suggestion  that  the  grandchildren's  best
    interests are not being met by their parents and there was no  evidence
    produced to show that her ties with them  were  over  and  above  those
    between a visiting grandparent and children.

10.  In relation to ground (1), Mr Khan is right to identify that the  judge
    twice referred erroneously to the test of  "insurmountable  obstacles",
    stating at paragraph 61:

         "61. I find that the Appellant would be able to return to  Pakistan
             and  re-integrate  into  that  country  and  would  not   face
             insurmountable obstacles in doing so.  I accept that her  life
             would be more difficult in Pakistan than in the  UK  but  that
             does not mean that she faces insurmountable obstacles  to  her
             return".


    However, I am not persuaded that this resulted in any  material  error.
    At paragraphs 52-58 the judge identified "very  significant  obstacles"
    as being the requirement the appellant  had  to  meet  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and correctly directed himself in relation  to  its
    meaning. The judge also gave sound  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant had not shown there were  very  significant  obstacles.   The
    paragraph in which the judge refers to insurmountable  obstacles  comes
    straight after a paragraph finding that the evidence showed  only  that
    the appellant's son in Pakistan was unable to provide the level of care
    she desired.  That was  a  factor  that  went  to  the  issue  of  very
    significant obstacles - irrespective of whether the judge described the
    relevant test correctly at paragraph 61.

11.  The appellant was someone who had failed to meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and in respect of whom there were several section
    117B considerations  weighing  against  her  case,  including  lack  of
    English, lack of  financial  independence  and  precarious  immigration
    status.  The judge's proportionality assessment was entirely within the
    range of reasonable responses.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the appeal  must  stand.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 25 February 2019

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

