
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                        |Appeal Number: HU/08431/2019          |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      |                                      |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2020                    |                        On 17        |
|                                      |December 2020                        |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                              min bahadur khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Makka Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a 37 year old  Nepalese  national  who  appeals,  with
    permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens,  against  a  decision
    which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs ("the judge") on 26
    February 2020.  By that decision, the judge dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of his application to join  his
    mother ("the sponsor") in the United Kingdom.


 2. The sponsor is a Nepalese national who was born on 26  September  1945.
    In May 2016, she settled in the United Kingdom as the widow of the late
    Nin Bahadur, who served in the Brigade  of  Gurkhas  between  1958  and
    1975.  The appellant's parents had five other children, now adults, all
    of whom remain in Nepal.


 3. The appellant applied for entry clearance on 27 January 2019.  He  gave
    his details, and those of his parents, and he  stated  that  he  was  a
    single man who remained financially dependent upon his mother.


 4. In her decision, the respondent found that the appellant was unable  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules or the  relevant  policy
    (Annex K of the Immigration Directorate Instructions).  The correctness
    of neither conclusion is at issue in these proceedings.  The respondent
    went on to conclude, however, that the  appellant's  ongoing  exclusion
    from the United Kingdom was not unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 and, in particular,  that  any  such  decision  was  in
    compliance with Article 8 ECHR.  The correctness of that conclusion was
    very much at issue before the FtT, just as the FtT's resolution of that
    question adversely to the appellant is at issue in the Upper  Tribunal.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge received bundles from the appellant and the respondent and  a
    skeleton argument from Ms McCarthy,  who  continued  to  represent  the
    appellant before me.  It was contended,  in  broad  outline,  that  the
    appellant is a single man with no regular employment who remains  close
    to his mother and who is financially dependent upon her.  He  was  said
    to live alone in the family home in Nepal and to  have  access  to  his
    late father's pension via an account in the  sponsor's  name.   Amongst
    other documents, witness statements  made  by  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor and financial  documents  were  adduced  before  the  judge  in
    support of these assertions.  In Ms McCarthy's  skeleton  argument,  it
    was submitted that the appellant and the sponsor continued to  enjoy  a
    protected family life  and  that  the  historic  injustice  perpetrated
    against the Gurkhas was determinative of the proportionality assessment
    which necessarily followed.  The latter submission - based as it was on
    settled authority - was uncontroversial.   The  former  submission  was
    accordingly the judge's focus.

 6. The judge reminded herself of relevant authority before she set out her
    findings of fact.  At [8], she noted that there had been  no  intention
    for the appellant to join the sponsor when  she  left  Nepal  in  2016.
    That intention  had  only  come  about  when  the  sponsor  encountered
    difficulties with health and language after arrival  in  the  UK.   She
    attached significance, in those circumstances, to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had chosen  to  live  apart  on  a  permanent
    basis.  The judge was concerned, at [9]  by  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant had "no one in Nepal".  That contrasted, she found, with  the
    evidence given by the sponsor, which was that she and the appellant had
    seen her other children when she visited Nepal.   The judge  considered
    that the appellant and the sponsor had exaggerated the  extent  of  his
    isolation in order to boost his chances of success on appeal.  She also
    considered the suggestion that the appellant had lost contact with  his
    married siblings to be contrary to a document adduced by the  appellant
    entitled "A  brief  note  on  the  Gurkha  family":  [10].   The  judge
    considered this exaggeration on the appellant's part to cast doubt over
    other aspects of the evidence before her: [11].  She was satisfied that
    the appellant had available to him his father's pension but she thought
    it likely that this sum, which had previously  supported  a  family  of
    eight,  was  shared  between  the  appellant  and  his  siblings.   She
    considered it unlikely that the appellant required the full  amount  to
    support himself.


 7. At [13], the judge noted that the sponsor had stated in  evidence  that
    the appellant had worked in Nepal.  That had not been disclosed in  his
    witness statement.  She had also changed her evidence to state, on  the
    one hand, that the appellant had looked after the family's cattle, only
    then to state that there was only a single  cow.   The  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had no contact with his siblings: [14].   She
    did accept that he remained close to his mother but she had  chosen  to
    leave Nepal in 2016 and had not intended for  him  to  join  her.   The
    relationship which continued to exist was not  one  which  amounted  to
    more than normal emotional ties and the money which was  sent  did  not
    amount to real, effective or committed support: [15]-[16].  So  it  was
    that the appeal was dismissed.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin, sitting as a judge of the  FtT.   The  appellant  renewed  both
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It was submitted, in summary,
    that there were errors of approach in the assessment of whether Article
    8 was engaged in its family life aspect and that the judge had erred in
    failing to consider Article 8(2).  UTJ Owens considered both grounds to
    be arguable, although it was only to the first  that  she  referred  in
    granting permission.

Submissions

 9. In development of the  grounds  of  appeal,  Ms  MCarthy  submitted  as
    follows.  As regards the conclusion at [9] of the judge's decision, the
    appellant had never claimed to be totally isolated  from  his  siblings
    and there was no proper evidential foundation for her  conclusion  that
    there was a discrepancy between the written and oral evidence.  It  was
    clear from [11] that this concern had caused  the  judge  to  view  the
    remaining evidence with doubt.  Secondly, the judge had seemingly  been
    concerned that the sponsor had changed  her  evidence  about  how  many
    cattle they had but the point had not been taken by the respondent  and
    might easily have been a problem  with  interpretation.   Thirdly,  the
    judge had been concerned  that  the  appellant  was  sharing  his  late
    father's pension with his siblings but the point had not been  explored
    in oral evidence and, in any event, it did  not  alter  the  fact  that
    committed support was being provided to him.  Fourthly, the  judge  had
    misdirected herself insofar as  she  attached  weight  to  the  sponsor
    having 'chosen' to come to the UK; such a conclusion  was  contrary  to
    what had been said in Jitendra Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  There had been
    no decision not to bring the appellant to the UK.  Fifthly,  the  judge
    had conducted an assessment of Article 8(1) which left out  of  account
    the sponsor's dependence upon  the  appellant.   These  errors  in  the
    judge's  rejection  of  the  account  were  material,  individually  or
    cumulatively, since the case  advanced  by  the  appellant  necessarily
    disclosed the existence of a family life.


10. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had not erred as contended  by  Ms
    McCarthy.  It was necessary  to  set  her  findings  in  context.   The
    appellant was thirty six at the date of the hearing before the FtT.  He
    had not cohabited with his mother  for  three  years  or  more,  having
    decided that he did not wish to come to the UK.  He  had  found  casual
    work in Nepal when such work  was  available.   All  of  these  matters
    pointed away from the existence  of  a  family  life.   The  judge  had
    directed herself in accordance with authority and her decision  was  to
    be read as a  whole.   She  was  aware  of  the  facts,  including  the
    appellant and sponsor's cohabitation before she left  Nepal.   She  had
    been entitled to consider it significant that the sponsor had chosen to
    leave the appellant.  The record showed that  the  sponsor  had  stated
    that the appellant did not intend to come to the UK at first.   It  was
    accepted by the judge that the appellant was close to  his  mother  but
    she had had concerns about  the  evidence  given.   Her  assessment  of
    whether he was alone, at [9] of the decision was open to  her,  as  was
    the decision to attach  weight  to  the  change  of  in  the  sponsor's
    evidence over the number of cows owned by  the  family.   Overall,  the
    findings were open to the judge and this was mere disagreement  on  the
    part of the appellant.


11. Ms McCarthy responded briefly to draw to my attention page A10  of  the
    appellant's bundle, in which the sponsor  had  said  that  it  was  not
    feasible to bring the appellant to the UK at the time she came.

12. I reserved my decision at the end of the submissions.   It  was  agreed
    between the parties that the appropriate relief, in the  event  that  I
    found there to be an error of law in the decision of the FtT,  was  for
    there to be a further hearing, either in the FtT or the Upper Tribunal.
     I reserved my decision on that also.

Analysis

13. Mr Whitwell's submissions about the context in which the judge made her
    decision were well made.  It is perhaps  unsurprising  that  the  judge
    came to the conclusion that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    healthy 36 year old appellant and his mother,  with  whom  he  has  not
    lived for a number of years.  Recalling that there is no presumption[1]
    for or against family life existing  in  circumstances  such  as  this,
    however, it is to the reasons that the judge gave for her  decision  on
    Article 8(1) which I must turn in order to consider whether  she  erred
    in law.


14. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin refused permission to appeal in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In doing  so,  she  concluded  that  the  grounds  were
    unarguable because they amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a  sustained
    disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.  My provisional view of
    the grounds was, frankly, in accordance with Judge Martin's assessment;
    the judge had made findings of fact which appeared to be properly  open
    to her on the evidence available.

15. Ms McCarthy invited me to consider the oral  and  documentary  evidence
    before the judge, however, before reaching a  concluded  view.  I  have
    done so with the dicta from cases such as AH (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL  49;
    [2008] 1 AC 678 and Fage v Chobani [2014] EWCA Civ 5 firmly in mind.  I
    recall that the FtT is an expert Tribunal and that its decisions are to
    be respected unless it is clear that it erred in law.   I  also  recall
    that the FtT was immersed in the sea of the evidence  and  that  it  is
    impermissible for counsel to  engage  in  'island-hopping',  suggesting
    that certain  items  of  the  evidence  should  have  received  greater
    scrutiny or weight in the judge's written decision.

16. With those principles  in  mind,  I  turn  to  the  first  part  of  Ms
    McCarthy's first ground, which concerns  the  judge's  conclusion  that
    there was a discrepancy between what was said  to  be  the  appellant's
    evidence that 'there is no longer any contact'  between  the  appellant
    and his siblings and the sponsor's evidence that she and the  appellant
    saw his siblings when she last visited Nepal.  Ms McCarthy's  point  is
    straightforwardly that the appellant did not say that he had no contact
    with his  siblings  and  that  there  was,  in  the  circumstances,  no
    discrepancy.

17. I have examined the appellant's witness statement in  considering  this
    submission.  It is a carefully drafted  document  which  runs  to  four
    pages.  Much of it is focused, as one would expect, on the relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor.  There  are  references  to  the
    appellant's siblings at various points in the statement.   At  [3],  he
    states that they are married and live separately in Nepal and that they
    are 'too busy to care for me or support me'.  He  says  that  he  feels
    like he has no other relationship with  any  other  family  members  in
    Nepal as his siblings have independent lives and that he  is  extremely
    lonely.  Similar remarks appear in [5], in  which  the  appellant  also
    states that he receives no support  from  his  siblings.   At  [6],  he
    states that his siblings 'have abandoned our family life after they got
    married'.  Then, at [7], he states that he has  spent  the  last  three
    years without any family members; that it has been extremely difficult;
    and that he has 'no family to interact with in  Nepal'.   At  [10],  he
    states again that his siblings have 'started their own lives'.


18. The picture painted by the appellant in these passages is as summarised
    in [10] of  the  statement:  the  appellant's  siblings  have  married,
    settled down and started their own lives.  The focus of those lives  is
    now on their  own  nuclear  families  and  not  on  the  wider  family,
    including the appellant and his mother.  What is not said is  that  the
    appellant has  no  contact  whatsoever  with  his  siblings.   No  such
    assertion is made directly in the statement.  Nor can  it  be  inferred
    from what  the  appellant  does  say.   The  statement  admits  of  the
    possibility that the appellant remains in contact with his siblings but
    that such contact is only sporadic, as a result of which he  no  longer
    considers his siblings to be a meaningful part of his family.


19. In the circumstances, I am bound to  accept  Ms  McCarthy's  submission
    that this experienced judge fell into error in  concluding  that  there
    was a discrepancy between the account given by  the  appellant  in  his
    statement and that given by the sponsor in oral evidence.   There  was,
    in truth, no contradiction between the appellant's  statement  and  the
    sponsor's evidence that she and the appellant  had  seen  his  siblings
    when she visited Nepal.  In concluding as she did, I am satisfied  that
    the judge fell into the type of error considered by Brooke LJ  at  [11]
    of R (Iran) & Ors v SSHD [205] INLR 633, in that she made a finding  of
    fact which was wholly unsupported by the evidence.

20. I do not accept that the remaining submissions in ground one  are  made
    out.  It is said at various points  in  the  grounds  that  matters  of
    concern were not put to the sponsor for comment, or  that  points  were
    taken by the judge which had not featured in the  submissions  made  by
    counsel for the respondent.   But  I  do  not  consider,  in  light  of
    Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173, that it was incumbent upon  the  judge
    to ensure that all points potentially adverse to the appellant had been
    put expressly to the sponsor.  Nor do I consider that she was  required
    to confine her factual findings on the case to the  points  upon  which
    she had been explicitly addressed.  And I consider the  judge  to  have
    given  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  concluding  that   the
    financial  support  provided  by  the  sponsor  to  the  appellant  was
    insufficient in itself to cross the rather modest threshold in Jitendra
    Rai of real, committed or effective support.

21. Ms McCarthy's third submission in ground one is that the judge erred in
    law in relying on the 'voluntary' separation of sponsor from  appellant
    in 2016.  She relies, in that context, on what was said by Lindblom  LJ
    at [38]-[39] of Jitendra Rai.  In doing so,  I  consider  her  to  have
    misunderstood the focus of the judge's observations.  The judge did not
    fall into the same trap as the judge at first instance in Jitendra Rai.
     The judge relied not merely on the fact that the sponsor had chosen to
    leave  Nepal  in  2016;  her  observation  rested  principally  on  the
    sponsor's oral evidence that she and the appellant had not intended  in
    2016 that he would follow his mother to  the  UK.   There  is  a  clear
    Record of Proceedings from the hearing in the FtT and it is clear  that
    the sponsor did give evidence that they had both intended in 2016  that
    the appellant would not come to the UK.  The judge was entitled,  as  a
    matter of law, to attach significance to that decision,  which  clearly
    shed a great deal of light on the relationship  which  existed  at  the
    point of the sponsor's departure (that being the proper focus,  as  per
    Jitendra Rai).

22. Ms McCarthy also contends that the judge erred in conducting  what  she
    aptly labelled a 'one-directional'  assessment  of  family  life.   The
    judge had focused, she submitted,  on  the  appellant's  need  for  his
    mother and had not really considered the evidence  that  the  sponsor's
    need for her son was potentially more acute.   This  was  a  case,  she
    submits, in which the sponsor had struggled with  her  health  and  her
    English, and in which she required the support of her  son.   Recalling
    what was said in Beoku-Betts [2008]  UKHL  39;  [2009]  1  AC  115,  Ms
    McCarthy submitted that the judge had erred  in  excluding  the  latter
    factors from her analysis.  In fairness to the judge, however, the case
    was not really advanced on that basis - the focus of the statements and
    the oral evidence was plainly on the appellant's  dependence  upon  his
    mother, not vice versa.  There was no medical evidence to show that the
    sponsor was frail and there was  very  little  to  show  that  she  was
    struggling due to her limited  English.   The  judge's  decision  might
    properly be  said  to  be  'one-directional',  therefore,  but  it  was
    justifiably so, given the focus of the case before her.

23. The final submission in ground one is that the judge failed to  conduct
    a holistic assessment of whether a family life  continued  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  That submission is not made out.  The judge
    plainly had  the  constituent  parts  of  the  relationship  (financial
    support, emotional dependence and provision of accommodation) in  mind,
    and her reasons for finding against the appellant were articulated with
    sufficient clarity to justify the ultimate conclusion.

24. Nor am I persuaded by ground two, the basis of which is simply that the
    judge should have considered Article 8(2) even if she was not satisfied
    that there was a protected family life in existence.  With reference to
    Jitendra Rai and  the  authorities  which  preceded  it,  however,  the
    judge's focus on family life was entirely correct.  In the absence of a
    finding that Article 8 was engaged in its family life aspect, the judge
    was quite right to conclude that the appeal could not  succeed:  Pun  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2106; [2018] 4 WLR 80 refers.

25. Having rejected all of the appellant's complaints apart from the first,
    therefore, I return to the question of whether the error of law I  have
    found to exist requires me to set aside the decision of the FtT.  Given
    the cogency of the remainder of the decision,  it  is  with  reluctance
    that I have come to the conclusion that I must set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.  I am not able to conclude that the error was  immaterial  to
    the outcome of the appeal as a result of what was said by the judge  at
    [11] of her decision.  It is quite clear that  she  not  only  attached
    significance to what she thought to be a discrepancy in  the  evidence;
    she stated that the discrepancy had coloured her view of the  remaining
    evidence.  Had she not erred as she did, therefore, she might have been
    less circumspect about accepting the evidence that the  appellant  (and
    only the appellant) was the recipient of his late father's pension, for
    example.  I therefore set aside the decision in full.

26. Given the scope of the enquiry which is required, the just  and  proper
    course is for this appeal to be remitted to  be  heard  de  novo  by  a
    different judge.

27. On remittal, the FtT will  be  entitled  to  see  further  evidence  in
    relation to matters  which  justifiably  concerned  Judge  Gibbs.   The
    sponsor gave evidence before her that she had  set  up  a  second  bank
    account in Nepal, into which  the  appellant  paid  some  of  his  late
    father's pension.  There was no evidence of that bank account, however,
    and the judge did not have the full financial picture as a result.   It
    is not for me to direct the provision of such  evidence  but  the  next
    judge in the FtT will be  entitled  to  see  the  statements  for  that
    account and to draw an inference if they are not produced.   The  other
    point on which there should, in my judgment, be further evidence is  in
    relation to the appellant's siblings.  Although the judge made an error
    in her evaluation of their relationship with  the  appellant,  she  was
    perfectly entitled to  consider  the  extent  of  the  support  network
    available to the appellant in Nepal.  There was only a partial  picture
    painted by the evidence before the FtT, however,  and  the  next  judge
    should expect to see evidence (not assertion) of the location of  those
    siblings, their family composition, and their occupations in Nepal.







Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by legal error  and  is
set aside in full.   The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be heard  de  novo
by a judge other than Judge Gibbs.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            17 December 2020
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630; [2016] Imm AR 1 refers

