
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/08836/2016
      HU/08833/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons delivered  |
|                                             |ex tempore at the hearing.    |
|On 7 February 2018                           |On 8 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                              mr pallab sarker
                              mrs moumita dutta
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Ashraf, Legal Representative, Chancery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, A Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants appeal with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill who, in a decision and reasons promulgated  on
    31 August 2017, had dismissed the Appellants' appeals based  ostensibly
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Appellants had not attended the hearing
    but they were legally represented by Mr Rana, a legal representative at
    Chancery Solicitors.

2.    The judge had noted that there had  been  a  previous  application  to
    adjourn a few days before the hearing and that had been refused on  the
    papers. Then on the morning of the hearing  Mr  Rana,  the  Appellants'
    legal representative had applied for an adjournment on the  basis  that
    one of his clients had gone to hospital,  apparently  not  being  well.
    The judge said in respect of that matter at paragraph 8 as follows:

         "Neither  of  the  Appellants  appeared  personally.   Mr  N  Rana,
         solicitor, appeared on behalf of the Appellants.  He stated he  was
         seeking an adjournment.  He referred to the fact  that  the  second
         Appellant [Mrs Dutta] had gone to hospital earlier in  the  morning
         with chest pains and reading difficulties.   He  advised  that  the
         first Appellant was accompanying her at hospital.  He was unable to
         provide any further information and his submissions  were  somewhat
         vague.  No documentary evidence or vouching was produced in respect
         of the second Appellant's health condition, nor her  attendance  at
         hospital."

 3.   The judge referred  to  the  decision  of  the  President  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  and  the  judge  noted
    that the grounds of appeal had been lodged in April 2016 [this  hearing
    was on 23 August 2017], that a recent adjournment application had  been
    made and the application had been refused.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  by
    way of a decision dated 10 November 2017 and she had said as follows:

         "If the Appellants were in truth at hospital on the morning of  the
         hearing then the grounds have merit.  I have some sympathy with the
         Judge on the day who noted that the Appellants had  made  a  recent
         adjournment application on the  basis  that  they  were  unprepared
         which  had  been   refused.    The   representative's   adjournment
         application was also vague.  The Appellants must  produce  evidence
         to the Upper Tribunal that they were at hospital on the day of  the
         hearing."

5.    Before me this morning, Mr Ashraf, on behalf of  the  Appellants,  has
    provided a skeleton argument where he refers to the decision in Nwaigwe
    and submits  in  that  skeleton  argument  (which  he  adopted  as  his
    submissions today) that the  test  for  the  judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was whether the procedure was unfair as opposed to whether the
    judge had acted reasonably in refusing the Appellants' application  for
    an adjournment.

6.    In addition to his skeleton argument, and indeed  not  within  it,  he
    brought to the Tribunal's attention that  in  fact  there  had  been  a
    further application to  adjourn  today's  hearing  but  that  had  been
    refused by an Upper Tribunal Judge by way of a decision sent out on  23
    January. In that most recent application to adjourn it  was  said  that
    Mrs Dutta was pregnant with the couple's second child and that she  had
    pregnancy related  tiredness,  weight  loss  and  low  blood  pressure.
    There was no explanation as to why Mr Sarker, her husband, was not able
    to attend his appeal hearing today.  In any event, in addition to  that
    application which had been rejected, under cover  of  a  letter  of  23
    January a Rule 15(2A) application had been made for  the  admission  of
    further evidence.  Amongst that bundle there is  indeed  correspondence
    to show that on the  morning  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that Mrs Dutta was being seen in hospital and it appears  that
    her husband had accompanied her.

7.    As explored during  the  submissions  of  both  parties  I  have  real
    concern, and  I  have  to  say  suspicion,  about  the  nature  of  the
    applications to adjourn which have been  made  by  the  Appellants  and
    indeed it is a curious feature of the case that although the Appellants
    have been told they can make an in-person claim for  asylum  that  they
    have failed to do that.  In any event I discussed in particular with Mr
    Ashraf the timing of the applications which were  to  be  substantively
    considered and indeed the timing of the unfortunate events  which  have
    led to the Appellants failing to appear, now twice,  at  the  Tribunal,
    once at the First-tier Tribunal and the second time here at  the  Upper
    Tribunal and he assures me that he will pass  my  concerns  on  to  the
    Appellants in no uncertain terms.  Mr Asharf also assures  me  that  he
    understands that he not only represents the Appellants and  appears  on
    their behalf, but he is there to advise them as well and that  he  will
    give them appropriate advice.  I  remind  myself  of  the  decision  in
    Nwaigwe, the head note of which says as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing?...".

8.    I find  my  hands  are  somewhat  tied  in  being  able  to  take  the
    investigation of what is going on in the background any further without
    Mr Sarker and Mrs Dutta present.  I do considerate  it  is  appropriate
    though to set out my concerns in this ex tempore decision.   I conclude
    that there is no real alternative but to conclude there is an error  of
    law in the judge's decision.  I  similarly,  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin, conclude that I have sympathy for the way in  which  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill had to deal with this  matter,  but  nonetheless  I
    conclude that the matter has to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.  None of the current findings shall stand  but  again  I
    stress and make clear, it if is not already clear,  that  a  time  will
    soon come where any further applications for adjournments are likely to
    begin to undermine the veracity of  what  the  Appellants  are  putting
    forward as their concerns in relation to  their  appeal.   Any  further
    directions will be for the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Ashraf has  assured
    me that he will inform  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  any  interpreter
    requirements within the next three days.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a procedural error and  is
therefore set aside. None of the findings shall stand.

There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Abid Mahmood                               Date: 7 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

