
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
hu/08788/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 February 2019                     | On 13 March 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Sujash Mitra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by Thamina
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  L  K  Gibbs
    (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT)  promulgated  on  18th
    December 2018.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  5th  December  1976.   He
    entered the UK on 27th April 2007 as a student.  He had lawful leave to
    remain until 5th December 2016.

 4. On 16th December 2016 he applied for leave to remain in the UK  on  the
    basis of his private and family life.  This application was  varied  on
    10th April 2017, to an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of ten years' lawful residence in the UK.

 5. The application was refused on 28th March 2018.  The Respondent did not
    accept that the Appellant had acquired  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK and therefore did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B(i)(a) and (v) of the Immigration rules.

 6. The Respondent found that paragraph 322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    applied in relation to a TOEIC  test  taken  with  Educational  Testing
    Service (ETS) on 22nd August 2012, as the Respondent was satisfied that
    the Appellant used a proxy test taker.

 7. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 19th November 2018.  The  judge  did
    not accept that the Secretary of State had proved that the Claimant had
    acted dishonestly and did not accept that it had  been  proved  that  a
    proxy test taker had been used.  The judge noted that the Appellant had
    taken a second TOEIC test on 26th September 2012, five weeks after  the
    disputed test, which was not disputed, and scored 200 in  speaking  and
    160 in writing, which was an improvement on both of his previous scores
    in the disputed test.   Because  of  this  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had not used a proxy test taker on 22nd August 2012.

 8. With reference to  long  residence  the  judge  was  persuaded  by  the
    Claimant's counsel that  paragraph  39E(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    applied.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  Claimant  had
    continuous valid leave from 27th April 2007 to 5th December 2016  which
    amounted to nine years seven months nine  days.   The  Claimant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 5th December 2016 and his section  3C  leave
    expired on that date.  He then submitted a fresh  application  on  16th
    December 2016 and the judge  was  persuaded  that  because  this  fresh
    application was made within fourteen days of the expiry of  section  3C
    leave, this meant  that  the  3C  leave  continued  and  therefore  the
    Claimant still had valid leave to remain, which meant that he  had  ten
    years' continuous lawful leave.

 9. Because the judge found that paragraph 322(5) did not  apply,  and  the
    Claimant had ten years' continuous lawful  residence,  the  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis that the Claimant's removal would be in breach  of
    the UK's obligations under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relying upon two grounds.  Firstly it was submitted  that  the
    judge had made a material error of law in considering paragraph 39E(2).
     The  Secretary  of  State's  case  was  that  this  paragraph  permits
    applicants to submit out of time applications which will be  considered
    and will not be refused simply for being out of time.  Paragraph 39E(2)
    does not extend the Claimant's leave under section  3C.   The  Claimant
    became appeal rights exhausted on 5th December 2016, and therefore  the
    judge was wrong to find that thereafter he continued to have continuous
    lawful residence by virtue of section 3C.

11. The second ground contended that the judge made a material error of law
    and failed to give adequate reasons for findings on a  material  matter
    in relation to paragraph 322(5).  It was submitted that the  judge  had
    not given an adequate explanation as to why it was  accepted  that  the
    Claimant had provided an innocent explanation for the  conclusion  that
    he had used a proxy test taker.  It was submitted that  the  judge  had
    placed undue weight on the Claimant's  ability  to  speak  English  and
    reliance was placed in particular  upon  paragraph  57  of  MA  Nigeria
    [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC).  It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  by
    failing to give adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  a  person  who
    speaks English would have no reason to secure  a  test  certificate  by
    deception.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Loke  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  Ground 1 asserts that the judge misapplied paragraph 39E(2) of
             the Rules.  I find that this  is  arguable.   Under  paragraph
             276B of the Immigration Rules, paragraph 39E(2)  only  applies
             where 276B(v) is raised, namely applications  which  are  less
             than 28 days out of time will be permitted, and not counted as
             a breach of Immigration Rules.  In  this  case  the  issue  is
             276B(i),  whether  the  Appellant  had  at  least  ten  years'
             continuous lawful residence.  Paragraph 39E(2) does not permit
             a period of overstaying to be viewed as lawful residence.

         3.   Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to give proper  reasons
             for finding that the Appellant had not practised deception  in
             the context of obtaining a TOEIC certificate.  The judge  gave
             reasons at [16-17] however it  is  arguable  that  these  were
             insufficient.

         4.   Ground 1 is stronger than Ground 2 but permission  is  granted
             on all grounds."

13. Following the grant of permission directions  were  issued  that  there
    should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the FTT had erred in law such that the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

14. At the oral hearing Mrs  Kenny  relied  upon  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal had been granted.

15. Mr Coleman, who had not appeared before the FTT relied upon a  skeleton
    argument prepared by his colleague who had appeared before the FTT.

16. A preliminary issue was raised, contending  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal  had  been  made  out  of  time,  and  without  an
    application to extend time, and therefore permission to  appeal  should
    not have been granted.

17. I find this submission to be misconceived.  The FTT sent  the  decision
    to the parties on 18th December 2018.  The deadline to appeal  was  1st
    January 2019.  The Secretary of State's application was received on 2nd
    January 2019.  Rule 11 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  explains  how  time  is
    calculated.  Rule 11(2) provides as follows;

         "2.  Subject to the Tribunal directing that this paragraph does not
             apply, if the  time  specified  by  these  Rules,  a  Practice
             Direction or a direction for doing any act ends on a day other
             than a working day, the act is done in time if it is  done  on
             the next working day."

18. 1st January 2019 was not a working day.  The application for permission
    to appeal was received on the next working day, that being 2nd  January
    2019 and therefore the application was made in time.

19. It was conceded by the author of the Claimant's skeleton argument,  who
    had appeared before the FTT, that the  judge  may  have  erred  in  her
    findings as to the long residence rules, those findings being contained
    at paragraphs 20-21 of the FTT decision.  This  point  related  to  the
    judge's findings on paragraph  39E(2).   Mr  Coleman  did  not  however
    accept that the judge had erred,  and  submitted  that  the  Claimant's
    section 3C leave was extended by paragraph  39E(2),  and  therefore  he
    continued to have lawful residence which  meant  that  he  accrued  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence.

20. I reject that submission.

21. The Claimant's leave in the UK as a Tier 4  Student  was  curtailed  on
    28th September 2014.  According to the Secretary of State's records  he
    applied on 29th September 2014 for further leave to remain as a Tier  4
    Student which application was refused with no right of appeal  on  18th
    March 2015.  However an appeal was lodged on 1st April 2015, which must
    have been accepted as valid, as  there  was  an  FTT  hearing  and  the
    Claimant's appeal was dismissed on 22nd June 2016.  The  Claimant  then
    submitted an application for permission to appeal to the  FTT  on  14th
    October 2016 which was refused.  He then submitted an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which  was  refused  on  5th
    December 2016, and therefore he became appeal rights exhausted  on  5th
    December 2016 and his section 3C leave ended on that date.

22. I do not find that paragraph 39E(2) extends to the  Claimant's  section
    3C leave.  Section 3C  relates  to  continuation  of  leave  pending  a
    variation decision.  In summary if a person who has  limited  leave  to
    remain in  the  UK  applies  for  variation  of  that  leave,  and  the
    application for variation is made before the  leave  expires,  and  the
    leave expires without the  application  for  variation  being  decided,
    leave is extended during any period when the application for  variation
    is neither decided nor withdrawn.  Leave is extended  while  an  appeal
    could be brought and while an appeal is pending.

23. Section 3C(4) provides that a person may not make  an  application  for
    variation of his leave to enter or remain in the UK while that leave is
    extended by virtue of section 3C.

24. I am satisfied that the  Claimant's  section  3C  leave  ended  on  5th
    December 2016.  Thereafter he made a fresh  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  I am satisfied that  paragraph  39E(2)  does  not  operate  to
    extend the Claimant's section 3C leave in this case.  In  my  view  the
    judge was therefore wrong to be  persuaded  otherwise  (a  point  which
    appears to be conceded by Counsel who made the  submission  before  the
    FTT, and who drafted the skeleton argument)  and  the  judge  therefore
    erred in finding that the Claimant had acquired ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence.

25. I find this to be a material error of law as the judge at paragraph  22
    records that the conclusion that the Claimant had acquired  ten  years'
    continuous  lawful  residence  "carries  significant   weight   in   my
    assessment of the appeal under Article 8 ECHR and the  public  interest
    in the Appellant's removal."

26. Turning to the second ground and paragraph 322(5) I find that the judge
    erred at paragraph 15 in recording that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the legal burden of proof.  That however is not  a  material
    error, as it is clear that the judge meant to record in that  paragraph
    that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of  State  discharged  the
    evidential burden of proof, and therefore the Claimant had  to  provide
    an innocent explanation.

27. I find that inadequate  reasons  have  been  given  by  the  judge  for
    concluding that the Claimant  provided  an  innocent  explanation.   At
    paragraph 16 the judge records the  Claimant's  evidence  was  that  he
    attended the test on 22nd August 2012 and took it.  As far  as  he  was
    concerned the test was properly taken.  There is no further explanation
    as to why ETS concluded that a proxy test taker was  used.   The  judge
    places significant weight upon a second test taken  on  26th  September
    2012 with improved marks, which was not disputed.   No  explanation  is
    given in the decision, as to why the Claimant decided to take a  second
    test.  I find inadequate reasons have been given  for  concluding  that
    the taking of a second test meant that a proxy test taker had not  been
    used in the first test.  I find  that  paragraph  57  of  MA  has  some
    relevance in which the Upper Tribunal found that there are a number  of
    reasons why a person proficient in English may engage in TOEIC fraud.

28. As I conclude that the judge materially erred in law  in  consideration
    of paragraph 39E(2), and paragraph 322(5) I find that the  decision  is
    unsafe and is therefore set  aside.   I  find  it  appropriate,  having
    considered paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements,
    to remit this appeal back to the FTT because of the nature  and  extent
    of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary  in  order  for  this
    decision to be remade.

29. The appeal will be heard by the FTT by a judge, other than  Judge  L  K
    Gibbs.  The parties will be notified  of  the  time  and  date  in  due
    course.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT discloses a material error of law and is set  aside.
 The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the FTT with  no
findings of fact preserved.



Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction.  There has been no request made to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.



Signed                              Date 28th February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date 28th February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

