
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08835/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2019                             |On 04 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ajakaiye [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C McWatters instructed via Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    allowed Mr [A]'s appeal against the Secretary of State's decision on  2
    August 2017 refusing his human rights claim.  I shall  refer  hereafter
    to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  as  he  was  before  the
    judge, and to Mr [A] as the appellant as he was before the judge.

2.   The judge noted what he described in conclusion at paragraph 37 of  the
    decision as an appalling criminal history of the appellant,  comprising
    some 74 appearances before the criminal courts including  a  conviction
    on 2 June 2016 for conspiracy to steal and a subsequent sentence of  43
    months' imprisonment and a further term of four weeks  consecutive  for
    his breach of bail.

3.   The judge also noted that the appellant has three children, the  eldest
    L born in 2003 from a relationship with CD and two  other  children,  A
    and O born respectively in January 2005 and December 2009 as  a  result
    of his relationship with RW-J.

4.   The judge considered the evidence  with  regard  to  the  relationships
    with the children and was satisfied that the relationship with  CD  was
    over and over the years he had had no  meaningful  involvement  in  L's
    life.  As regards his relationship with RW-J and the children A and  O,
    the judge was satisfied that they both had their own homes to  stay  in
    throughout the relationship but he would stay with her and attend  when
    required by the schools but they lived separate lives.  The  judge  was
    satisfied that he had a limited involvement to the  lives  of  the  two
    children, commenting that at best he saw them infrequently and had  not
    seen them since December 2015 and when he was at large he  lived  at  a
    separate address and would see them infrequently.   However  the  judge
    did not accept he had played any role as a parent in their upbringing.

5.   The judge allowed the appeal first on the basis that he  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had spent most of his life lawfully resident in  the
    United Kingdom and was socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom.  He had arrived in the United Kingdom aged  9  in  1991
    and was taken into care in 1993 and in 1995 was made a ward  of  court.
    An application was made on his behalf for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on the basis that he was an abandoned child on 4 May  1995  and
    granted on 29 November 1996.  He has therefore had indefinite leave  to
    remain since the age of 14.

6.   The judge was satisfied that the appellant  had  no  contact  with  any
    relatives in Nigeria.  Efforts had been made by the local authority  in
    1995 to see if there was a place available in Nigeria for him  to  live
    but the local authorities were unable to find any relatives or a  place
    of safety.  His brothers and sister live in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge noted what was said by the Court of Appeal in Kamara [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813 with regard to integration into the country into which  it  was
    proposed that a person will be deported, and concluded that  since  the
    appellant lived in the United Kingdom for 27 years having been educated
    in the United Kingdom, having no ties to Nigeria there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  Nigeria  and  he  was
    culturally and socially integrated into the United Kingdom.

7.   The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    this decision, on the basis, taking this from the order of Judge Kebede
    who granted permission, that there was arguable merit in the  assertion
    that the judge had failed fully and properly to  address  the  relevant
    question when considering whether the appellant had  met  the  test  of
    demonstrating very significant obstacles  to  integration  in  Nigeria.
    She found less arguable merit in the first ground but did  not  exclude
    it.

8.   In his submissions Mr Melvin  argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    address  properly  the  relevant  questions  as  to  very   significant
    obstacles to integration into Nigeria.  He adopted the grounds.  It was
    for the appellant to show why he could not return to Nigeria and make a
    life for himself.  The decision was materially in error of law.  It  is
    also arguable that the appellant could not properly be  found  to  have
    integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom  given  his   extensive   criminal
    activities.  The main point was with regard to return  to  Nigeria  and
    very significant obstacles however.  He referred also to  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Mwesezi [2018] EWCA Civ 1104.

9.   It was said that Kamara was a decision on its own facts and  in  Kamara
    the appellant had been found to be credible and had committed a one-off
    offence and had no knowledge of the local languages in the  country  of
    return and  had  shown  remorse  and  good  conduct  in  prison.   This
    contrasted with the situation of the appellant.

10.  Mr McWatters relied on his Rule 24 response.  It was  clear  from  what
    had been said by the Upper Tribunal in MK [2013] UKUT  641  (IAC)  that
    there was no need to provide extensive reasons if  the  decision  under
    challenge made sense.  The judge had set out a lot of detail about  the
    appellant's background.  He had noted that he had no ties  in  Nigeria.
    He was entitled to include that he had truly  and  socially  integrated
    into the United Kingdom.

11.  It was clear that with regard to very significant obstacles  the  judge
    had the test set out in Kamara in mind.  It was inevitable to  conclude
    as he did.  He had stated the obvious and there was no need for further
    reasons.  There had been no challenge to the credibility findings so it
    was irrelevant and the judge was entitled to find that  there  were  no
    ties.

12.  As regards outcome, if the Tribunal found an error of law it was  asked
    to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  since  there  was  now
    evidence from his partner and child and also  medical  evidence.   This
    was relevant to change of circumstances.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  The first point to consider is  whether  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the appellant is  socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom.  He has, as noted above, been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 9.  His offending behaviour began in 1994 when
    he would have been around 12, and the list of offences as  set  out  in
    the decision letter is a depressing litany of serial offending, and  it
    is relevant to note in passing the comment  of  Judge  Carroll  in  the
    sentencing remarks of 16 June 2016 that the appellant is  somebody  who
    in his judgment was incapable of telling the truth.  All the First-tier
    Judge said with regard  to  the  paragraph  399A  social  and  cultural
    integration point was by reference to the fact that the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom since the age of 9 and remained in the  care
    of the local authority for the next nine years as a ward of court.   It
    does not seem to me that it was open to  the  judge  in  light  of  the
    appellant's  offending  history  to  find  that  he  is  socially   and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.  The point as  it  seems
    to me is well made in the grounds that not  only  is  he  a  persistent
    offender but his offending pattern is not that of juvenile  delinquency
    and there is a strong indication that he is not prepared to  adhere  to
    the norms of expected values of society.  Accordingly  I  consider  the
    judge erred in law in  finding  that  he  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom.

15.  I note that the judge of course took account of what was  said  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Kamara.  All the judge said  by  way  of  conclusion
    having set out the quotation  to  be  found  at  paragraph  36  of  his
    decision was that the appellant has no ties to Nigeria and found  as  a
    consequence that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Nigeria.  I do  not  consider  the  decision  in  this
    regard to be properly reasoned.  The appellant lived in  Nigeria  until
    the age of 9 and although he has thereafter been in the United  Kingdom
    for 27 years, I agree with Mr Melvin that more needs to be shown and as
    a consequence determined, as to the difficulties that he would face  in
    returning to Nigeria.  The fact that he has no ties there was not in my
    view a  sufficient  basis  to  conclude  that  as  a  consequence  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria had been shown.

16.  Accordingly I find material errors of law in the judge's decision  such
    that it falls to be set aside.

17.  I note that there is now evidence produced in  the  form  of  a  letter
    from RW-J and A.  It is also said to be the case that there is  medical
    evidence to be  provided  concerning  the  appellant's  mental  health.
    These matters will require to be considered as part  of  the  necessary
    evaluation  of  the  remaking  of  the   human   rights   appeal.    On
    consideration it seems to me  that  there  are  matters  of  sufficient
    substance as to go potentially to the heart of relevant  parts  of  the
    decision such that it is appropriate for the matter to be reheard for a
    full remaking of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal.  That will be
    listed to take place as previously in Birmingham.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.
[pic]
Signed                                  Date 03 Apr. 19
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
