
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08848/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                           mrs Indra Kumari gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Nepal, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 19th July  2017
    to refuse her application for entry clearance as the wife of  a  former
    Gurkha soldier who had been granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    UK on  20th  October  2006.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Robertson
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 19th  November  2018.
    The Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 28th December 2018.

 2. he Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  considered  the  application  under
    paragraph 276R of the Immigration Rules along  with  the  discretionary
    guidance  for  the  spouses  of  ex-Gurkhas  contained  in  Immigration
    Directorate  Instructions,  Chapter  15,  Section  2A,  Annex  A.   The
    application was refused as it was not accepted that the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor were married as claimed. The ECO  further  considered  that
    there was no evidence that  the  Sponsor  was  living  in  the  UK  and
    therefore did not accept that the Appellant had a spouse or partner who
    is currently present and settled in the UK or who has been admitted  at
    the same time for settlement.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence  in  relation  to
    the marriage and was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  are
    married as required by the Rules.  The judge accepted  the  explanation
    put forward by the parties in relation to  the  issues  raised  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer as regards the marriage certificate  [paragraph
    7].  This finding has not been challenged.

 4. The judge properly identified that the remaining issue was the question
    of residence highlighting that paragraph 276R of the Immigration  Rules
    requires that the applicants spouse is "present and settled" in the UK.
     The judge noted at paragraph 10 that it is not disputed that when  the
    Appellant submitted her application in 2017 her husband was living with
    her in Nepal and that he did not come to the UK until after the ECO and
    the Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) had made their  decisions.   Although
    he was visiting the UK on a regular basis, the  judge  did  not  accept
    that he was present or settled in the UK at that time.  The judge noted
    that at the date of the hearing the Sponsor had been in the UK for only
    a few months and accordingly found that the Appellant cannot  meet  the
    Immigration Rules which requires the Sponsor to be present and  settled
    in the UK.  The judge went on to consider that proportionality  of  the
    decision in accordance with Article 8.  The judge found the  fact  that
    the Immigration  Rules  were  not  met  was  a  significant  factor  in
    determining proportionality and concluded that the decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance was proportionate.

Error of law

 5. It is contended in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the
    judge materially erred in law in deciding that the First-tier  was  not
    required to consider whether  the  Appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance would succeed  under  paragraph  276R  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  Reference is made to the judge's findings that the  Appellant
    was married to her husband and that he was living in  the  UK  at  that
    time.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy agreed that the  claimed  errors  had
    been made out.  He accepted that the requirements of paragraph 297R  of
    the Rules were met at the date of the hearing and that the judge  erred
    in failing to acknowledge that the relevant point for assessment of the
    Rules in this particular case was the date of the hearing.

 7. Paragraph 276R sets out the requirements for indefinite leave to  enter
    the UK as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  UK  under
    paragraphs 276E to 276Q, or of a member of HM Forces who is exempt from
    immigration control.  Having found that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    were married, the only issue for the judge to determine was whether the
    Sponsor was present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   The  judge  found  at
    paragraph 10, and it is not in dispute, that at the date of the hearing
    the Sponsor was present in the UK having lived in  the  UK  for  a  few
    months and that he had indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

 8. Paragraph 276R, unlike other provisions of the Immigration Rules,  does
    not require that the provisions are met at  the  date  of  application.
    This is a human rights appeal and the appropriate time  for  assessment
    of the circumstances of the case  is  the  date  of  the  hearing.   As
    accepted by Mr Duffy, having made the findings as to  the  relationship
    and the Sponsor's presence in the UK, it is clear that at the  date  of
    the hearing the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276R.

 9. In these  circumstances,  accepted  by  Mr  Duffy  and  Mr  Uddin,  the
    Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  this  was
    determinative of the Article 8 issue as these provisions of  the  Rules
    assessing family life are compliant with Article 8.

10. In these circumstances I consider that the concession made by Mr  Duffy
    at the hearing was properly  made.   I  find  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in deciding that the Appellant could not meet the
    Immigration Rules at the date of the hearing when it is  clear  on  the
    evidence before the judge that she did. As there has been no  challenge
    to the findings of fact I preserve those findings  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking the Decision

11. I remake the decision in accordance with the facts found by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  As the Appellant now meets  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and the Rules are  compliant  with  Article  8  I
    remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  I set it aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 As the information which enabled the appeal to be allowed was not  provided
to the decision maker I have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
