


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/08382/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at UT(IAC) Birmingham         |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 18 July 2017                     |           On 24 July 2017            |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             tahmina Begum juma
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 2 August  1995.  She
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ford dismissing her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her application for entry clearance to the UK.

   2. The appellant applied for entry clearance as a partner under  Appendix
      FM of the immigration rules.  Her  application  was  considered  under
      paragraph EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM.

   3. The respondent refused the application on  9  September  2015  on  the
      basis that she was not satisfied  that  the  appellant's  relationship
      with her sponsor was genuine and subsisting and was not satisfied that
      the appellant intended to live together with the  sponsor  permanently
      in the UK. The respondent noted that the appellant had stated that she
      met and married the sponsor in  February  2014  and  that  they  lived
      together in Bangladesh for a period after the marriage, but  that  the
      photographs  submitted  only  showed  them  together  at  the  wedding
      ceremony. There was no evidence  of  time  spent  together  after  the
      marriage. Whilst it was noted that the appellant claimed  to  maintain
      contact with the  sponsor  by  telephone  and  skype,  the  record  of
      messages sent did not readily identify  the  sponsor.  The  respondent
      noted further that the application form referred  to  the  appellant's
      husband suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and to him  being  under
      the care of a mental health team. The respondent  considered  that  it
      was not apparent from the application form,  which  appeared  to  have
      been completed by someone else, what was the appellant's understanding
      of  her  husband's  care  requirements.  The  respondent  refused  the
      application under paragraph EC-P.1.(d) of Appendix FM.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 10 October 2016. The judge  heard
      from the sponsor who gave oral evidence before her and she  considered
      him to be an honest witness. The judge recorded the sponsor's evidence
      that he had not spoken to the appellant before  he  met  her  for  the
      first time one week prior to their  wedding.  The  marriage  had  been
      arranged by the sponsor's mother and the  appellant's  mother  at  the
      instigation of the sponsor's uncle. The arrangements for  the  wedding
      had been made by his uncle. The sponsor's solicitor had completed  the
      application form on the information given to him by  the  sponsor  and
      after visiting the appellant in Bangladesh in August 2015. The sponsor
      last visited the appellant on 23 October 2015 after her application as
      refused.

   5. The sponsor said that he and the appellant were in regular contact  by
      Skype  and  telephone  calls   and   the   documents   produced   were
      communications from him to the appellant. The judge noted  that  there
      was some limited evidence of money transfers which  the  sponsor  said
      were gifts from him. The sponsor explained that he had been  diagnosed
      in 2009/2010 and suffered from paranoid schizophrenia  and  psychosis.
      He had told the appellant that he took an injection  monthly  for  his
      head. His wife did not know the meaning  of  psychosis  but  she  knew
      there was something wrong with him as he had told her.  She  had  told
      him that he should stop taking the injections, but  he  said  that  he
      would continue with the injections. His condition  was  controlled  by
      the medication, which consisted of the  injections  and  tablets.  The
      judge noted that the sponsor had been awarded  the  higher  rate  care
      component for help with personal care  and  the  lower  rate  mobility
      component for help getting around, up until 20 July 2016. The  sponsor
      explained to the judge that the only  care  he  needed  was  reminders
      about his personal care,  such  as  brushing  his  teeth  and  washing
      himself.

   6. The judge had regard to a letter from the sponsor's  GP,  a  statement
      from the appellant, Lycamobile records, a Lebara history document  and
      Skype records. The judge had no doubt that the sponsor  was  committed
      to his relationship with the appellant but was not satisfied that  the
      appellant was, either at the date of decision or currently,  committed
      to the relationship in the long-term rather than committed to securing
      entry clearance to the UK. The judge was concerned that the  appellant
      had  not  been  told  that  the   sponsor   suffered   from   paranoid
      schizophrenia  and  was  particularly  concerned  that  she   had   no
      understanding of the seriousness of his  diagnosis  and  had  no  real
      interest in the sponsor or his health as she  had  suggested  that  he
      stop taking his medication. The judge considered that the evidence  of
      contact between the sponsor and appellant was poor  and  she  was  not
      satisfied that they were in communication with each other in a  manner
      consistent with a committed couple who had been married for two years.
      The judge was not satisfied that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
      subsisting or that the appellant intended to live permanently with the
      sponsor after her arrival in the UK. The judge was not satisfied  that
      the appellant and sponsor shared family  life  together  and  was  not
      satisfied that Article 8 was engaged. She  accordingly  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 1 November 2016.

   7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the grounds that the judge had been  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
      marriage was not subsisting. It was asserted in the grounds  that  the
      judge had attached too much weight to the fact that  the  sponsor  had
      only told the appellant that he was suffering from psychosis and  that
      the appellant would not have understood the technology and  the  judge
      had failed to consider the cultural aspects of the appellant living in
      a rural village. The grounds referred to Goudey (subsisting marriage -
      evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 in asserting that  the  evidence  of
      telephone calls was capable of being evidence of the intentions of the
      parties.


   8. Permission was granted on 25 April 2017 "with some hesitation".

Appeal Hearing

   9. Mr Sharif submitted that the judge had failed to consider the cultural
      context of the case in that this was an arranged  marriage  where  the
      appellant, who was a village girl  from  rural  Bangladesh,  had  some
      understanding of the sponsor's  condition.  The  condition  was  under
      control and there was no need for her to understand all  the  details.
      The judge had failed to give adequate weight  to  the  fact  that  the
      sponsor had been to see the appellant in Bangladesh  in  October  2015
      after her application was refused.   There  was  evidence  of  contact
      through Skype and telephone calls  as  well  as  money  transfers  and
      therefore all the relevant evidence was there. The  judge  was  asking
      for more than that which the sponsor was able to supply.

  10. Mr Mills submitted that Goudy and GA ("Subsisting" marriage)  Ghana  *
      [2006] UKAIT 00046, the cases relied upon by the appellant, were  only
      a starting point when there was nothing out of the  ordinary  about  a
      case, but in this case there was something out of  the  ordinary.  The
      judge was entitled to have concerns about the health  issues  involved
      in the case and the appellant's lack of knowledge about her  husband's
      condition some two years after the marriage. The judge  was  concerned
      that the appellant had not  properly  consented  and  that,  once  she
      became fully aware of the situation, she would not intend to stay with
      the sponsor. Such concerns  were  rational  and  open  to  the  judge,
      particularly when she  had  rejected  the  claim  that  the  sponsor's
      condition was controlled and that he only needed reminders as  to  his
      personal care. The judge was concerned that there had been a  lack  of
      disclosure to the appellant and that was sufficient  to  outweigh  the
      supporting evidence in the form of telephone records.


  11. Mr Sharif responded by reiterating the points previously made.


Consideration and findings

  12. I find myself entirely in agreement with Mr Mills, that this was not a
      case where the judge,  contrary  to  the  findings  in  Goudey,  found
      against the appellant simply on the basis of the evidence of telephone
      calls and contact being insufficient to corroborate the  relationship.
      It is relevant to have regard to paragraph (iii) of the  head-note  to
      Goudey, which states that "Where there are no  countervailing  factors
      generating suspicion  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  parties,  such
      evidence may be sufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof  on  the
      claimant." The point being made by Mr Mills was that,  in  this  case,
      there were other countervailing factors and I agree that that  is  the
      case.

  13. The concerns that  the  judge  had,  in  considering  the  appellant's
      intentions, were that she had not properly consented to the  situation
      of living in a committed relationship with the  sponsor,  owing  to  a
      lack of understanding of what would be involved in such a commitment.


  14. It is asserted in the grounds and submitted that the judge, in  making
      the findings that she did, had failed to consider the circumstances of
      the relationship in its proper cultural context, on the basis that the
      appellant was a girl from a rural village in Bangladesh and would  not
      be expected to understand, and would thus not need  to  be  told,  the
      full details of her husband's condition.  It  is  submitted  that  the
      appellant had no need to know any more than she did, as the  sponsor's
      condition was being controlled by his  medication  and  all  that  was
      needed of her was to remind him about his personal care.


  15. However, as seen from the judge's observations and findings  at  [30],
      the judge plainly had full regard to the cultural aspects of the  case
      and accepted that in an arranged marriage it was not  surprising  that
      the appellant should have such little  knowledge  about  the  sponsor.
      Accordingly that was  clearly  a  matter  that  the  judge  took  into
      account. What the judge was particularly concerned about, however, was
      that the sponsor's condition required far more from the  appellant  in
      terms of care and support than she understood. She was concerned  that
      the appellant had not been provided with an accurate  account  of  her
      husband's condition and what would be required of her in terms of care
      and support.


  16. The judge noted that, some two years after the marriage, the appellant
      considered that her husband's illness did not require  day-today  care
      and that all he needed was a stable and happy environment and for  her
      to ensure that he had hot meals at appropriate times, as stated in her
      statement recorded at [22] of the judge's  decision.  The  judge,  for
      reasons properly given  at  [19]  did  not  accept  that  the  sponsor
      required such a low level of care. At  [30]  she  found  that  crucial
      information had been withheld from the appellant by  the  sponsor  and
      his parents about the full extent of the  care  he  required  and  she
      noted, further, at [32], that there was in fact no evidence to support
      the claim that the sponsor's condition was under  control.  The  judge
      was  also  particularly  concerned,  at  [27],  that   the   appellant
      considered that the sponsor should simply stop taking his  medication,
      showing a complete misunderstanding of the extent of his condition, as
      well as a lack of real interest in him or his health.

  17. On the basis of the lack of disclosure to the appellant, and her  lack
      of comprehension, of the extent of the sponsor's condition,  it  seems
      to  me  that  the  judge  quite  reasonably  had  concerns  about  the
      relationship. The judge had full regard to the evidence of contact and
      communication, the  Skype  messages,  the  money  transfers  from  the
      sponsor and the visit made by the sponsor, but provided cogent reasons
      for concluding that that evidence was weak and was not consistent with
      a committed couple who had been married for a period of two years.  In
      light of the concerns she otherwise had  about  the  relationship,  it
      seems to me that the limited weight that the  judge  accorded  to  the
      evidence of contact was perfectly  reasonable  in  the  circumstances.
      Accordingly I conclude that, for the reasons fully and cogently given,
      and following a detailed and comprehensive assessment of the evidence,
      the judge was entitled to reach the adverse conclusions that  she  did
      about the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor and about
      the appellant's intentions as regards living together  permanently  in
      the UK. The judge was entitled to conclude that the refusal  of  entry
      clearance was not in breach of the appellant's or sponsor's Article  8
      human rights and to dismiss the appeal on the basis that she did.


  18. I find no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  I  uphold  the
      decision.

DECISION

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity. I see no need  for
    anonymity in this case and I therefore discharge the order pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  19 July 2017
