
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08195/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 April 2019                     |On: 30 April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MD HASIB ELAHI
                        (No anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Pennington-Benton of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh born on
   29 March 1985.  However, for the sake of convenience, I shall continue to
   refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary of the  State
   as  the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the respondent refusing to grant him leave to remain  on  his
   family life with his  partner  with  reference  to  Appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules and paragraph 276 ADE (1).

3. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  respondent  was  granted  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge in a decision dated 29 January 2019  stating  that  it  is
   arguable that the Judge did not give adequate  reasons  for  his  finding
   that there are exceptional circumstances  in  this  appeal  amounting  to
   unjustifiably harsh consequences and also by not taking into account  the
   public interest set out in section 117B.

4. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings  which  I
   summarise. He considered the decisions of Hyatt  Pakistan  and  Chikwamba
   significant. He noted that the principle established in these  cases  was
   not confined only to cases where children were involved.

5. The Judge set out the head note of Chikwamba where  it  was  stated  that
   where the only matter weighing on the respondent side  of  an  Article  8
   proportionality balance is the public policy of requiring an  application
   to be made under the immigration rules abroad, that legitimate  objective
   will usually be outweighed by factors resting on the appellant's side  of
   the balance.

6. The Judge found that this headnote makes clear that  the  Upper  Tribunal
   was emphasising  that  the  public  policy  aspect  in  considering  that
   proportionality will usually be outweighed.  The Judge then turned to the
   case of Agyarko and another at paragraph 42 to 48 which  deals  with  the
   issue of insurmountable obstacles. He noted that the Supreme Court  found
   the definition within  EX  2  to  be  consistent  with  the  views  taken
   generally by the European Court of Human Rights.

7. The Judge considered the factors specific  to  the  appellant  and  found
   that  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  and  his   leave   was
   successfully extended by the respondent. The appellant explained that the
   appellant could not make any further applications because his parents had
   withdrawn financial  support  to  him  because  he  had  entered  into  a
   relationship of which his family did not approve.  The  Judge  found  the
   evidence of both the appellant and his partner is clear and truthful. The
   Judge accepted the evidence that they could not return  as  a  couple  to
   either Bangladesh or Turkey because the families refused to accept  their
   relationship.

8. In to the assessment of Article 8  outside  the  immigration  rules,  the
   Judge stated that the respondent maintains the view that the  requirement
   for the appellant to return to Bangladesh may well be  temporary  on  the
   basis that he might well be granted immigration to return to settle  with
   his partner in this country. The appellant's partner's is salary was  not
   disputed by the respondent. However, it is very  strongly  held  view  of
   both the appellant and his partner that any period of separation,  albeit
   temporary, would involve very serious hardship and significant obstacles.
   Similarly,  it  was  asserted  that  the  consequence  of  requiring  the
   appellant to return to Bangladesh, even on a temporary  basis,  would  be
   unjustifiably harsh.  There  needs  to  be  an  assessment  of  both  the
   practical and emotional needs of the appellant and his  partner  and  the
   dependency on each other of both parties. Here  the  Judge  found  it  of
   particular  importance  that  the  appellant's  partner   holds   British
   citizenship. The Judge accepted that their relationship  began  when  the
   immigration status of the appellant was precarious and that is  a  factor
   that he must take into account.

9.  In  respect  of  the  EX1,  the  Judge  found  that  in  the  particular
   circumstances, very significant obstacles would arise for the  couple  if
   the appellant had to return to Bangladesh to  make  his  entry  clearance
   application.  The  Judge  stated  that  this  would   cause   significant
   difficulties for the partner who is a very  hard-working  individual  who
   holds two managerial posts from which she earns a comfortable income. The
   evidence of  the  appellant  and  his  partner  was  that  the  temporary
   separation would cause emotional distress  the  partner  which  would  be
   "very  significant  indeed"  given  their   genuine   and   very   strong
   relationship.

10. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal but did not specifically  state
   whether he allowed it under the immigration rules are Article  8  of  the
   European Convention  on  Human  Rights.  However,  in  the  body  of  the
   decision, he found that the appellant does meet the requirements  of  the
   immigration rules that having found that he  did,  nevertheless  assessed
   the appeal under Article 8 seems  also  to  have  allowed  it  under  the
   Convention.

11. The grounds of appeal state  that  the  only  available  route  for  the
   appellant for further leave to remain was under EX1  and  EX  2  and  the
   Judge at paragraph 74 and 75 in his  decision  asked  himself  the  wrong
   question.  The  Judge  only  considered  the  impact  of  the   temporary
   separation of the appellant and his partner when the issue to address was
   whether or not family life of the appellant and his partner can  continue
   in Bangladesh or Turkey. The Judge does not give any reasons  as  to  why
   the couple cannot relocate to either country  to  continue  their  family
   life and why any difficulties could not  be  overcome,  and  which  would
   entail very serious hardship for the appellant or his partner.

12. The only explanation given by the Judge  was  at  paragraph  71  of  the
   decision was that the families of the appellant and his  partner  do  not
   approve of their relationship and that is why they do not wish to live in
   Turkey or Bangladesh. However, this does not form part of  the  reasoning
   under EX1 which should have been addressed. The Judge has merely  focused
   on the Chikwamba point and the temporary separation of the appellant from
   his partner and has failed to  answer  the  correct  question  under  the
   immigration rules.

13. The second ground of appeal is that the Chikwamba point may be  relevant
   to the proportionality balance outside the immigration rules  and  it  is
   clear from Agyarko that there  must  be  exceptional  circumstances  that
   would amount to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  appellant.  The
   point is only relevant where it is guaranteed that the appellant would be
   granted entry clearance from abroad. The respondent stated that while  it
   is accepted that at the date of the decision in the  United  Kingdom  and
   date  of  hearing,  the  only  outstanding  issue  was  the   appellant's
   immigration history which means that there is no guarantee  he  would  be
   granted entry clearance for  Bangladesh  if  he  returned.  Even  if  the
   appellant would be granted entry clearance if returned to Bangladesh, the
   separation would only be temporary,  and  the  Judge  does  not  properly
   reason why this amounts to unjustifiably harsh consequences.

14. It was not clear why the strong romantic bond between the appellant  and
   his partner would be affected or why the  partner  would  face  emotional
   distress. It is also not clear why such a "rare" finding is made when the
   appellant circumstances do not appear to be out of the ordinary as  there
   was no evidence of any mental health or medical condition such  that  the
   distress to the partner would be significant. The evidence  is  that  the
   appellant's partner is the sole earner for of the  family.  Even  if  the
   relationship has endured for  a  number  of  years,  the  Judge  has  not
   adequately reason why temporary disruption would be "highly adverse"  for
   the partner.

15. Further the Judge seeks to refer to the public  interest  considerations
   in section 117B that failed to consider they are neutral factors as found
   recently by the Supreme Court in  Ruppiah.  The  Judge  states  that  the
   appellant's speak English and has sufficient income  available  from  the
   salaries of his partner and that these factors  favouring  the  appellant
   outweigh the public interest. It is  clear  from  this  case  that  these
   factors are only relevant when they are not present,  in  fortifying  the
   public interest, rather than providing the reason to outweigh it.

    Decision as to whether there is an error of law

16. Upon a careful reading of the decision of the  first-tier  Tribunal,  it
   is evident that the Judge acted out of sympathy for the appellant and his
   partner. This was obvious when he stated at paragraph 75 of his  decision
   "I would strongly emphasise that this is a  relatively  rare  finding  in
   such circumstances. My finding is based upon my assessment  of  the  very
   strong relationship between the appellant and his partner. I  would  also
   emphasise that that would not be a finding which I would necessarily make
   in other circumstances where to partners might find themselves in similar
   circumstances of the appellant and his sponsor.

17. It is clear from this statement that the Judge is almost  apologetic  to
   the respondent for allowing the appeal and promising not to do  so  again
   in similar circumstances. This cannot be considered  as  proper  judicial
   reasoning because everyone is entitled to  the  same  level  of  fairness
   according to the law. It is evident that the Judge  was  aware  that  the
   appellant was on very  weak  footing  to  claim  that  even  a  temporary
   separation from his partner would amount to serious hardship for  her.  I
   agree with the respondent that there are no children in this marriage and
   nor is there any medical evidence to show serious hardship. The principle
   established Chikwamba does not automatically trump factors which  may  be
   found to be in favour of the State such as the poor  immigration  history
   of an individual. The absence of children may diminish the force  of  the
   principle and the fact specific assessment.

18. I was referred to the case of  Chen  where  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill
   states that  there  may  be  cases  in  which  there  are  insurmountable
   obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the  United  Kingdom.  But
   where temporary separation to enable an individual to make an application
   for entry clearance may be  disproportionate  and  it  will  be  for  the
   individual to place before the Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such
   temporary separation will  interfere  disproportionately  with  protected
   rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon the case law concerning
   Chikwamba.

19. EX.1 and EX 2 applies if:

    (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

20. The first question that the Judge had to answer was  whether  there  are
   insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  his  partner  continuing
   outside the United Kingdom. Insurmountable obstacles have been defined as
   very significant difficulties which would be faced by  the  applicant  or
   their partner in continuing the family life together outside  the  United
   Kingdom and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
   hardship for the applicant or their partner.

21. The Judge fell into a material error by  not  engaging  with  the  issue
   whether there would be significant difficulties of  serious  hardship  to
   the appellant and his partner to continue family life in another country.
   If he was satisfied that they were, he should have gone  on  to  consider
   whether the  Chikwamba,  principle  applied  to  this  appellant  in  his
   assessment of proportionality under Article 8.

22. The only reason that the Judge gave  was  that  the  appellant  and  his
   partner do not wish to live either in Bangladesh or  Turkey  was  because
   their respective families do not accept their relationship. The Judge did
   not consider that they are both adults and living in this country without
   family support and  therefore  they  could  continue  their  family  life
   independently in another country as they are doing here.

23.  In  respect  of  Article  8  Judge  the  Judge  found  that  there  are
   exceptional circumstances in this appeal where the  appellant  should  be
   allowed to remain under Article 8. The only reasons given  by  the  Judge
   was the "romantic bond" the appellant and his  partner  and  stated  that
   this would  create  difficulties  for  the  appellant's  partner  if  the
   appellant had  to  return  to  Bangladesh  to  make  an  entry  clearance
   application. The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  partner  has  two
   managerial  positions  and  therefore  would  be  able  to  support   the
   appellant's application from  abroad.  The  Judge  also  found  that  the
   appellant's partner will face emotional distress if the appellant was  to
   leave the United Kingdom even on a temporary basis, but the decision  was
   not open to him for these reasons.

24. The Judge was aware  that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  started  a
   relationship when the appellant's immigration history was precarious. The
   Judge found a material error when he considered that the factors in  part
   5A go in favour of the appellant  and  which  outweigh  the  respondent's
   interest. The Judge stated that the  appellant  speaks  English  and  has
   clearly more than sufficient income available to him from the salaries of
   his partner. It was a material error to hold these factors go  in  favour
   of appellant when they should be held to be neutral factors and certainly
   could not be considered factors in favour of the appellant.

25. The circumstances I find that there has been a material error of law  in
   the decision and set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
   will not remake the decision but send it back to the First-tier  Tribunal
   for  findings  of  fact  to  be  made  about  whether  there   would   be
   insurmountable obstacles or hardship for the appellant  and  his  partner
   continuing family life outside the United Kingdom  which  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge failed to address.

DECISION

I remit the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                 This 15th day of April 2019

