
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08884/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|on 26th of March 2019                |On 1st April 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 HABIBUR [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Chaudhry instructed by Maya Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Mark Davies promulgated on 27 December 2018  in  which
       the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.




Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  appealed  the  respondent's
       decision of 7 April 2018 refusing him leave to remain in  the  United
       Kingdom on human rights grounds. The Judge sets out findings of  fact
       from [34] of the decision under challenge which can be summarised  in
       the following terms:

        i. The appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
           both his partner, who has ILR, and their  British  national  son
           [34].


       ii. There was no expectation on behalf  of  either  the  appellant's
           partner or indeed the son that the appellant will be allowed  to
           remain in the United Kingdom on a permanent basis [34].


      iii. Although it is accepted the appellant has established  a  family
           life in the  United  Kingdom  and  private  life  and  that  the
           respondent's decision interferes with that private life, it  was
           not accepted the interference would have  consequences  of  such
           gravity so as to potentially engage the operation of  article  8
           [35].


       iv. There was no evidence to suggest the appellant could not  return
           to Bangladesh, no evidence of very significant difficulties  for
           him in integrating into life in Bangladesh and no evidence as to
           why he could not return to Bangladesh and make an application to
           enter the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules [36].


        v. There is no reason why the appellant's partner cannot return  to
           Bangladesh with the  appellant  even  taking  into  account  the
           appellant has a 17 year old son living with her who will shortly
           be an adult albeit that he is in full-time education [37].


       vi. Even if the appellant's partner remains in the United Kingdom to
           support her son interference with the family  life  between  the
           appellant, his partner  and  her  partners  son  will  not  have
           consequences of  such  gravity  as  to  potentially  engage  the
           operation of article 8 as they can  be  communication  over  the
           telephone and by other modern means of communication. It was not
           accepted the consequences to the appellants partner  or  British
           national son of the appellant returning to  Bangladesh  will  be
           such that his welfare would in any way be damaged.  It  was  not
           accepted  the  respondent  did   not   properly   consider   his
           obligations under section 55 [38].


      vii. Even if article 8 is engaged, the respondent's  decision  is  in
           accordance with the law and proportionate to the public interest
           of maintaining effective immigration  control,  particularly  in
           light of the appellant's immigration history [39].


     viii. The appellant is not financially independent [43].


       ix. Little weight is given to the appellant's  private  life  taking
           into account's his immigration  history  and  little  weight  is
           given to the fact he has established his relationship  with  his
           partner and his partners child when he was in the UK  unlawfully
           [44].


        x. Although accepting the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
           parental relationship with the  British  citizen  child  and  it
           would not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the United
           Kingdom, it is not a matter that assists the appellant  for  the
           reasons stated [45].


       xi. The Judge finds the appellant,  his  partner  and  his  partners
           child have been credible witnesses [46].

    3. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the  Judge  erred
       in assessing the evidence of the appellant's case, in relation to the
       article 8 assessment with  specific  reference  to  section  55  best
       interests of the child.
    4. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal who extended time and admitted  the  appeal.  The  operative
       part of the grant is in the following terms:

           "2.    Much of the grounds appear to be argument with the weight
                the Judge gave to particular factors, which is a matter  for
                him, and saying that the Judge  did  not  consider  s55  and
                EX1(a) (the reasonableness provision)  when  the  Judge  did
                consider the provisions, just reached a result  contrary  to
                that the appellant desired. Whilst it is arguable  that  the
                finding that Article 8 was not engaged may have been  wrong,
                the Judge considered proportionality in the alternative.


           3.     However I do consider it arguable (see para 4, ground  2)
                that the Judge erred in not expressly considering  the  best
                interests of the child with whom he found the appellant  had
                a genuine and subsisting parental relationship and factoring
                those conclusions into the proportionality  balance.  Whilst
                not specifically raised by the  appellant,  I  draw  to  the
                attention of the parties that it might be said the Judge did
                not explain in light of case law, his finding that  although
                the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                the British citizen child and it would not be reasonable  to
                expect that child to leave the UK, that did not  assist  the
                appellant."

    5. No Rule 24 Reply has been filed.




Error of law


    6. Section 117B(6) of  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       provides:

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-


                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and


                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

    7. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 found  the  question
       of whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK  is  to
       be  decided  without  considering  the  immigration  history  of  the
       parents.  The immigration history is relevant however to whether  the
       parents will be leaving the UK.  To that extent their record  becomes
       indirectly material because it may lead to them having to  leave  the
       UK.  It is only  if,  even  on  that  hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
       reasonable for the child to leave that the  provision  may  give  the
       parents a right to remain.  The reasonableness of the  child  leaving
       the UK is to be considered on the basis that the facts  are  as  they
       are in the real world, so that if one parent has no right to  remain,
       but the other does, or if both parents have no right to  remain  that
       is the background against which the  best  interest's  assessment  is
       conducted. The ultimate question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
       expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to  remain  to
       their country of origin.
    8. In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT  00072
       (IAC)  a  Presidential  panel  found  that  Section  117B(6)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  requires  a  court  or
       tribunal to hypothesise that the child in question  would  leave  the
       United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the  case,  and  ask
       whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.
    9. The Judge's own findings establish it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
       expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.
   10. In KO (Nigeria) it was reaffirmed section 117B(6) is  a  freestanding
       provision.
   11. I find in light of the findings concerning the  child,  a  qualifying
       child, together with all the other  facts  relating  to  this  family
       unit, that it has not been  established  that  it  is  reasonable  to
       expect the child to leave the United Kingdom and that in the  absence
       of any countervailing factors that the statutory  provisions  do  not
       require the appellant's removal from the UK. This is the point relied
       upon by Mrs Choudhury which was accepted by Mr Diwnycz on  behalf  of
       the respondent.
   12. Accordingly I find the Judge erred in law at [42]  when  finding  the
       appellants claim did not engage Article 8 ECHR when it clearly did on
       both family and private life grounds, and in concluding  as  part  of
       proportionality assessment that the interference  in  the  appellants
       protected  rights  is  proportionate.  As  noted  in  the  grant   of
       permission, the Judge failed to adequately explain how  in  light  of
       prevailing case law the finding  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with the British child and that it would  not
       be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK did not assist the
       appellant.
   13. I set aside the decision of the Judge. I remake the decision allowing
       the appeal on human rights grounds, article 8 ECHR outside the Rules,
       on the basis of the statutory provisions, it not being reasonable  to
       expect the child to leave the United Kingdom, the freestanding nature
       of section 117B(6) and lack of  adequate  countervailing  factors  to
       warrant a finding in the alternative.




Decision


   14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is allowed.


  Anonymity.


   15. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27th March 2019












