
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08731/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2020                           |On 21 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HON. MR JUSTICE CHAMBERLAIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                     and
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          BIRJU GOVINDBHAI TRIVIDI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Trividi in person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal from a decision of Judge Rai ('the judge') sitting in
    the First-tier Tribunal. In the  decision,  promulgated  on  20  August
    2019, the judge allowed Mr Trividi's appeal against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 26 March 2018  refusing  his  application  for
    further leave to remain and refusing to revoke a deportation order.


Background


 2. Mr Trividi is a national of India. He was born on  29  April  1973.  He
    claimed asylum in the UK on 6 November 1998. The claim was refused on 3
    July 1999. On 2 February 2004, he was convicted at Lewes Crown Court of
    possession of a false instrument. On 8 March 2004, he was sentenced  to
    8 months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation. He  was  served
    with notice of a decision to deport him on 12 May  2004.  He  appealed.
    His appeal was dismissed by an adjudicator on  26  November  2004.  His
    appeal rights were exhausted on 3 March 2005. A deportation  order  was
    signed on 23 March 2007 and served on 14 January 2010. He made  further
    representations  raising  asylum  grounds,  which  were   refused   and
    certified  as  clearly  unfounded  on  14  April  2010.   Yet   further
    representations were lodged on 21 March 2012. These  were  rejected  as
    not amounting to a  fresh  claim  pursuant  to  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules on 3 May 2016.


 3. On 24 July 2016, Mr Trividi submitted an application for Further  Leave
    to Remain. He prayed in aid his length of residence  (then  18  years),
    his strong social ties to the UK and the absence of any support network
    in India. He pointed out that he was fluent in English, was financially
    independent and had not reoffended since 2004.


 4. In a decision served on 26 March 2018, the Secretary of State said that
    deportation was still conducive to the public  good,  bearing  in  mind
    that he had chosen  to  remain  illegally  and  was  wilfully  avoiding
    deportation. It was acknowledged that Mr Trividi was not  a  persistent
    offender and his offence had not caused serious harm, so paragraph  398
    of the Immigration Rules was not engaged. It was said that  deportation
    would not breach his Article 8  rights.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the
    findings of the adjudicator in November 2004 to  that  effect.  It  was
    acknowledged that the interference with Mr Trividi's Article  8  rights
    would be greater now than it was  then,  but  it  was  said  that  that
    interference would not be disproportionate. The matter  was  considered
    under paragraph 391A of the Immigration Rules and  the  decision  taken
    that the representations  did  not  amount  to  a  material  change  of
    circumstances. It was accepted  on  this  occasion  that  Mr  Trividi's
    submissions amounted to a  fresh  claim  under  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 5. The judge's decision proceeded in the following stages.


 6. At [22], she noted that Mr Trividi had accepted that he had not applied
    for a birth certificate or passport himself, because he did not want to
    return to India. At [27], however, she found that Mr  Trividi  had  not
    wilfully obstructed the Secretary of  State's  efforts  to  procure  an
    emergency travel document ('ETD') by  providing  false  information  in
    answer to questions about this address and the school he  attended.  Mr
    Trividi was 'not required to obtain the documentation himself,  but  to
    engage in the ETD process' by answering questions truthfully.  This  he
    had done. The delay was attributable to the Indian authorities, who had
    not responded to a request sent by the Secretary of State in 2011.

 7. At [29], the judge identified the question she thought she had to  ask:
    'whether there are any exceptional circumstances to justify  revocation
    of the deportation order under para. 390'. She noted that the Secretary
    of State accepted that paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules  was  not
    engaged. At [30], she  accepted  that  Mr  Trividi  did  not  meet  the
    requirements for Exception 1 and 2 under the Rules. This was apparently
    a reference to  paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    respectively. She found that, as Mr Trividi was educated in  India  and
    speaks  Hindi  and  a  little  Punjabi  and  Gujarati,  and  given  the
    versatility he has shown in building a life in the UK, there would  not
    be significant obstacles to his reintegration  in  India  (albeit  this
    would be 'difficult' after more than 20 years here). At [31], she noted
    that Mr Trividi had been in the UK for over 20 years and that, 'by  the
    mere passage of time,' Article 8(1) was engaged.


 8. At [32], the judge  noted  that  the  most  compelling  factors  in  Mr
    Trividi's favour were the fact that he  had  received  only  one  short
    sentence of 8 months, having committed an offence which did  not  cause
    serious  harm,  and  that  he  had  not  (on  her  own  findings)  been
    uncooperative with attempts to deport him. At [33], she  accepted  that
    the public interest in deportation had not diminished, but  noted  that
    Mr Trividi had developed a private life while in the UK and that he had
    raised money for various charities and  undertaken  voluntary  work  to
    help those in need of support. She reminded herself of 'the context  in
    which it was  done'  (presumably  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  Mr
    Trividi's private life in the UK had  been  established  and  developed
    while here illegally) and  for  that  reason  considered  that  'little
    weight' was to be attributed to his private life.


 9. At [34]-[35], the judge said this:


         '34... At some point, the respondent needs to obtain  the  ETD  and
         remove the appellant or, there comes a point where the  passage  of
         time becomes a disproportionate interference with his private life,
         on the basis that the respondent has to accept  that  there  is  no
         reasonable prospect of removing the appellant  in  pursuance  of  a
         deportation  order.  The  appellant  challenged   the   deportation
         decision as  soon  as  he  was  taken  into  immigration  detention
         following the release from his 8-month sentence. His appeal against
         the  decision  to  deport  was  dismissed  and  his  appeal  rights
         exhausted in 2005. The appellant engaged with the  ETT  process  in
         2006 and has continued to do so. He has  largely  kept  in  contact
         with the respondent and signed on when required to do  so.  He  has
         not committed any further offences since being in the UK.  Even  if
         his removal would have been entirely proportionate if it had  taken
         place at any time from 2005 onwards, the  passage  of  time  alone,
         where it is not the appellant  obstructing  the  ETD  process,  has
         reached a point where there is  no  alternative  to  accepting  the
         reality, which is that all efforts to get an ETD have stalled.


         35.  The  respondent  has  not  had  a  response  from  the  Indian
         authorities for eight years regarding the appellants nationality. I
         was not provided with  any  further  plans  by  the  respondent  to
         resolve this issue, save  for  the  appellant  should  contact  the
         Indian High Commission to assist with the  process.  The  appellant
         indicated that the High Commission have told him to go to the  Home
         Office or a solicitor. Having considered the evidence in the round,
         I am not satisfied that the respondent has any means  of  resolving
         ETD issue and I weigh that up against the length of time since  the
         deportation order was made.'


10. At [36]-[37], the judge found that there were exceptional circumstances
    under paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal.


Discussion: material error of law

11. The judge thought that this was a case to which paragraph 390A applied.
    But paragraph 390A applies only where paragraph 398 does. As she  noted
    at [29] of her decision, the  Secretary  of  State  had  conceded  that
    paragraph 398 had no application  in  this  case.  The  concession  was
    correct, because the sentence imposed in 2004 was one of less  than  12
    months and the Secretary of State had not found that the offending  had
    given rise to  serious  harm  or  that  Mr  Trividi  was  a  persistent
    offender. So, paragraph 390A did not apply. Paragraph 391 applies  only
    '[i]n the case of a person who has been  deported'.  On  their  natural
    meaning, the opening words  of  paragraph  391A  ('[i]n  other  cases')
    indicate that that paragraph applies to cases other than those  covered
    by the immediately preceding paragraphs 390A and 391. We note that this
    accords with the view to which the  Court  of  Appeal  inclined  in  ZP
    (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    1197, [2016] 4 WLR 35, at [26] (Underhill LJ).


12.  Under  paragraph  391A,  the  question  was  not  whether  there  were
    'exceptional  circumstances,'  but  whether  'the  situation  has  been
    materially altered, either by  a  change  of  circumstances  since  the
    [deportation] order was made, or by fresh information coming  to  light
    which was not before the appellate  authorities  or  the  Secretary  of
    State'. The last sentence of the paragraph  is  directed  to  the  case
    where deportation has taken place. It does not on its face apply  here.
    But this does not matter, because we consider it clear that the passage
    of  time  could  in  principle  clearly  give  rise  to  a  change   in
    circumstances that is material for the purposes of paragraph 391A,  and
    for the purposes of the Article 8 balancing exercise, even  in  a  case
    where deportation has not occurred.

13. Three categories of cases where the passage of time might  be  relevant
    to the Article 8 balancing exercise when removing failed asylum seekers
    were identified by Lord Bingham in the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 AC 1159, [14]-[16]:
    first, those where it enables the appellant to establish deeper ties to
    the community in this country; second,  those  where  it  prevents  the
    Secretary of State from relying on the impermanence of  a  relationship
    entered into knowing  that  one's  immigration  status  is  precarious;
    third, where the delay is the fault of the Secretary  of  State,  delay
    may diminish the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  state's  interest  in
    immigration control. Caution must be exercised in applying what is said
    there to the deportation context, where  there  is  an  additional  and
    important public interest in play: the  public  interest  in  deporting
    those who have been recommended for deportation by  a  court  or  whose
    deportation the Secretary of State has determined is conducive  to  the
    public good. Lord Bingham's analysis serves, however, to show that  the
    questions whether and if so to what extent the passage of time  affects
    the Article 8 balancing exercise is intensely fact-specific.


14. Because the judge did not appreciate that the applicable test was  that
    contained in paragraph 391A, she did not focus on the question  whether
    there had been a material change in circumstances. This was an error of
    law. The error had the effect that the judge went on to apply the  test
    set out in paragraph  390A,  namely  whether  there  were  'exceptional
    circumstances' - a more stringent test than the  one  she  should  have
    applied. She found that even this test was satisfied.  If  her  reasons
    for doing so were not vitiated by any error of law, we  could  not  say
    that the error was material, because those reasons would also have  led
    her to find that there had been  a  material  change  of  circumstances
    within paragraph 391A. It  is  therefore  necessary  to  focus  on  the
    judge's reasons for concluding that  Mr  Trividi's  circumstances  were
    exceptional.

15. The crux of the judge's reasoning was that Mr Trividi had done all that
    he was required to do. This, she said, extended to  answering  honestly
    questions asked of him, but did not extend to applying directly to  the
    Indian authorities for a birth certificate or passport. So,  the  judge
    found, he could not be blamed for the delay in deporting him.  We  must
    consider whether that finding disclosed a material error of law.

16. We start with an analysis of the statutory framework. Section  3(5)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971 ('the 1971 Act') provides that a person  whose
    deportation is deemed by the Secretary of State to be conducive to  the
    public good is 'liable to deportation'. Section  3(6)  makes  the  same
    provision for a person whose deportation is recommended by a  court.  A
    person liable to deportation may, by s. 5(1), be made the subject of  a
    deportation order, which is  'an  order  requiring  him  to  leave  and
    prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom' (emphasis added). The
    deportation order 'shall invalidate any leave to enter or remain in the
    United Kingdom given him before the order is made or  while  it  is  in
    force'.

17. It follows that the primary legal consequence of a deportation order is
    to impose an obligation on the person subject to it to  leave  the  UK.
    The 1971 Act goes on, in s. 5(5) and Sch. 3, to confer  powers  on  the
    Secretary of State to remove those subject to deportation orders and to
    detain them for that purpose. Parliament did not, however,  impose  any
    duty on the Secretary of State to effect the removal of those liable to
    deportation.

18.  This  feature  of  the  statutory  regime  governing  deportation   is
    replicated in the regime governing removal of  overstayers,  which  was
    considered by the Supreme Court in Patel v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] AC 651. At [27],  Lord  Carnwath
    (with whom Lord Kerr, Lord Reed and Lord Hughes agreed) noted that that
    regime conferred powers of removal and could not be 'read  as  imposing
    an obligation to make a [removal] direction  in  any  particular  case,
    still less as providing any link between  failure  to  do  so  and  the
    validity of a previous immigration decision'. Hence the  conclusion  at
    [29] that:

         'The Secretary of State does not "thwart the policy of the Act"  if
         she proceeds in the first  instance  on  the  basis  that  unlawful
         overstayers should be allowed to leave of their own volition (as on
         the evidence the great majority do).'


19. That reasoning seems to us to apply a  fortiori  to  those  subject  to
    deportation orders, who have engaged in conduct that is  sufficient  to
    warrant  a  deportation  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  a
    recommendation for deportation by a court.


20. Once it is appreciated that the legal effect of the  deportation  order
    in Mr Trividi's case was to require him to leave the UK, it must follow
    that he was obliged to take reasonable steps to enable that to  happen.
    Proactively applying  to  the  Indian  authorities  for  the  necessary
    documents seem to us to fall squarely within the kind of steps that  it
    would have been reasonable to take. It follows that, in  our  judgment,
    the judge erred at [27] of her decision in concluding that he  was  not
    required to take such steps. The fact that, on the judge's findings, he
    had given honest answers to questions posed by the Secretary of State's
    officials, and so had not sought to obstruct the Secretary  of  State's
    efforts to remove him, did not exhaust his legal obligations.

21. Reading  the  judge's  decision  as  a  whole,  we  consider  that  the
    conclusion that Mr Trividi has done all that was  legally  required  of
    him played a significant part in the reasoning. This error of  law  was
    therefore material in the sense that it might have affected the outcome
    of the appeal.

Re-making the decision

22. There has, however, been no challenge to the judge's  primary  findings
    of fact, and there has been no application to adduce  further  evidence
    by either party. We therefore proceed to remake the decision  based  on
    the facts found by the judge.


23. Looking at the matter through  the  prism  of  paragraph  391A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the question  we  have  to  answer  is  whether  the
    situation has been materially altered  by  a  change  of  circumstances
    since the making of the order. The circumstances in question are  those
    relevant to the balancing exercise required by Article 8.

24. Mr Trividi is not a 'foreign criminal' as that term is  defined  in  s.
    117D(2) of the Immigration Act 2014 ('the 2014 Act'), so as  to  engage
    the provisions of s. 117C of that Act. That  does  not  mean,  however,
    that his deportation is not in the public interest. We start  from  the
    proposition that there is always a public interest in deportation  when
    there is a deportation order in force based on a valid decision by  the
    Secretary of State that deportation is conducive to the public good  or
    a recommendation for deportation by a court.

25. In assessing  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation, we bear in mind three matters. First, the offence  merited
    a relatively short custodial sentence in 2004. Second, as he emphasised
    in submissions to us, Mr Trividi has not re-offended since then. Third,
    however, although subject since 2010 to a legal duty to  leave  the  UK
    (see paragraphs 16-20 above), Mr Trividi has not taken reasonable steps
    to comply with that obligation and  has  instead  remained  unlawfully,
    making a series of unsuccessful applications. Overall,  there  remains,
    in our view, a  significant  (though,  we  accept,  not  great)  public
    interest in deporting him.

26. Against that must be weighed Mr Trividi's private life,  which  he  has
    built up over more than 20 years in the UK. There is no doubt that such
    a  period  of  residence  (even  if  unlawful)  generates  an  interest
    protected in principle by Article 8.  We  note  in  this  regard  that,
    outside the  context  of  deportation,  an  applicant  with  20  years'
    residence (whether lawful or not) is  eligible  to  apply  for  limited
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life under paragraphs 276ADE-
    276CE. However, as the judge correctly noted at [33] of  her  decision,
    this private life must be  given  'little  weight'  in  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise, given that it was built up over a  period  when  Mr
    Trividi was here unlawfully. This is not just a matter of common sense.
    It is mandated by s. 117B(4) of the 2014 Act.

27. There are two  further  matters  relevant  to  our  assessment  of  the
    strength of Mr Trividi's Article 8 interest. First, Mr Trividi  has  no
    children, is currently single and did not seek to  rely  on  any  other
    personal relationship giving rise to family (as distinct from  private)
    life. Second, as the judge found and Mr Trividi  confirmed  to  us,  he
    speaks Hindi and some Punjabi and Gujarati.  This,  together  with  the
    fact that he  was  educated  in  India,  amply  justifies  the  judge's
    finding, at [30]  of  her  decision,  that  there  are  no  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in India. It was not suggested that  his
    type 2 diabetes could not be adequately managed in India.

28.  Overall,  we  consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has   clearly
    established that the public interest in deporting Mr Trividi  continues
    to  outweigh  his  interest  in   respect   for   his   private   life,
    notwithstanding that he has been in  the  UK  for  over  20  years.  It
    follows that, in terms of paragraph 391A, there has not been a material
    changes of circumstances since the making of the deportation order.

29. We therefore dismiss Mr Trividi's human rights appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and requires the decision to be set aside.

We remake the decision by dismissing Mr Trividi's  Article  8  human  rights
appeal.


Martin Chamberlain
The Hon. Mr Justice Chamberlain


18 February 2020
