
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/08358/2015
                                                               HU/08359/2015
                                                               HU/08360/2015
                                                               HU/08362/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On Friday 15 December 2017                 |On 18 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  FAIZA [A]
                                    [B A]
                                    [M H]
                                    [O A]
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No attendance

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


              DECISION IN RELATION TO WITHDRAWAL AND DIRECTIONS

Background

   1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department.  For ease of reference though, I refer to the  parties  as
      they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The Appellants appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  27
      September 2015 to refuse their applications  for  entry  clearance  as
      visitors for a period of fourteen days.  The First  Appellant  is  the
      mother of the Second, Third  and  Fourth  Appellants.  The  Appellants
      intended to visit the First Appellant's  brother.  However,  the  real
      purpose of their visit was to participate in the death prayers for the
      First Appellant's father (the grandfather of the other Appellants) who
      had sadly passed away in the UK.

   3. Their appeals were allowed "on human  rights  grounds"  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cox in a decision promulgated on  15  July  2016  ("the
      Decision"). He also  purported  to  dismiss  the  appeals  "under  the
      immigration  rules"  which  provoked  a   separate   application   for
      permission to appeal from the Appellants which was refused  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell.  As Judge Kimnell  rightly  pointed  out,
      Judge Cox had no jurisdiction to either allow or dismiss  the  appeals
      under the Rules  as  these  are  post-Immigration  Act  2014  appeals.
      Insofar as the Judge purported to  decide  that  issue  therefore  the
      Decision is a nullity.  The Appellants' application for permission  to
      appeal has (rightly) not been renewed to this Tribunal.

   4. The Respondent also sought permission to appeal the Decision.  She did
      so on essentially four grounds.  First, she asserted that the Tribunal
      had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeals as  there  was  no  human
      rights claim and no refusal of one by  the  Respondent.   Second,  she
      asserted that there is no family life between the Appellants  and  the
      sponsor (First Appellant's brother) relying on Kugathas v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  Third, she asserted
      that there was a factual distinction to be drawn between  these  cases
      and the case of Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement - Article  8)
      [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) ("Abbasi") because it  is  asserted  that  the
      person who had passed away lived in Pakistan and not the UK.  Finally,
      it is asserted that there is  an  inconsistency  between  the  Judge's
      finding at [29] of the Decision that the Appellants meet the Rules and
      [34] of the Decision where it is asserted that they do not.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell
      on 30 November 2016 in the following terms so far as relevant:-

           "...The Judge found at paragraph 29 of  the  decision  that  the
           immigration rules had been met and  at  paragraph  34  that  the
           rules had not been met.  The extent to which the rules were  met
           is  important  to  any  human   rights   argument,   and   since
           incompatible conclusions are recorded the error  is  capable  of
           making a difference to the result."

   6. The appeals thereafter came before DUTJ D E Taylor sitting in Bradford
      on 2 May 2017.  The Appellants were not represented at  that  hearing.
      That hearing followed an earlier appeal hearing before  UTJ  Bruce  at
      which the Appellants were not  represented  either.  In  her  decision
      promulgated on 11 May 2017, Judge Taylor accepted the  second  of  the
      Respondent's grounds.  She also accepted the third of the grounds.  In
      relation to the fourth ground, she rejected the assertion  that  there
      is a discrepancy in the Decision and concluded that the Judge had made
      a typographical error only at [34] of the  Decision.   The  Judge  had
      therefore clearly concluded that the Appellants do meet the  Rules  as
      visitors.

   7. However, because she concluded that Abbasi did not apply on the facts,
      premised on the assumption that the  person  who  had  died  lived  in
      Pakistan and not the UK, she found an error  of  law,  set  aside  the
      Decision and re-made the Decision dismissing the Appellants' appeals.

   8. By applications  received  on  23  May  2017,  the  Appellants  sought
      permission to appeal Judge Taylor's decision.   They  did  so  on  the
      basis that Judge Taylor had been misled by the Respondent's grounds in
      thinking that the person who had died lived in Pakistan  and  not  the
      UK.  The Appellants pointed out that the person who had died  was  the
      First Appellant's father (who lived in the UK)  and  not  her  husband
      (who remains in Pakistan).

   9.  Following  those  applications,  this  Tribunal  gave  notice  on  29
      September 2017 of its intention to set aside Judge  Taylor's  decision
      under Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
      The parties were given the opportunity to make submissions.  The  only
      representations were a  request  by  the  Appellants  for  a  hearing.
      Accordingly, by a decision dated 30 October 2017, UTJ Kebede set aside
      Judge Taylor's decision.

  10. The appeals came before me to determine  afresh  whether  there  is  a
      material error of law in the Decision.  However, at the outset of  the
      hearing, Mr Wilding handed in a letter from  Mr  Jarvis,  Senior  Home
      Office Presenting Officer dated 8 March 2017 which had not reached the
      Tribunal's files.  He also  indicated  that  the  Respondent  had  not
      received Judge Kebede's decision  which  explained  the  lack  of  any
      submissions in response.

  11. The letter dated 8 March 2017 reads as follows:-

           "The ECO writes  in  respect  of  the  ECO's  appeal  which  was
           adjourned partly for the reason that the Sponsor and  instructed
           representatives had not been served the notice of the  error  of
           law hearing.

           This SPO indicated to UTJ  Bruce  that  the  ECO  would  in  the
           meantime consider the legal position in respect of  the  Grounds
           of Appeal and notify the UT of any position taken in advance  of
           the rearranged hearing.

           The ECO  therefore  asks  that  the  UT  treat  this  letter  as
           notification of  the  decision  to  withdraw  the  ECO's  appeal
           against the decision of the FtT and further  asks  that  the  UT
           consent to such an action in line with  Rule  17(2)  of  the  UT
           Procedure Rules."

  12. Mr Wilding indicated that this letter was not sent to  the  Appellants
      as the Respondent does not have an address  other  than  addresses  in
      Rawalpindi.  That no doubt  explains  why  the  Appellants  sought  to
      appeal Judge Taylor's decision.

  13. Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides for a party to withdraw its case before  the  Upper  Tribunal
      only with the consent of  the  Tribunal.   If  the  Tribunal  does  so
      consent this would amount to a final disposal of the appeal before the
      Upper Tribunal. The effect of the withdrawal by the Respondent of  her
      appeal to this Tribunal is that the Decision  (of  FTTJ  Cox)  in  the
      Appellants' favour would be maintained.

  14. Subject to consideration being given  to  any  request  received  from
      either party to the contrary by 4pm on Friday  19  January  2018,  the
      Upper Tribunal proposes to consent to the Respondent  withdrawing  her
      case before this Tribunal with the effect that  the  Decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal is upheld.  I have allowed  a  longer  than  usual
      period of time as the Appellants are resident in Pakistan.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  15 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
