
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08529/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                FITIM POTERA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jones
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo who was born on 3  May  1984.  The
    respondent refused the appellant leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as
    the spouse of a person present  and  settled  here  and  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    21 May 2019, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Tarlow, who appeared for the respondent before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    did not formally concede the appeal but acknowledged that  the  grounds
    appeared to be 'valid.' He  made  no  submissions  in  support  of  the
    judge's decision. Having heard the brief but helpful submissions of  Ms
    Jones, who appeared for the appellant, I informed the  parties  that  I
    intended to allow the appeal and return the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the matter to be determined de novo. I gave my reasons  at
    court so will now  be  brief  in  summarising  those  reasons  in  this
    decision.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the presenting officer representing the
    Entry Clearance Officer sought to place in evidence a  minute  relating
    to an interview of the appellant by the Entry Clearance Officer  on  28
    October 2017. This item evidence had not been  produced  in  accordance
    with directions and had never previously been seen  by  the  appellant.
    Counsel for the appellant objected to it being  admitted  and,  in  the
    alternative,  sought  an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  so  that   the
    instructions of the appellant might  be  taken.  That  application  was
    refused by the judge. The appellant now asserts that  the  hearing  was
    unfair, the appellant having had no opportunity to give instructions on
    this relevant item of evidence. The judge observed that  parts  of  the
    minutes were referred to in the notice of refusal. However, as Ms Jones
    pointed out, that fact did not in any way excuse  the  failure  of  the
    judge to provide a proper opportunity for the appellant (who  alone  of
    those giving evidence on his behalf in the  appeal  was  able  to  give
    evidence regarding what had been said  at  the  interview)  to  provide
    proper instructions  to  his  representatives.  By  failing  either  to
    exclude the evidence or to adjourn the hearing,  the  judge  fell  into
    serious legal error. She deprived the appellant of a  fair  hearing  of
    the appeal.

 4. The appeal is  allowed.  The  appeal  is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Chana) for that tribunal to remake the decision  at
    or following a hearing de novo.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of  the  findings
of fact shall  stand.  The  appeal  shall  be  returned  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Chana) for that Tribunal to remake the  decision  at  or
following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 6 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
