
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08010/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |28th December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUnAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                lakhvir singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sidhu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of her private and family life on 1st October 2015.  He is
    a citizen of India who was born on 6th January 1973  and  is  43  years
    old.  He was required to leave the United Kingdom.

 2. His appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  ("the
    judge") following a hearing on 29th June 2016.

The Grant of Permission

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  granted  permission  to  appeal
    (20th October 2016).  She said that it is arguable  that  having  found
    that Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 had been established, it is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
    dismissing  the  appeal.   The  other  grounds  too  are  arguable  and
    permission was granted on all grounds.

Respondent's Position

 4. In the reply notice (17th November 2016) it is said that  although  not
    very well expressed, the judge has all  the  guidance  set  out  in  MA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    705.  This makes it clear that Section 117B(6)  involves  consideration
    of a wide range of factors.

Appellant's Position

 5. Section 117B(6) is determinative  of  the  public  interest  assessment
    within Article 8.  The Appellant has a  closer  relationship  with  the
    child for whom he cares than the child's father and stepmother, and the
    judge has failed to properly consider the impact on the  child  of  the
    Appellant being removed.   The  Appellant  has  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the child and the judge has speculated as  to  future
    integration with the child's stepmother.  The judge's observation  that
    removal of the Appellant should be  delayed  to  enable  an  adjustment
    period undermines the conclusion  regarding  proportionality.   It  was
    orally submitted that the difference between this case and MA  is  that
    here the child concerned is a British  citizen  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for this  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  given  the
    particular circumstances of the child's health.  The best interests  of
    that child had not been properly considered given the Appellant is  the
    one who fulfils the role of the mother.   It  was  irrational  for  the
    judge to say that a period of time to  adjust  should  precede  removal
    while at the same time he is saying that removal was proportionate.

Respondent's Position

 6. The judge heard all the evidence and made findings open  to  him.   The
    Appellant's adverse immigration history of having stayed here for  nine
    years as an overstayer and not being  the  parent  of  the  child  were
    relevant factors.

Judge's Determination

 7. It was found in the determination that:

         [48] The Appellant has played and continues to play  a  significant
             role in the life of P in the way described  in  the  evidence.
             He has done so for much of P's life, and certainly  since  his
             mother finally removed herself from the family  in  2011.   He
             has effectively under taken the role in the  family  that  she
             would have played.

         [49] This has continued since the arrival of the  stepmother.   Her
             efforts to take over that role have  been  unsuccessful.   The
             Appellant enjoys a special, close relationship  with  P  which
             the stepmother has been unable to penetrate.

         [50] I must not look into the future.

         [52] I find  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with  P,  and  that,  therefore  Section
             117B(6) applies.

         [54] Section 117B(6)  is  not  the  whole  of  the  proportionality
             exercise  I  must  conduct.   It  does  not   preclude   other
             considerations.

         [57] It may take time for the  stepmother  to  integrate  into  the
             family as his mother and  it  may  not  be  easy  particularly
             because of the disabilities from which P suffers  and  because
             of his attachment to the Appellant.   In  the  short  term  it
             might not be P's preference, but even with the difficulties he
             has, I do not see it as a change he cannot adapt  to,  without
             the Appellant's support.  His stepmother is clearly  able  and
             willing to offer him the love, care and  affection  which  the
             Appellant currently offers, and it will alleviate some of  the
             practical difficulties currently faced by the family.

         [58]  P's  best  interests  are  served  by  him  being  given  the
             opportunity to integrate more fully with his immediate  family
             members in a normal family unit, namely with  Mrs  Nandha  and
             his half brother.

         [59] The Appellant was a successful businessman in  India  and  has
             good DIY skills and having come here in his late 20s was well-
             versed in Indian culture  and  society.   There  are  no  very
             significant or insurmountable obstacles to  him  reintegrating
             into Indian society.

         [60] He has now been in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  for  many
             years.  He has established a worthy private life  particularly
             with regard to P and connected his life around the temple  but
             I attach little weight to it having regard to Section 117B(5).



Discussion

 8. MA directs that if Parliament had wanted the child's best interests  to
    dictate the outcome of the leave application  it  would  have  said  so
    [47].  The court can have regard to the wider public interest including
    the immigration history [101].

 9. I accept that the judge did take into account the  adverse  immigration
    history of the Appellant.  It is clear that the judge has speculated as
    to what may happen in the future regarding P's stepmother's integration
    into the family.  Having guided himself not to speculate [50]  he  went
    on to do so [56]-[57].  I am satisfied that in doing so  he  materially
    erred in law because as at the date of the hearing  the  Appellant  was
    acting as the mother of the disabled child P and that was  the  reality
    of the position.  The fact that somebody else may at  some  point  take
    over was immaterial and the judge erred by considering that.  This  was
    plainly a situation where it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom given his disability and,  in  taking
    into account a factor that the judge was not entitled to, the judge was
    not in a position to conclude that it was in the child's best interests
    to be able to integrate into his family with his stepmother.

10. In addition, I am satisfied that the conclusion by the  judge  that  an
    adjustment period was required flies in the face of the conclusion that
    it was proportionate to require  the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. I am satisfied in those circumstances that the judge  materially  erred
    in both respects and I set aside the  decision.   Both  representatives
    agreed that if I found a material error of law it was  not  appropriate
    for me to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  because  I  had
    sufficient facts to enable me to determine the appeal.   I  agree  with
    them.

Re-making the Decision

12. Given the findings that have been made of the unique role played by the
    Appellant in the child's life and  the  current  circumstances  of  the
    family with that pivotal role being played by him, despite his  adverse
    immigration history, and despite the fact that at  some  point  in  the
    future a new family dynamic may emerge, I am satisfied that the  public
    interest does not require  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom and that the child's  best  interests  currently  can  only  be
    assessed on the basis of the current position.  It is entirely a matter
    for the Secretary of State the length of time for which leave to remain
    is granted and it may be at some point in the future  that  the  family
    dynamic  will  have  changed.   However,  as  at  the  date  the  judge
    considered the decision and indeed as at today's date, I  am  satisfied
    that this appeal should be allowed for the reasons I have given.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 23 December 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
