
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08434/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2018                     |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 miss g d j
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  brought  by  [GDJ]  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her application for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules.  The date of the decision
    is 3 March 2016.

2.    The  essential  issue  as  it  develops  before  me  is  that  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and  her  grandmother.   There  were
    other issues that formed part of the challenge to the decision  of  the
    judge who dismissed the appeal in August 2017 but Mr Gajjar has refined
    that down to essentially the Kugathas issue as well I call it the issue
    of the relationship between the appellant and her grandmother.

3.   The judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  her  grandmother's
    carer and said there was no evidence to  support  her  claim  that  her
    grandmother required a carer other than that advanced by the  appellant
    in person.  The judge said he  read  carefully  the  available  medical
    reports.  It was quite apparent that the grandmother's conditions  were
    well controlled and there was no suggestion whatsoever for any  medical
    source that the grandmother suffered from any form of medical  loss  so
    she had failed to prove the existence of a family relationship with the
    grandmother within the meaning of Article 8 and the assertion that  her
    sisters would not be able to assist or would be prepared to assist  the
    grandmother was not accepted.

4.   The challenge in this regard relates  very  much  to  medical  evidence
    that was in abundance before judge from Dr Vincent dated 10 July  2015.
    That is the letter with reference to the grandmother and it  refers  in
    the first paragraph to various physical health problems from which  she
    suffers.  She also informs me that she has a carer to help with some of
    her activities  and  daily  living  including  her  personal  care  and
    emotional support, cooking, cleaning, carrying heavy shopping,  driving
    her and ensuring she eats the necessary food and there is the reference
    in the penultimate paragraph to her granddaughter  providing  the  care
    and support as listed above which I take to be a reference to the  care
    which is  described  in  paragraph  1.   There  is  also  reference  in
    paragraph 2 to side effects from Mrs [J]'s  medications  which  include
    memory problems and sleepiness.

5.   That is, I think, it is probably fair to say, the  essence  of  why  Mr
    Gajjar says this decision is flawed as a  matter  of  law  because  the
    judge came to the conclusion at paragraph 13 to which I referred  above
    about the care issue and the memory issue and the evidence that appears
    to go directly against that.  There is a very full Rule 24 response  on
    which Mr Tarlow relied and I understand it is full and normally are  is
    thorough and comprehensive.  It makes the point with reference  to  the
    earlier decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  August  2014  which
    included a witness statement from the appellant in which  she  did  not
    claim to be acting as carer for her grandmother in the  United  Kingdom
    and it is noted from paragraph 6 that this contrasts starting with  the
    claim to have acted as a carer for eight years and any apparent brevity
    in the judge's findings on its part of the claim is  therefore  readily
    explicable and the response  also  goes  on  to  deal  with  the  issue
    concerning potential support from  the  sisters  and  there  are  other
    matters which I think do not need any longer to be addressed  in  light
    of Mr Gajjar's narrowing of the grounds.

6.   I see the force of the Rule 24 response and Mr Tarlow's reliance on  it
    but it does seem to me that that is vulnerable to the point made by  Mr
    Gajjar that this is not something that was relied on by the judge.  The
    judge did not say well I see the medical evidence at  page  26  of  the
    bundle but in light of the failure by the appellant to mention  any  of
    these matters in the 2014 case it seems to me that  this  simply  lacks
    credibility and the judge did not say that but simply said  well  there
    is no evidence to support the claim that  the  grandmother  requires  a
    carer nor is there evidence of memory loss and both  of  those  matters
    were part of the evidence of the doctor which the judge simply did  not
    take into account.  It may well be that on a rehearing of  this  matter
    the judge  considering  things  as  a  whole  will  come  to  the  same
    conclusion as this judge  came  to  but  I  do  not  feel  sufficiently
    confident that that is  going  to  be  so  clearly  the  outcome  as  a
    consequence of a full consideration of the  earlier  decision  and  the
    medical evidence that I can say that there is no material error of  law
    in this case.

7.   So in my conclusion there is a material error in the  failure  to  take
    into account the medical evidence in the absence  of  any  relating  of
    that evidence to the evidence in the earlier decision and therefore the
    appeal is allowed to the extent that it will be remitted for  rehearing
    in full by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date 19th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




