
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08580/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2018                          |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   VAN [P]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Mac, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Vietnam  who  made  application  to  the
    Respondent for leave to remain on the basis of private and family life.
    That application was refused and following a hearing, and in a decision
    promulgated on 24 April 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hussain
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Alis in a decision dated 25 December 2017.  His
    reasons for so granting are:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in-time,  against  a
             Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain (hereinafter
             called the Judge) who, in a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated
             on April 24, 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
             respondent's decision to reject his human rights claim.

         2.   The grounds of  appeal  argue  the  Judge  erred  because  the
             decision conflicted with the fact  the  Appellant's  wife  and
             children had leave to remain until March 25, 2018.

         3.   The Judge noted the appellant came here unlawfully in May 2010
             and began a relationship with Vietnamese  woman  against  this
             background. She also came here illegally.  The  Appellant  and
             his partner have two children (corn  11/5/2011  and  28/1/2014
             respectively)  who  were  not  entitled  to  leave  under  the
             Immigration Rules but  had  discretionary  leave  outside  the
             Rules.

         4.   The grounds take issue with the Judge's "Razgar" approach  and
             for ignoring the fact his wife and children have discretionary
             leave and the extent to which the family is settled.

         5.   In a brief decision it is arguable the  Judge  did  not  fully
             engage with  section  55  of  the  Boarders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration  Act  2009  and  apply   section   117B   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Although I  give
             permission to appeal the Appellant should not take that as  an
             indication that the decision would be any different.

         6.   Permission to appeal is granted."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms Mac relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  and
    emphasised that both the Appellant's spouse and two children have leave
    to remain  until  25  March  2018.  Indeed  they  now  have  a  further
    application pending. The grounds then reiterate  the  Appellant's  case
    which is, in short, that he should not be denied a private  and  family
    he has with his spouse and two children in the United Kingdom.  Ms  Mac
    was keen to emphasise that the Judge had materially erred by reason of,
    at the date of hearing, the  Appellant's  spouse  and  children  having
    leave to remain.

 5. Mr Tarlow relied upon the Respondent's Rule 24 statement and  contended
    that the Judge had come to a decision  fully  aware  of  the  Appellant
    having both a spouse and two children in the  United  Kingdom  but  was
    entitled to come to the conclusion that he did finding  that  the  best
    interests of the children did not "tip the scales"  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant given his  conduct  and  that  the  Appellant's  partner  and
    children were in the United Kingdom with discretionary  leave  and  not
    indefinite leave to remain. Beyond that the Judge was entitled to  find
    that the Appellant can relocate to Vietnam.

 6. The Judge's findings are to be found at  paragraph  17  to  24  of  his
    decision.  He  reminded  himself  of  appropriate  authority   and   in
    particular  that  of  Razgar  -v-  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27. He balanced the factors on  either  side  of
    the scales before coming to a conclusion that  was  open  to  be  made.
    Whilst there is no direct reference  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  Section  117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  it  is  plain  from  any
    reading of the Judge's decision that the factors therein  that  he  was
    obliged to take into account have been considered.

 7. The grounds are an argument with findings that were open to be made  on
    the totality of the evidence. The Judge  has  adequately  reasoned  his
    decision and come to a conclusion that was open to be made.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set it aside but  order  that
it shall stand.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order in relation to  anonymity  and
I find there is no reason why one should be made today.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 16 March 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard





