
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08540/2018
     HU/08550/2018
     HU/08554/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 3, 2019                             |On April 23, 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MR SATWINDER SINGH
                             MRS RAJWINDER KAUR
                             MR RAMANDEEP SINGH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sawar, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr Cheema


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first and second-named appellants are husband, wife and the third-
    named appellant is their child (born 8/11/1996). They are all nationals
    of India.


 2. In 2002, the first-named appellant entered the United Kingdom
    illegally. The second and third-named appellants were granted entry
    clearance as visitors to the United Kingdom on June 4, 2009. At the
    date of entry, the third named appellant was aged 12 years 5 months of
    age.


 3. On February 5, 2013 the appellants applied for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom, but this was refused without a right of appeal. A
    further application was lodged on March 24, 2014 which was refused
    without a right of appeal but following a consent order in the
    Administrative Court in October 2015 (and a further threat of legal
    proceedings) the respondent reconsidered their applications but refused
    their applications on March 24, 2018.

 4. The appellants appealed these decisions under section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 6, 2018.

 5. Their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal
    on September 12, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on September 25,
    2018, the Judge dismissed their appeals on human rights grounds.

 6. The appellants appealed this decision, out of time, on October 17, 2018
    arguing the Judge had materially erred by blaming the child for his
    parents' poor immigration histories and misdirecting herself in law.

 7. In granting permission to appeal (and extending time) on October 29,
    2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gibb found it arguable the Judge
    had materially erred in her approach.

 8. In a Rule 24 response dated November 27, 2018, the respondent opposed
    the application arguing the main ground of appeal was flawed because at
    the date of hearing the third-named appellant was no longer a child and
    the Judge had considered the third-named appellant's appeal on its own
    merits and had reached findings open to her.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Sawar adopted the grounds of appeal and  submitted  there  were  two
    material errors in law. The first error was that the Judge  blamed  the
    third-named appellant for accessing  education.  At  paragraph  5,  the
    Judge on three occasions blamed or criticised the third-named appellant
    for accessing education. The appellant came into this country  when  he
    was under the age of 13 and there was no evidence it was  his  decision
    to remain here and be educated and the Supreme Court made it  clear  in
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 that  he  should  not  be  blamed  for  a
    decision taken by his parents. The  Rule  24  response  suggested  this
    ground was flawed because  at  the  date  of  hearing  the  third-named
    appellant was an adult but when the child accessed free  education,  he
    was a child.

11. The Judge also failed to follow the guidance in PD and others  (Article
    8-conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108.  Mr  Sawar  had
    argued before the FTT that the Judge should  consider  the  third-named
    appellant's appeal separately (as an adult) but  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider his circumstances distinctly or why it would be  unjustifiably
    harsh for him to return.

12. The second error concerned  the  way  the  Judge  approached  paragraph
    320(7B) HC 395. He had found the third-named  was  technically  not  an
    overstayer and could apply to return to the United Kingdom to  continue
    his studies  at  a  university  in  this  country.  This  approach  was
    incorrect because Section 3C leave could not apply in this case because
    the appellant was an overstayer once his leave expired and  Section  3C
    leave could not keep his presence in this country legal.

13. Mr Howells adopted the Rule 24 response and submitted the Judge had not
    blamed the third-named appellant but had  simply  observed  the  third-
    named appellant had benefited (see paragraphs 35,  38  and  41  of  the
    decision). However,  even  if  the  Judge  did  blame  the  third-named
    appellant he then applied the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  00027
    and found it was proportionate to return all the appellants for  stated
    reasons  and  not  simply  because  of  a  recourse  to  public  funds.
    Specifically, with regard to the  third-named  appellant  he  submitted
    that at paragraphs 35-36 the Judge did consider his position and simply
    posed a number of rhetorical questions.

14. Concerning the second ground,  Mr  Howells  submitted  the  third-named
    appellant came here legally but overstayed and  whilst  the  Judge  may
    have erred when applying paragraph 320(7B) HC 395 he argued  the  Judge
    went onto consider the option of whether it was reasonable for  him  to
    return to India and there was no material error.

15. In response, Mr Sawar maintained the Judge did  blame  the  third-named
    appellant and failed to consider the third-named appellant's own  claim
    and simply posed  rhetorical  questions  in  paragraphs  35-36  of  the
    decision and failed to carry out a proper analysis of  his  claim.  The
    third-named appellant had been in the United Kingdom and whilst he  may
    have overstayed it had not been his decision and he  had  continued  to
    remain here as an adult because he had an appeal pending.

16. There was a difference when considering  the  public  interest  of  the
    third-named appellant to that of his parents and the Judge should  have
    made findings on the public interest in his removal. It was open to the
    Tribunal to find an error on the third-named appellant's  decision  but
    to dismiss the claims of his parents.

    FINDINGS

17. In dismissing the three appeals of the appellants the  Judge  concluded
    the public interest in maintaining immigration  control  justified  the
    removal of each of these appellants. Mr Sawar submitted that the  Judge
    had made  two  crucial  errors  which  amounted  to  an  error  in  law
    particularly insofar as the third-named appellant was concerned.

18. The first-named appellant had entered the country illegally in 2002 and
    by the time his appeal came to be heard by the First-tier  Tribunal  he
    had been residing in this country for around 16 years. The second-named
    appellant had entered the country legally as a visitor in June 2009 but
    thereafter overstayed and by the time her appeal was heard by the First-
    tier Tribunal she had been residing in this  country  for  around  nine
    years.

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded there were no very  significant
    obstacles to their integration into India noting that  they  had  spent
    over 30 years living in India before they arrived in the United Kingdom
    and they were both able to understand how life went  on  in  India  and
    would be able to participate in such a life. The Judge did not find any
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for  the  First  or  Second-named  appellants.  The  Judge
    rejected their claim they  were  not  on  speaking  terms  with  family
    members in India and subsequently,  when  considering  proportionality,
    applied both sections 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002  Act  which  made  it
    clear that little weight should be placed on a private life established
    when a person's immigration status was either unlawful or precarious.

20. The grounds of appeal, advanced by Mr Sawar, did not seek to  challenge
    the Judge's decision to refuse the First  or  Second-named  appellants'
    claims. In fact, Mr Sawar went as  far  to  suggest  that  this  was  a
    situation where the third-named appellant's position could  be  treated
    differently to those of his parents.

21. The outcome of the third-named appellant's appeal  would  not,  on  its
    own, be sufficient  to  enable  the  remaining  appellants  to  succeed
    because at the date of hearing he was an adult  and  was  no  longer  a
    dependent child of his parents.

22. Turning to the third-named appellant's appeal, Mr Sawar argued that the
    Judge had not considered his claim independently and he had been blamed
    for the actions of his parents.

23. The Judge noted at paragraph 22 Mr Sawar's request that the third-named
    appellant's appeal could be treated separately to that of his  parents,
    but it is submitted that although aware of this  submission  the  Judge
    failed to consider this for the third-named appellant.

24. The Judge correctly concluded that at the date of application the third-
    named appellant (and the remaining appellants) could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular he found that  as  the  application
    had been made in March 2014 the  third-named  appellant  had  not  been
    resident in the United Kingdom for seven years and could not  therefore
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395. He could also not  satisfy  the
    eligibility requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

25. The Judge went on to consider the appeal  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and reminded himself that in assessing proportionality  he  would
    have to have regard to sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

26. Mr Sawar argued that the  Judge  had  not  considered  the  third-named
    appellant's claim separately but a  reading  of  the  Judge's  decision
    reveals that is not the case.

27. At paragraph 35 of the Judge's decision, the  Judge  acknowledged  that
    the third-named appellant had integrated  very  well  into  the  United
    Kingdom and had demonstrated outstanding  achievements.  Mr  Sawar  had
    submitted that the reference in paragraph  35  to  him  achieving  free
    education was effectively blaming him  for  his  parent's  choice.  The
    Judge's observation in paragraph 35 was not the Judge blaming the third-
    named appellant but simply stating the obvious. He wished to remain  in
    this country to continue his education,  but  the  Judge  accepted  the
    submission advanced at the  hearing  that  he  had  no  entitlement  to
    continue his education here and  had  taken  no  steps  into  enquiring
    whether he could be issued a visa to study in the United Kingdom.

28. The third-named appellant told the Judge that he wished  to  set  up  a
    business  before  continuing   his   education   and   in   considering
    proportionality the Judge was obliged not only to consider that  as  an
    option but also the option of him doing exactly the same in India.  The
    Judge at paragraph 36 considered the length of time he had resided here
    compared to the time he had resided in India. The Judge made  it  clear
    in paragraph 42 that the third-named appellant "is not to be blamed for
    the conduct of his parents".

29. The argument advanced by Mr Sawar that the appellant was blamed for the
    actions of his parents overlooked the fact that  the  Judge  considered
    the third-named appellant's circumstances and did not reject his  claim
    on the basis of his parent's conduct.

30. The second argument that was advanced concerned the Judge's approach to
    paragraph 320(7B) HC 395. There was some discussion during the  hearing
    over this issue.

31. The third-named appellant came here  legally  but  that  leave  expired
    shortly after his arrival. When he submitted the current application to
    remain on March 24, 2014 he was under the age of 18 but he  would  have
    been an overstayer. My initial view, expressed at the hearing, was that
    section 3C leave could not apply to this appellant and I do not  depart
    from that view.

32. The Judge concluded that at the time  of  his  most  recent  breach  of
    overstaying he was under the age of 18 and having considered Mr Sawar's
    argument (contained in the skeleton argument previously submitted)  and
    the Judge's reasoning I can see why the Judge made such a finding. This
    was never a Section 3C issue because the appellant could not extend any
    leave because he did not have it to extend.

33. However, whichever way the legislation is viewed  it  is  important  to
    look at the Judge's approach to proportionality because it is here that
    the Judge had to assess whether it would be disproportionate to require
    the third-named appellant to leave.

34. The Judge clearly had regard to the educational opportunities available
    to the appellant and in assessing proportionality he took into  account
    Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

35. Paragraph 320(7B) HC 395, if applied to the third-named appellant, does
    not mean this appellant would be prevented from continuing his  studies
    in the United Kingdom for an indefinite period. If he voluntarily  left
    the United Kingdom, at his own expense, he would be entitled to seek re-
    entry within a maximum period of two years. It is  only  where  the  UK
    authorities funded his removal that the period increased to  a  minimum
    of five years and a maximum of 10 years. The Judge placed weight on the
    fact that he had established his private life  whilst  his  immigration
    status was precarious albeit the Judge specifically noted in  paragraph
    42 that he could not be blamed for the conduct of his parents.

36. Even if the Judge had erred in his approach  to  paragraph  320(7B)  HC
    395, which I do  not  find,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  assessing  the
    appellant's case he did have regard to not only the negatives but  also
    the positive aspects of his case and reached a conclusion that it would
    not be disproportionate to require him to leave at the same time as his
    parents.

37. I reject  Mr  Sawar's  submission  that  the  Judge  did  not  consider
    individual aspects of the third-named appellant's appeal  or  that  any
    erroneous approach to paragraph 320(7B) HC 395 materially affected  the
    outcome under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

38. I find there was no error of law and I uphold the original decision.



Signed                              Date     09/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date     09/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
