
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/08054/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 October 2018                      | On 7 November 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                         Grace Ifesinachi Ogbonnaya
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss O Ukachi-Lois (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  5  November  1991.   She
    appeals the decision on 12 July 2017  to  refuse  her  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her private  life
    under Article 8.  The appellant arrived in this country on  18  January
    2001 with an exemption from leave as the child of a diplomat, valid  to
    27 October 2004.  An application to remain as the dependent child of  a
    highly skilled migrant was refused on 19 August 2005.

2.   It is the respondent's case that the appellant left the United  Kingdom
    on 3 June 2005 for Nigeria and returned on 2 August 2006 with leave  as
    a highly skilled migrant dependant valid to 15 July 2008  and  extended
    to 26 June 2012.

3.   The respondent relied on the entry stamps in the  appellant's  passport
    to support the view that the appellant  had  returned  to  Nigeria  and
    remained there between 2005 and 2006.  Further applications  for  leave
    to remain made between 2012 and 2014 were all refused by the  Secretary
    of State and her appeal was dismissed from the  last  of  the  refusals
    following a hearing on 5 May 2015 before First-tier Judge Freer.

4.   The appellant's case is that she had never left the United  Kingdom  as
    the Secretary of State had maintained.  Her appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 8 June 2018.

5.   The judge considered the material relied upon by the appellant to  show
    that she had remained in full-time education  at  a  school  which  had
    since closed down between September 2003 and 31 August  2011  when  the
    appellant had completed her studies.

6.   The judge records in paragraph 9 of his determination that it was  only
    when her application had  been  refused  in  September  2015  that  the
    appellant had learned that the Home Office had believed  that  she  had
    been out of the country between 2005 and August  2006.   Her  case  was
    that she had lived continuously in the United Kingdom from  18  January
    2001.  She had been able to obtain an attendance  record  showing  that
    she had attended from September 2003  until  June  2008  and  had  then
    attended the sixth form until 2011.

7.   The determination in relation to the appellant's case under  the  Rules
    concludes as follows:

         "10. In cross-examination the appellant was taken to her  passport.
             She recalled the American visa, but could not recall returning
             to Nigeria in 2005-2006 because she had  not  gone.   She  had
             first seen the documents a couple of months before the hearing
             and her reaction on seeing them was that they were  not  true.
             It was pointed out that she had  not  expressed  this  in  her
             witness statement.  She confirmed that she had  continued  her
             relationship with her teacher,  Dr  Hartney,  after  she  left
             school.  Dr Hartney had said it was ridiculous to suggest that
             she had not been there throughout.  She had  been  in  contact
             with the headteacher.  She had tried unsuccessfully to contact
             her father in 2015.  Her friend would not be able  to  support
             her in Nigeria.  She had  not  enquired  about  rent  or  work
             there.  She had not attempted to contact her mother or  sister
             in any shape or form.  It had upset them when she made her own
             separate application.  They were  still  living  in  the  same
             place.


         11.  Dr Hartney submitted a  short  witness  statement,  explaining
             that she had met  the  appellant  when  she  taught  religious
             studies at the school.  To  the  best  of  her  knowledge  the
             appellant did not leave the country for a year  from  2005  to
             2006.  She observed that it would be very noticeable  for  any
             student to miss such a significant amount  of  time  in  their
             education.  She added that she might not  be  able  to  attend
             because of her chronic  migraines.   In  the  event,  she  was
             unable to attend and it  was  unfortunate  that  her  evidence
             could not be tested.


         12.  The onus is on the appellant in immigration appeals  to  prove
             his or her case on the balance of  probabilities,  subject  to
             the legal principle that 'he who  asserts  must  prove'  which
             applies where the respondent asserts deception.


         13.  It is difficult to see how  the  two  date  stamps  have  been
             innocently and falsely inserted into the  passport,  but  that
             does not mean that the appellant was necessarily  out  of  the
             country throughout all that period.  The memory of Mrs Hartney
             may be imperfect, but it is difficult to avoid the message  of
             the extract from the register that the appellant  was  present
             during much of the disputed year.  The appellant at  the  time
             was too young to be held responsible for  her  own  movements,
             but she now states  categorically  that  she  never  left  the
             United Kingdom.  She was, however, 23 when she  gave  evidence
             at the joint appeal with her mother and  sister  on  24  April
             2015.  All three of  them  gave  evidence  on  that  occasion,
             having made witness statements.  There is no suggestion of any
             disagreement that they stayed in Nigeria for about a year,  as
             found by the tribunal.  That cannot sit with  the  appellant's
             assertion now that she never left the United Kingdom.  At  the
             time when she left in June 2005 she was without leave.


         14.  In these circumstances I find that the appellant fails to meet
             the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.   There  are  no  bright
             lines  and  I  find  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
             integration back into Nigeria."


8.   The judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds in the light  of
    his findings.  There was an application for permission to  appeal.   In
    granting permission the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that the First-
    tier Judge had been entitled to take into account the evidence given at
    the hearing in April 2015 however subsequent to that appeal  there  had
    been evidence before the judge to suggest that the appellant was in the
    UK during that period which was not referred to by him.  Permission  to
    appeal was accordingly granted.

9.   Counsel submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  all  the
    evidence before him.  She referred to the bundle of material  that  had
    been lodged before the First-tier Judge.  She referred  to  letters  to
    the appellant's parents at pages 22 and 23 of the bundle.  There was an
    attendance record  for  the  appellant  set  out  at  page  E8  of  the
    respondent's bundle - material  referred  to  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    judge's decision.  It was  submitted  that  the  material  relied  upon
    covered the period between the disputed dates.  Reference was made to a
    school census  at  page  14  of  the  appellant's  documents.   It  was
    submitted that  the  appellant's  case  was  supported  by  independent
    evidence. In the determination of First-tier Judge Freer on 5 May  2015
    at paragraph 16 it had been said that the family had lived  in  the  UK
    since 18 January 2001 "with the exception of the period 3 June 2005  to
    2 August 2006".  However the appellant had not known about this and she
    had always been in the UK and had been a minor at  the  material  time.
    Reference was made to the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 but the
    two appeals it was submitted were different.  The appeal  before  Judge
    Freer had been a combined appeal with other members of the family.   Of
    course the stamps in the passport were compelling evidence.

10.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the First-tier Judge had carefully  considered
    the evidence and had noted, for example, that  the  appellant's  school
    had since closed down.  Issues of fact were ultimately for the judge to
    determine and it had been acknowledged  that  the  case  of  Devaseelan
    played a part in the assessment.   The  point  made  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 13 of the decision about the  date  stamps  in  the  passport
    remained valid.  The stamps were powerful evidence that  the  appellant
    was not in the UK at the material time.  The judge  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and there was no material error of law in the
    determination.  In reply Counsel submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    confused findings in referring in paragraph 13 to it being difficult to
    avoid the message of the extract from the register that  the  appellant
    was present during much  of  the  disputed  year.   The  findings  were
    slightly confusing.  It seemed to be accepted that  the  appellant  had
    been in the UK for part of the disputed period.  There was an error  of
    law in the decision.

11.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the decision of the First-tier Judge  if  it
    was flawed in law.

12.  In my  view  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Judge  is  clear  and
    comprehensive.  The judge for example sets out in paragraph  3  a  full
    analysis  of  the  appellant's  attendance  record.    He   notes   the
    difficulties caused by the fact that the appellant's school  had  since
    closed down.  He also makes a reference  in  the  concluding  lines  of
    paragraph 3 to other documents which provided "small  clues"  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom during parts of the challenged
    period.

13.  It was not in my view incumbent on  the  judge  to  list  every  single
    document or piece of evidence before him.   He  took  into  account  in
    paragraph 4 the claim that the appellant had been a minor  between  the
    disputed dates.  He also had in mind the various  character  references
    given to the appellant as is clear from paragraph 6  of  the  decision.
    The judge had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from  the  appellant
    who was subject to cross-examination.  The judge took into account  the
    evidence of a witness statement provided by Dr  Hartney  who  had  been
    unable to attend the hearing.  As is submitted by Mr Tarlow the judge's
    point in relation to the passport stamps was a  telling  one.   It  was
    argued on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    unclear.  In my view the judge did not arguably  misdirect  himself  in
    noting that it was the appellant's case that she  had  never  left  the
    United Kingdom during the disputed period and there is nothing  in  the
    determination to indicate that the judge left  any  significant  matter
    out of account in his deliberations.  As the judge points out while she
    had been a minor during the disputed period she was very much an  adult
    when she gave evidence at the joint hearing  on  24  April  2015.   All
    three parties had given evidence and had made  witness  statements  and
    there was no suggestion as the judge records of any  disagreement  that
    the family had stayed in Nigeria for about a year.

14.  In my view the judge reached his  conclusions  after  a  very  careful,
    fair and balanced evaluation of the facts and  that  there  is  nothing
    unclear about his decision when it is read as a whole. In the light  of
    the judge's findings he did not err in dismissing the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

15.  For the reasons I have given  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    stands and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date:  29 October 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
