
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08182/2017
                                                               HU/08187/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                           |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       mohammad [l] (First Appellant)
                        NARGIS [L] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Iengar, counsel instructed by Aston Bond Law
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants,  referred  to  in  this  decision  as  "A1"  and  "A2",
    nationals of Pakistan, appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decisions,
    dated 23 June 2017,  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  adult  dependent
    relatives of their sons, the Sponsors, in the  United  Kingdom.   Their
    appeals came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  (the
    Judge) who dismissed their appeals on  4  April  2018.   Permission  to
    appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Keki?  on  1  November  2018.
    Essentially the grounds argue that the Judge has failed  to  understand
    and properly apply the evidence before her when  assessing  whether  or
    not the position had got to the stage where they met  the  requirements
    of the Rules, and in particular to the  issue  of  whether  their  care
    needs could be adequately and reasonably met back in  Pakistan.   There
    the issue lay with a wide-ranging number  of  findings  which  led  the
    Judge to the conclusion that their current needs were being adequately,
    could be adequately met, in Pakistan,  and  therefore  they  could  not
    succeed under the Rules.

2.   Mr Lindsay, in a short but pithy argument, essentially  took  me  to  a
    number of paragraphs in a  decision  which  he  said  showed  that  the
    substance of the problem the Appellants face was that their application
    was premature because they were not in the position where  their  needs
    could not be met.  The  medical  evidence  did  not  show  with  cogent
    evidence that those needs could not be met.  Notwithstanding any errors
    of law the Judge may have made the appeals could  never  succeed.   The
    errors, if they are errors, were  not  material  to  the  outcome.   In
    effect, even if one was to set aside the decision on  a  remaking,  the
    same result would be arrived at.

3.   Miss Iengar argued first, in order of presentation, that  documentation
    was produced late in the day by the Presenting Officer, which purported
    to show a number of care homes available in excess of  those  addressed
    by the Sponsors, and therefore there was reason to doubt the Appellants
    assertions about the lack of availability of care back in Pakistan.

4.   If that was the only point, the fact was that it  was  unfortunate  the
    Judge did not address  the  documentation  in  the  decision  and  give
    reasons why that application was refused.  It did not seem to me to  an
    entire answer  that  the  additional  information  was,  as  the  Judge
    expressed it, an academic issue, because quite simply it was  part  and
    parcel of  the  extent  to  which  care  could  be  provided  for  both
    Appellants, bearing in mind their ailments and troubles.

5.   By itself I would conclude that the refusal of an adjournment  of  late
    arising material demonstrated procedural unfairness but it was  only  a
    part of the whole argument. I  did  not  consider  it  would  make  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

6.   Of more importance, and to  a  degree,  troubling,  is  the  extent  to
    which, on the medical evidence which the Judge had in relation  to  A1,
    only partly referred to by the Judge  in  the  decision,  was  able  to
    conclude that A2 was there and able to provide care for A1.

7.   Whilst the Judge referred to pages 146-156 of the medical evidence,  it
    is a noticeable omission in  the  decision  that  the  Judge  makes  no
    apparent reference to page 145 in the Appellants' bundle.  This  was  a
    "To Whom It May Concern"  letter  by  Dr  M  Zafar  Iqbal  Abbasi,  who
    addressed A2's health  and,  amongst  other  things,  stated  that  the
    current prognosis was that A2 needed constant looking after, and due to
    her health, she was unable to carry out her daily routine. This problem
    in turn affected her mentally because she felt  she  was  a  burden  on
    others.  The same letter goes on to note her  falling  into  depression
    and not being able to care for herself and her husband who is suffering
    from critical illness.  The letter  also  noted  A2  needed  care  with
    everything, for example, to be given her medication on time, to  ensure
    she eats a healthy diet, otherwise her sugar levels  went  up  and  she
    becomes hyperglycaemic.

8.     The effects of separation were also commented upon in  terms  of  the
    impact on her and the absence of her sons, the Sponsors', grandsons and
    others.  The omission of any consideration by the Judge  apparently  of
    that evidence is a matter of concern.  It was also of concern that  the
    Judge dealt with A1's mental health issues (AB pages 254 and 255) which
    identified his unfortunate medical problems of dementia, kidney issues,
    lack of mobility and ability to care for himself, which  was  evidently
    on a 24 hour basis, together with the fact that he cannot be left alone
    because of his very short memory processes.

9.   The Judge  made  reference  to  the  doctor's  letter  and  said  this,
    "Although I accept his (A1) conditions, I also note  that  this  letter
    was requested by the family specifically for  these  proceedings".   He
    stated that A1 needs  care  with  his  eating,  dressing,  washing  and
    medication.  The Judge then seemed to  dismiss  the  substance  of  the
    letter which was addressing A1  because  there  was,  what  may  be,  a
    factual error, which the Judge believed the doctor had got wrong.   How
    that error, about whether or not persons were  or  were  not  going  to
    Canada, affected the    reliability  of  the  Doctor's  letter  in  its
    entirety, I do not understand.  It is of particular concern  that  such
    important evidence was so  lightly  dismissed  on  a  basis  completely
    unrelated to A1's health and abilities to care for himself.

10.   I concluded that these matters suggested that  the  Judge  has  simply
    not correctly addressed the evidence as a whole, but rather has  sought
    to divide aspects of it and at least part of the consideration  of  the
    sufficiency of current care arrangements was  on  an  erroneous  basis.
    Mr Lindsay rightly pointed out, the Judge  at  paragraph  32  concluded
    that everything was alright for the time  being  and  the  status  quos
    being maintained.  However, the underlying assumption that A2 can  play
    a significant part in all those other hours of the day,  when  the  two
    helpers who come in are not there, which renders his assessment unsafe.
     Accordingly, I reach the conclusion  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    adequately address the evidence as a whole.  I considered  the  Judge's
    underlying assumption that the current care needs  are  being  met  was
    flawed, as she has expressed herself.

11.  For these reasons, therefore, I find the  decision  cannot  stand,  the
    Original Tribunal's decision will have to be remade.  Given the absence
    of time which is unfortunate, the case has got to be reheard  again  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I hope that the  evidence  will  be  properly
    brought up-to-date, particularly if the Article 8 ECHR issue  is  being
    made, it may be some thought needs to be given to the point,  at  which
    it may be said, that the evidence relating to the Immigration Rules  is
    confined to the date of application on the Immigration  Rules  Appendix
    FM claim, because it may be that it can only be got  in  through  being
    part of the updated Article 8 claim.
DIRECTIONS

    (1)  List for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  at  Newport,  not
         before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Suffield-Thompson  or  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Frankish.


    (2)  No findings of fact to stand.


    (3)  Three witnesses.


    (4)  Time estimate - two hours.


    (5)  No interpreter required.


    (6)  Any further evidence to be served not later than ten working  days
         before the date of the further hearing.


    (7)  Any further arguments relied upon by the parties to  be  submitted
         in writing to the IAC not later than five working days  before  any
         further hearing.


    (8)  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 16 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
