
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08258/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ND
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Caswell, instructed by Reiss Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant ND, was born in 1975 and is a male citizen of
    Pakistan.  He arrived in the United Kingdom as a spouse  in  2003.   In
    February 2004, he was convicted of assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
    harm.  On 10 October 2007, the appellant was convicted of battery  and
    given a community order of eighteen months.  On 15 September 2016,  the
    appellant was  convicted  on  three  counts  of  possession/control  of
    articles for use  in  fraud.   He  was  sentenced  to  sixteen  months'
    imprisonment.  He did not appeal conviction or  sentence.   A  decision
    was taken to deport the appellant to Pakistan.  That decision, dated 25
    July 2017, was the subject of an appeal by the appellant to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  11
    April 2018, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In essence, the grounds challenge the decision on the  basis  that  the
    judge's finding that it would be unduly harsh on the children  for  the
    appellant to be removed from the United Kingdom by way  of  deportation
    is flawed in law.  The Secretary of State argues that the  consequences
    of the deportation for the children would not cross the high  threshold
    of "unduly harsh"; there were discrepancies  regarding  the  children's
    progress at school (whether they were struggling or "doing very well");
    the judge ignored the availability of support groups for the  wife  and
    children in the event of the appellant's deportation;  the  appellant's
    wife's health did not appear to be connected to the anticipation of his
    deportation; the judge paid insufficient regard to the public  interest
    concerned with the appellant's deportation.

 3. Both representatives before the Upper Tribunal agreed that the crux  of
    this appeal lies  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  "unduly  harsh"  as
    provided for in paragraph 399(a) of HC 395 (as amended):

         '399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported.'

 4. The judge's analysis of the evidence is detailed (the decision runs  to
    fifteen pages).  His conclusions as regards the harshness of the impact
    of the deportation of the appellant on the children appears at [93]:

         "However, in this case there are two British citizen  children  who
         have lived in the  United  Kingdom  all  their  lives.   They  have
         extended family here, including a supportive grandmother.  They are
         at significant points in their education and, of course,  have  all
         the benefits which  accrue  from  British  citizenship.   They  had
         visited Pakistan but never lived there.  I find that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for them to leave the UK and to relocate to  Pakistan.
         That  is  not,  of  course,  an  inevitable  consequence   of   the
         deportation of the appellant.  The children could remain in the  UK
         with their mother.   That  would  involve  a  separation  from  the
         appellant.  Would the  consequence  of  the  separation  be  unduly
         harsh?  I find on balance that it would  be.   I  accept  that  the
         appellant is far from being an ideal role model for the children as
         a result of his criminality.  However there is some  evidence  that
         his recent custodial sentence has had a beneficial impact on him as
         evidenced by the reports from prison and the  certificates  he  has
         obtained while serving his sentence.  There is  evidence  including
         from the children's grandmother,  Ms  Logie  and  in  the  form  of
         medical evidence that the  separation  from  the  appellant  had  a
         negative impact upon them.  I find that the children are  genuinely
         attached to the appellant and in the event that he were removed and
         they remained that would have a significantly adverse  impact  upon
         them, particularly with regard to their education."

 5. The question is whether this analysis is adequate  and  the  conclusion
    was properly available to the judge on the evidence.  Mr  McVeety,  for
    the Secretary of State, did not challenge Mr Caswell's submission  that
    the appellant is a  "medium  offender"  and  thereby  entitled  to  the
    protection of exception 2 (Section 117C of the 2002 Act):

         "Exception  2  applies  when  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of C's
         deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

 6. Mr Caswell submitted that [93] of Judge's Turnock's  decision  did  not
    simply represent a brusque disposal of the question of undue  harshness
    but represented the culmination of  a  lengthy  and  detailed  analysis
    which fully justified the conclusion.  He pointed out that at [76]  the
    judge had dealt in detail with a letter provided by Dr Rafaquat.   This
    dealt with the appellant's wife's  depression  as  a  reaction  to  the
    appellant's absence from the family  home  whilst  in  detention.   The
    doctor noted the appellant's wife was in "very low mood" and  that  the
    children had been

         "Very upset, struggling at school, not eating or sleeping well.   O
         is bedwetting every night and is brought frequently to the  doctors
         for headaches and other minor ailments.  He  cries  and  bangs  his
         head against a wall out of frustration.  The Practice has  provided
         support to this family through this very tough time."

    The doctor described the family as "clearly struggling to  cope."   She
    concluded by noting that "if the appellant is unable  to  return  home,
    his family would have serious physical and mental health  issues."   Mr
    Caswell also submitted that the judge at [82]  had  correctly  examined
    the facts in the context of the  public  interest  concerned  with  the
    appellant's deportation.

 7. Mr McVeety, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  agreed  that  the  judge's
    analysis at [93] was the focus of this appeal.  He submitted  that  the
    appellant had chosen to become a criminal knowing the effect that  this
    would have upon his family.  A negative impact  caused  by  deportation
    upon the family did not amount to a consequence which was unduly harsh.
     The judge in this instance had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching his conclusions.

 8. Notwithstanding what the doctor said regarding the  appellant's  wife's
    health, the judge concluded at [92] that the effect of  deportation  of
    the appellant on the wife would not be unduly harsh.  He recorded  that
    the wife would have the opportunity or choice to return to Pakistan  to
    live with the appellant.  That was not a choice which was properly open
    to the British children of the appellant; indeed, Mr  McVeety  did  not
    suggest that it would be reasonable to expect the children to return to
    Pakistan.  Leaving aside  the  question  of  the  appellant's  apparent
    rehabilitation whilst in prison, it is clear that the judge has focused
    in his analysis upon the medical evidence which I  have  quoted  above.
    The judge found that this evidence indicated that the impact  upon  the
    children caused by the deportation would be so "significantly  adverse"
    as to cross the undue harshness threshold.  In my  opinion,  the  judge
    was entitled to reach that conclusion on  the  evidence.   The  medical
    evidence has unequivocally raised the probability of consequences which
    go far beyond the distress which any child would suffer as a result  of
    being separated from a parent.  "Struggling at school,  not  eating  or
    sleeping well", bedwetting, crying and banging  one's  head  against  a
    wall out of frustration contributed to a factual matrix which  led  the
    doctor to conclude  that  a  further  separation  would  have  "serious
    physical and mental health issues" for the children.  I find  that  the
    judge  was  entitled,  on  the  particular  facts,  to  find  that  the
    consequences of the father's deportation upon  the  children  would  be
    unduly harsh.  The Upper Tribunal should  hesitate  before  interfering
    with the nuanced analysis of a First-tier Judge who  has  examined  the
    evidence thoroughly, as I find is the  case  here.   The  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
