
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08997/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 3 July 2020         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 20 July 2020                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MOURAD LOUDJANI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 16 October 2019 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul  ('the  Judge')
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
        on a renewed application on 10 March 2020, the  operative  part  of
        the grant being in the following terms:


        "The appellant's case was based on his long  residency  in  the  UK
        since April 2000.  Given  the  importance  of  this  issue  to  the
        appellant as well  as  the  fact  that  the  appellant  produced  7
        witnesses to support his claim, is arguable that the judge ought to
        have reached a clear conclusion  as  to  the  credibility  of  that
        evidence as well as the length and  continuity  of  the  appellants
        residence and given adequate reasons for the findings that he did."


     3. The appeal was listed for an Initial hearing to  enable  the  Upper
        Tribunal to establish whether the Judge had  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on 4 May 2020. As  a
        result of the  Covid-19  pandemic  that  hearing  was  vacated  and
        directions sent to the parties indicating the Upper Tribunal was of
        the opinion the question of whether the Judge had erred in law  and
        whether any error was material to the decision could be made on the
        papers, inviting a response from the parties  within  a  stipulated
        period.
     4. Both parties have made submissions the appellant's  representatives
        in a letter of 12 May 2020 in which they confirm the appellant  has
        no further submissions to make but requesting the Tribunal "in  the
        interest of justice" to list the matter for  a  telephone  hearing;
        claiming this was the last opportunity for the appellant to address
        his immigration case  that  he  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
        continuously for at least 20 years.
     5. The respondent filed a reply dated 1 June 2020  written  by  Senior
        Home Office Presenting Officer  commenting  upon  the  grounds  and
        confirming  the  Tribunals  provisional  view  that  it   will   be
        appropriate for the matter to be determined without a hearing.
     6. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     7. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     8. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
             to-
             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);
             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.


     9. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers in this case.  The  parties
        were given the opportunity to make submissions as to the method  of
        hearing and to provide any further information they  seek  to  rely
        upon. Nothing on the facts, in law, on the basis of the submissions
        that have been made that makes consideration of the issues  on  the
        papers not in accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.
    10. Accordingly I exercise the discretionary power contained in Rule 34
        to determine the question of whether an error of  law  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal has  been  made  on  the  papers
        without further hearing.



Background


    11. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on the 6 December  1964.
        On 22 February 2019 he made a human rights claim on  the  basis  of
        long residence and private life which was refused on 28 March 2019.
    12. The Judge sets out his findings from  [9]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge. At [11] the Judge records that on  the  appellant's  own
        evidence he made the application before he had completed  20  years
        residence in the United Kingdom and that the only basis on which he
        could succeed under the Immigration Rules will be  in  relation  to
        showing significant obstacles if returned  to  Algeria.  The  Judge
        finds the appellant had not demonstrated this was the case.  Whilst
        accepting that it will be hard under the  circumstances  there  was
        nothing  to  demonstrate  very  significant  obstacles   that   the
        appellant could not overcome.
    13. The Judge went on to consider Article 8 ECHR and  the  question  of
        whether exceptional circumstances had been made out  sufficient  to
        render any interference with the appellant's private  life  in  the
        United Kingdom disproportionate. The Judge  noted  the  appellant's
        claim relating to the period he has been in the United Kingdom  and
        that he had established a close network of  friends  most  of  whom
        appeared to be of Algerian origin.
    14. The Judge notes he was  specifically  invited  by  the  appellant's
        representative to make a finding  in  relation  to  the  period  of
        residence in the United Kingdom but finds at [13]  that  the  claim
        the appellant had never left the United Kingdom  since  he  entered
        was still to be resolved, which is a clear  finding  the  appellant
        had not adduced sufficient evidence to prove  what  he  claimed  in
        this regard was true.
    15. At [14] the Judge finds he is not able to make a  finding  that  it
        had been established to the requisite standard that  the  appellant
        had been in the United Kingdom for 19 years for the reasons set out
        in the decision under challenge. The Judge  then  consider  section
        117B noting the appellant has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully
        which warranted little weight being attached to  his  private  life
        claim. The Judge  thereafter  finds  the  public  interest  is  not
        outweighed by any interference, sufficient to  warrant  the  appeal
        being allowed.
    16. The appellants grounds assert the Judge erred in law on  the  basis
        the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for a very long  time
        and that the Judge was required to make a finding either  that  the
        appellant had lived in the UK continuously for 19 years  from  2000
        in light of the oral evidence he heard or to make a finding that he
        had not lived in the United Kingdom  for  19  years,  in  order  to
        resolve conflict between the  appellant  and  the  respondent.  The
        grounds assert the Judge failed to resolve such conflict.
    17. The grounds also assert the Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
        appellant and 7 witnesses and accepted the appellant had  lived  in
        the UK "for a very long time" but failed to qualify what that  term
        meant. The grounds assert the Judge failed to give reasons  why  he
        accepted the appellant had lived in the country  for  a  very  long
        time but then reverses his decision by finding documentary evidence
        had not been provided therefore finding it could not  be  made  out
        that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for  19  years.
        The grounds assert the Judge failed to take into  account  material
        matters that there was  no  documentary  evidence  available  as  a
        result of which the oral evidence was relied upon.
    18. The appellants grounds  are  set  out  in  further  detail  in  the
        pleadings of 21 February 2020.



Error of law


    19. The grounds fail to establish arguable legal error material to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal.
    20. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  in  support  of
        the findings made. The Judge was aware that he was being  asked  to
        make a specific finding the  appellant  has  lived  in  the  United
        Kingdom for 19 years from the year 2000 but the Judge did not  find
        the appellant had discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to  the
        required standard to show that this was so on the basis of evidence
        on which the Judge was able to attach appropriate weight.
    21. The appellant's assertion that the Judge was  required  to  make  a
        finding that either the appellant had  lived  continuously  in  the
        United Kingdom for 19 years or had not lived in the United  Kingdom
        for 19 years omits the further finding the Judge  was  entitled  to
        make which is that the appellant had not proved that  what  he  was
        claiming was true, i.e. that length of claimed  residence  had  not
        been proved. This is the finding the Judge  made  and  no  arguable
        legal error arises in relation to this point on the evidence.
    22. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
        the basis of long residence but  as  he  had  been  in  the  United
        Kingdom without leave the only basis on which he could succeed  was
        by establishing that he has completed 20 years  and  therefore  met
        the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii) of the Immigration Rules.
        The Judge noted that on the basis of the appellant's  own  evidence
        the application was made for leave before he completed the required
        20 years meaning he could not succeed by establishing  the  minimum
        period of residence required. No arguable legal error is  made  out
        in the Judge so finding.
    23. The Judge therefore correctly notes that whether the appellant  was
        able to succeed under the Rules required the establishment of  very
        significant  obstacles  to  integration   pursuant   to   paragraph
        276ADE(vi) which had not been made out on the evidence. This  is  a
        finding clearly within the range of those available  to  the  Judge
        which  is  supported  by  adequate  reasons.  The  grounds  do  not
        specifically challenge the Judge's finding that no very significant
        obstacles are made out.  Length of  time  in  the  United  Kingdom,
        whatever that may be, is not sufficient to establish the same.
    24. Having concluded the appellant was  unable  to  succeed  under  the
        Immigration Rules  the  Judge  considers  Article  8  ECHR  and  in
        particular section 117B which he was lawfully required to  do.  The
        fact the appellant had remained in the United Kingdom "for  a  long
        period of time" is not a finding that he had lived for 19 years, as
        to some 10 Years may be a long period of time, and  does  not  make
        any interference with private life established disproportionate per
        se. It is not time, but the  nature/quality  of  any  private  life
        established during such time that  is  relevant.  The  Judge  makes
        clear findings accepting that private life had been established but
        it was not made out that the Judge was required to apply  any  more
        weight than he did  to  this  aspect  in  light  of  the  statutory
        provisions.
    25. The respondent in response to the directions refers to a  claim  in
        the appellants grounds that the decision places  the  appellant  in
        the  middle   "limbo"   position   perpetuating   the   appellant's
        unregulated stay in the UK. This is interpreted by  the  author  of
        the respondent's reply as a statement by the appellant that he  has
        no intention of leaving the UK if his appeal is  dismissed  and  is
        disgruntled because he wants to use a positive "19 years in the UK"
        finding for a future application. It is likely there  is  merit  in
        such an interpretation.
    26. Having considered the evidence, the decision, grounds of challenge,
        grant of permission to appeal, and subsequent submissions,  I  find
        that whilst the appellant does not like the decision and wishes  to
        remain in the United Kingdom the grounds fail to establish arguable
        legal  error  material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
        sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in
        this matter. The decision is  wholly  within  the  range  of  those
        reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence.  The  findings  are
        supported by adequate reasons and the weight to  be  given  to  the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge.

Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.

I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 3 July 2020
