
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08894/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 19 November 2018                       |On: 27 November 2018            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 sandra [d]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, instructed by Clapham Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 29  March  2000.  She  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Pacey dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the UK on 14 February 2017 with entry  clearance
      as an EEA family member of [SS], her step-mother, valid  until  9  May
      2017. On 24 April  2017  she  submitted  an  application  for  an  EEA
      residence card as the family member of [SS] but  her  application  was
      refused on 9 October 2017. On 20 November 2017 she applied  for  leave
      to remain on the basis of her family life with her  father  and  step-
      mother.

   3. The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on  27  March  2018.  The
      respondent  considered  that  she  could  not  meet  the   eligibility
      relationship  requirement  in  paragraph  E-LTRC.1.2  to  1.6  because
      neither of her parents had been given leave to remain  under  Appendix
      FM and accordingly she could not meet the requirements of paragraph R-
      LTRC.1.1(d)(iii). The respondent considered further that the appellant
      could not meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of
      private  life  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional   circumstances
      justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration  rules.  The
      respondent noted the appellant's claim to fear return to Ghana on  the
      basis that she was abused by her stepfather there, that her mother did
      nothing to protect her and that she was no one else available to  take
      care of her in Ghana. The respondent considered that the appellant had
      provided no evidence in support of her claim and noted  that  she  had
      stated that she did not wish to claim asylum. It  was  considered,  in
      the absence of evidence to the contrary, that  there  was  nothing  to
      suggest that her welfare would be at risk if she returned to Ghana.

   4. The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  In  her  grounds  she
      submitted that her father had sole responsibility for her and met  the
      requirements of paragraph E-LTRC.1.2 to 1.6, as her  mother  neglected
      her and her father was the person who provided  the  majority  of  her
      financial and emotional support.

   5. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey on
      17 August 2018. The appellant and  her  father,  [GD],  gave  evidence
      before the judge. The judge also had a  letter  from  the  appellant's
      brother in Ghana to the sponsor advising him that the appellant should
      not go back to Ghana as he could not support her, since he was  living
      with a friend following their mother and step-father's departure  from
      Ghana. The evidence before the judge was that the  appellant's  father
      and step-mother had separated, with her  step-mother  leaving  shortly
      after she came to the UK. The appellant had been refused  a  residence
      card as her step-mother refused  to  produce  her  passport,  but  the
      sponsor  had  since  become  a  British  citizen  and  therefore   was
      sponsoring her himself. The appellant claimed to  have  been  sexually
      abused by her step-father in Ghana and her father  therefore  came  to
      Ghana and brought her back to the UK with him. It was  said  that  the
      sponsor had only learned that he  had  a  daughter  when  he  went  on
      holiday to Ghana in 2012 and since then  they  had  kept  in  constant
      touch and he had been supporting her.

   6. On the basis that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
      immigration rules the judge  considered  the  issue  under  Article  8
      outside the rules. The judge did not accept that there were more  than
      the normal emotional ties between the appellant and her father and she
      considered that the appellant's removal was proportionate and did  not
      breach Article 8.  She dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

   7. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
      appellant. The grounds are unclear and poorly drafted, but in  essence
      they assert that the judge's finding, that there was nothing more than
      the normal emotional ties between the appellant and  her  father,  was
      irrational, that the appellant's case was exceptional and it would  be
      disproportionate to remove her and that the judge failed  to  consider
      whether a short period leave should be granted  to  the  appellant  to
      allow her to finish her studies.

   8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 16  October  2018
      on the basis of an arguable failure by the judge to  follow  a  Razgar
      structured assessment of private and family life.

Appeal Hearing

   9. At the hearing the parties made submissions.

  10. Mr Spurling submitted that the judge had failed to take  a  structured
      approach. She failed to make clear findings on whether Article  8  was
      engaged. In so far as she found that there was nothing more  than  the
      normal emotional ties between the appellant and her father, she failed
      to start with the question of whether there was previously family life
      between the appellant and her father when she was a child and  whether
      that was severed when the appellant turned 18.  The  judge  failed  to
      make  a  finding  on  whether  the  appellant's  father   was   solely
      responsible for her and wrongly  relied  on  the  fact  that  she  had
      previously lived with her mother, which was irrelevant to the question
      of sole responsibility. The judge ought to have concluded that Article
      8 was engaged on the basis of family and private life. The judge ought
      then to have considered whether the immigration rules  were  met.  She
      provided no explanation as to why the appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM and failed to consider sole responsibility
      under paragraph 298 of  the  rules.  The  judge's  balancing  exercise
      consisted  of  observations  but  no  findings.  She   made   negative
      observations which were not relevant, such as  the  reference  to  the
      sponsor's relationship with his son, the appellant's relationship with
      her father before 2012, the appellant's English language  ability  and
      the appellant's step-father no longer being in Ghana.  The  judge  did
      not undertake a proper assessment of the public  interest  factors  in
      section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and
      failed to consider those factors in the appellant's favour. There  was
      no proper proportionality balancing exercise and the appellant was not
      able to know how the decision to dismiss her appeal was reached.

  11. Mr Lindsay submitted that the  judge  made  clear  findings  that  the
      appellant's father was not solely responsible for  her  and  therefore
      the requirements of paragraph 298 could not be met. The judge  clearly
      found that Article 8 was  not  engaged  on  family  life  grounds  and
      applied the correct test in so doing. There was nothing irrational  or
      perverse in such a finding. The judge found that there was some degree
      of private life but that was not capable  of  outweighing  the  public
      interest.

  12. Mr  Spurling  reiterated  the  points  previously  made  in  response,
      maintaining that the judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  paragraph
      298(c) and failing to factor  in  relevant  matters  when  considering
      family life. The challenge was not a perversity challenge  but  was  a
      challenge on the grounds of inadequate reasoning.


Consideration and findings

  13. As a starting point I would observe that permission was  not  actually
      granted on the grounds of challenge but on a different basis which  in
      itself is of some concern. In any event the  basis  of  the  grant  of
      permission has not been made out.

  14. Contrary to the assertions made in the grant  of  permission  and  the
      submissions made by Mr Spurling,  the  judge  did  indeed  follow  the
      correct structured approach in a human  rights  appeal.  She  directed
      herself properly at [25], noting that the appeal was on  human  rights
      grounds, but that consideration of the appellant's ability to meet the
      immigration  rules  was  necessary  as  part  of  the  proportionality
      assessment. At [30] she properly observed that an ability to meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules  was  a  weighty  factor  in  an
      appeal based on human rights, but only became relevant  if  Article  8
      was engaged.

  15. Mr Spurling submitted that the judge failed to give  reasons  for  her
      finding at [26] that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
      the immigration rules, but it seems to me that  in  doing  so  he  was
      making submissions on issues which had  not  been  before  the  judge.
      With regard to his submissions on paragraph 298 of the rules, it is of
      note that at no point in the grounds of appeal before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal or in the  grounds
      seeking permission was there any suggestion that the  requirements  of
      paragraph 298 was a relevant consideration or that those  requirements
      could be met. Clearly they could not. The appellant was an  overstayer
      who had never  been  granted  leave  to  enter  or  remain  under  the
      immigration  rules.  She  had  not  made  her  application  under  the
      immigration rules, but had applied for  leave  outside  the  rules  on
      family and private life grounds. Likewise, the appellant clearly could
      not meet the requirements in Appendix FM as a child as she was not the
      child of a parent who had limited leave under Appendix FM. Again,  the
      grounds seeking permission  did  not  include  any  challenge  to  the
      judge's findings in that regard. The grounds were  based  solely  upon
      the judge's findings on Article 8 outside the immigration rules and it
      was on that basis that the appeal proceeded.

  16. The judge, in following the relevant steps in Razgar, considered first
      of all whether Article 8 was engaged. It is asserted that  she  failed
      to make any finding as to whether Article 8 was engaged on family life
      grounds, but it is plain from [33] that she  found  it  was  not.  The
      judge properly observed that there was no bright line at the age of 18
      between a child and an adult but went  on  to  give  reasons  why  she
      considered that the appellant's relationship with her father  did  not
      constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8. She applied  the
      correct test in so doing, as set out in Kugathas v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31. Contrary to Mr  Spurling's
      assertion, the ground of appeal in respect of the judge's findings  in
      that regard was indeed a perversity challenge, as is clear  from  [12]
      and [25] of the grounds, in which it was  asserted  that  the  judge's
      finding was  irrational.  I  agree  with  Mr  Lindsay  that  the  high
      threshold for meeting such a challenge has not been  met  and  in  any
      event it seems to me that the judge's findings  in  that  regard  were
      fully reasoned and were entirely open to her for the reasons given  at
      [33] and [34].

  17. The judge went on  to  consider  proportionality  on  the  basis  that
      Article 8 was engaged. Whilst I have to agree with  Mr  Spurling  that
      the judge did not make the clearest of findings in the paragraphs that
      followed, from [35] onwards, the tenor of her  observations  in  those
      paragraphs was that she did not believe the appellant's account of her
      circumstances in Ghana to be a credible and  genuine  one.  The  judge
      plainly had concerns about the reliability of the appellant's  account
      of her brother's circumstances and his inability  to  accommodate  and
      support her in Ghana and did not believe her claim to  fear  returning
      to Ghana. She plainly rejected the appellant's account  of  the  abuse
      from her step-father and did not  accept  that  that  was  a  credible
      reason for her not  wishing  to  return  there,  particularly  as  her
      evidence was that he had since left Ghana. Whilst the  judge  accepted
      that the appellant had a relationship with her father,  and  that  her
      father had since acquired British  citizenship,  she  provided  cogent
      reasons for concluding that that relationship was  not  of  sufficient
      strength to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  her  removal  as  an
      overstayer, when taken together with the totality of her circumstances
      in the UK and Ghana.

  18. Accordingly, and contrary to Mr Spurling's submissions, the judge  did
      not err in her  approach  to  the  consideration  of  the  appellant's
      Article 8 claim. She followed the correct  steps  in  considering  the
      appellant's claim within and outside the immigration  rules  and  took
      account of all relevant matters in assessing  proportionality.  It  is
      clear why she dismissed the appeal and it is also clear that  she  was
      entitled to dismiss the appeal on the basis that she did.

  19. For all these reasons I find no material errors of law in the  judge's
      decision requiring it to be set aside. I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.






Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  21 November
2018
