
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2019               |On 18 October 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan


                                   Between

                                lalita gurung
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 25 October 1984. She is the
    daughter of a former Gurkha soldier who died in 1994. Her mother  ("the
    sponsor") entered the UK in 2012 as the widow of a  former  Gurkha.  In
    2014 the appellant applied for entry clearance in  order  to  join  the
    sponsor in the UK. The application was refused. Her appeal against that
    decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett (following
    an earlier decision being set aside) in a decision  promulgated  on  26
    April 2016 ("the 2016 decision"). On  3  November  2017  the  appellant
    applied again for entry clearance. This application was refused  on  26
    February 2018. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  where
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Seelhoff ("the
    judge"). In  a  decision  promulgated  on  18  April  2019  ("the  2019
    decision"), the judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  is  now
    appealing against the 2019 decision.

 2. The appellant was unsuccessful before the First-tier Tribunal  in  both
    2016 and 2019 for the same reason, which is that it  was  not  accepted
    that her relationship with the sponsor engaged article 8 ECHR.  In  the
    2019 decision, the  judge  treated  as  his  starting  point  (and  had
    significant regard to) the 2016 decision.



The 2016 decision

 3. In the 2016 decision, Judge Grimmett stated that in order for article 8
    ECHR to be engaged the appellant was required to  show  more  than  the
    usual emotional ties between her and the sponsor.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that there were such ties. He found that there was nothing to
    show any contact between the appellant and sponsor  between  June  2012
    and July 2014; and that there was no  evidence  about  the  appellant's
    life in Nepal or her contact with siblings, or to  show  that  she  was
    emotionally or financially dependent on  the  sponsor.  Judge  Grimmett
    concluded:

         "In the absence of evidence to show any regular contact between the
         appellant and her mother in the last 2 years and in the absence  of
         evidence to  show  that  she  has  been  supported  by  her  mother
         financially or that there are any continuing ties in  the  form  of
         regular  contact  by  letter,   telephone   or   other   means   of
         communication, I was not satisfied that the appellant has shown she
         enjoyed article 8 family life  with  her  mother  at  the  date  of
         decision."



The 2019 decision

 4. In the 2019  decision,  the  judge  directed  himself  that  Devaseelan
    (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka  *  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 would apply in respect of the 2016 decision.  At  paragraph
    23, at the start of the section of the decision headed "findings",  the
    judge stated that he  was  required  to  take  as  his  starting  point
    findings in the previous decision. At paragraph 9, when summarising the
    law, the judge stated that absent good reason to depart  from  them  he
    was bound by the factual findings in the 2016 decision.

 5. At paragraphs 23 - 25, the judge considered  the  appellant's  argument
    that there should be a departure from the findings in the 2016 decision
    because the legal test for determining the  existence  of  family  life
    under article 8(1) ECHR had been clarified by, and the appeal needed to
    be reconsidered in light of, the Court of  Appeal  judgment  in  Rai  v
    Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320.  The  judge
    rejected this argument because he did not accept that the 2016 decision
    was inconsistent with Rai.

 6. Notwithstanding his reliance on Devaseelan, the judge conducted his own
    assessment of whether  family  life  engaging  article  8  existed  (at
    paragraphs 28 - 36). The judge found there was a lack of evidence about
    the appellant and sponsor's financial circumstances (including who paid
    the rent and the source of their income) at the time the sponsor  moved
    to the UK. The judge also found that there was a lack of evidence about
    the appellant's current circumstances and that  the  evidence  did  not
    support the appellant's contention that she and the sponsor  had  daily
    contact.

 7. The judge directed himself at paragraph 30 that the  lack  of  evidence
    concerning financial support was relevant  but  not  determinative.  At
    paragraph 36 the judge concluded:

         "In terms of the evidence that is before me I am not satisfied that
         there is a family life between the  appellant  and  her  mother.  I
         reach this decision because the evidence taken in  the  round  does
         not show that there are emotional ties above and  beyond  what  one
         would expect between an adult parent and their adult  child.  I  do
         not consider the [sic] adequate evidence has been given to  justify
         me departing from the findings of the previous Tribunal  and  I  do
         not consider that the previous  Tribunal's  findings  are  rendered
         unsafe in the way that Mr Jesurum invited me to find  in  light  of
         the case of Rai."



Grounds of appeal

 8. Two grounds of appeal were advanced to challenge the 2019 decision.

          a. The first ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  misapplied
             Devaseelan by treating the findings of the  2016  decision  as
             binding rather than as a starting point and by failing to take
             into consideration the implications of Rai.

          b. The second ground  is  that  the  judge  applied  too  high  a
             threshold when determining whether article 8 was engaged.

 9. I will now consider each of the grounds.



Was Devaseelan misapplied?

10. Devaseelan  is  a  starred  Upper  Tribunal  decision  which  sets  out
    guidelines on procedure in second appeals. The guidelines explain  that
    the first decision stands unchallenged (or not successfully challenged)
    as an assessment of the claim made  at  that  time.  Whilst  the  first
    decision is not binding on the second judge, as an  assessment  of  the
    matters that were before the first judge it should simply  be  regarded
    as unquestioned and it is not the role of the second judge to  consider
    arguments intended to undermine the first judge's decision.

11. At paragraphs 38 - 39 of Devaseelan the Upper Tribunal stated:

         "38.      The  second  Adjudicator  must,  however  be  careful  to
         recognise that the issue before him  is  not  the  issue  that  was
         before the first Adjudicator.  In particular, time has passed;  and
         the situation at the time of the second Adjudicator's determination
         may be shown to be different from that which  obtained  previously.
         Appellants may want to  ask  the  second  Adjudicator  to  consider
         arguments on issues that were not - or could not be - raised before
         the first Adjudicator; or evidence that was not - or could not have
         been - presented to the first Adjudicator.

         39.      In our view  the  second  Adjudicator  should  treat  such
         matters in the following way.

          1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting-point.  It is the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's status at the time  it  was  made.   In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

          2) Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
             can always be taken into account by  the  second  Adjudicator.
             If those facts lead the second Adjudicator to  the  conclusion
             that, at the date of his determination  and  on  the  material
             before him, the appellant makes  his  case,  so  be  it.   The
             previous  decision,  on  the   material   before   the   first
             Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.

          3) Facts happening before the first  Adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always be
             taken into account  by  the  second  Adjudicator.   The  first
             Adjudicator will not have been concerned with such facts,  and
             his determination is not an assessment of them." (Emphasis  in
             original)

12. The grounds of appeal submit that  the  judge  erred  by  treating  the
    findings of the 2016 decision  as  binding  rather  than  merely  as  a
    starting point. In addition, it is argued that the judge erred  by  not
    departing from the findings of  the  2016  decision  because,  firstly,
    circumstances had changed; and, secondly, because the decision  in  Rai
    clarified  that  the  relevant  test  was  whether  the  appellant  was
    supported by the sponsor, not whether she was dependent on her.

13. Mr Moriarty argued that the  decision  in  Rai  emphasised  that  where
    article 8 is being considered in the context of a former Gurkha who has
    suffered an historic injustice, the relevant issue is not  whether  the
    appellant is dependent on, but rather whether she is supported by,  the
    former Gurkha (or in this case, his widow). He maintained that the 2016
    decision could not be relied upon because it predated Rai  and  applied
    the test of dependence rather than support. Ms Everett's  response  was
    that the judge considered whether the findings  in  the  2016  decision
    were still reliable in light of Rai and was entitled to  conclude  that
    they were.

14. I am not persuaded by  this  ground  of  appeal  for  several  reasons.
    Firstly, although the judge referred, at paragraph 9, to being  "bound"
    by the 2016 decision (which would be inconsistent with Devaseelan),  it
    is apparent from reading the decision as a  whole,  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 28 - 36, that the judge did not in  fact  treat  himself  as
    bound by the 2016 decision but rather treated it  as  no  more  than  a
    starting point. This is because, at  paragraphs  28  -  36,  the  judge
    considered for himself, in detail, the evidence concerning family  life
    and reached his own conclusion, based  on  that  evidence,  as  to  the
    existence of family life.

15. Secondly, the judge did not disregard up to date evidence because of  a
    misconception that he was bound by the 2016 decision. On the  contrary,
    as is evident from paragraphs 31 - 33, the  judge  examined  in  detail
    evidence post-dating the 2016 decision.

16. Thirdly, the judge did not err by not treating  the  2016  decision  as
    less authoritative because of Rai. Even if Rai modified the legal  test
    under  article  8(1)  in  the  context  of  Gurkhas,  this  would   not
    invalidate, or make less authoritative, the findings  of  fact  in  the
    2016 decision.  A  change  in  the  legal  test  might  mean  that  the
    conclusions drawn from the facts need to be reconsidered, but it  would
    not undermine  the  authoritativeness  of  factual  findings  based  on
    evidence that was before the previous Tribunal. Moreover,  and  in  any
    event, Mr Moriarty's argument is based on a mistaken premise  that  Rai
    modified the legal principles applicable to determining whether article
    8 is engaged between a former Gurkha and his adult child. But  this  is
    not the case. The Court of Appeal in Rai did not  delineate  a  new  or
    modified test for the engagement of article 8 - it merely confirmed the
    legal position as set out in well-established case law. See Rai at [16]
    where it is stated that the legal principles are not controversial.



Did the First-tier Tribunal  apply  too  high  a  threshold  in  determining
whether the relationship between the appellant and sponsor  engaged  article
8 ECHR?

17. It is clear from Court of Appeal case law that the central question  is
    whether there is real,  committed  or  effective  support  between  the
    sponsor and appellant, and that the  issue  to  be  determined  is  not
    whether there is dependency.

18. Although the judge did not use the term "support", reading the decision
    as a whole, it is apparent that the judge appreciated that "dependency"
    is too high a threshold and  that  a  test  of  exceptionality  is  not
    applicable. This is clear from paragraph 12, where the judge stated:

         "Financial dependency could be an indication of such  ties  but  is
         not necessary for one to find that they exist. In  the  context  of
         the case of Rai in paragraph 36 it is important that  the  tribunal
         not impose any test of exceptionality."

19. The observation at paragraph 11 of the  decision  that  "the  appellant
    needs to demonstrate that the  relationship  is  something  beyond  the
    norm" is consistent with the case law and does not indicate  the  judge
    considered there had to be exceptionality.

20. In any event, as noted in Rai at [34], the absence  of  a  clear  self-
    direction as to the legal principles bearing on whether  article  8  is
    engaged is not fatal. The  question  is  whether  the  principles  were
    applied to the evidence in this case. In my  view,  it  is  plain  from
    reading the decision as a whole that they were.  This  is  not  a  case
    where the judge has found article  8  is  not  engaged  because  of  an
    absence of financial dependency or exceptionality. The judge has looked
    at the evidence in the round and found that there was  nothing  in  the
    evidence, either at the time the sponsor left Nepal  or  subsequent  to
    her doing so, to show anything going beyond the normal  emotional  ties
    expected between a parent and adult child. Although the term  "support"
    has not been used, the findings of the judge are, in effect, that there
    is not real, committed or effective support.



Conclusion

21. I am satisfied that the judge has not  misapplied  Devaseelan  and  has
    applied the correct legal principles in considering whether  article  8
    was engaged. The grounds therefore do not identify a material error  of
    law.



Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and stands.
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |Dated: 16 October 2019             |

