
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons            |
|On 1 March 2021                            |Promulgated:                  |
|                                           |On 09 March 2021              |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               Poonam Shreshta
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Victor Ogunbusola, Counsel, appearing by Direct
Access
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 11 September 2015 to refuse her entry  clearance  as  the  dependant
    adult  child  of  a  former  Gurkha  soldier,  with  reference  to  the
    respondent's policy (Annex K) and the historic injustice. The appellant
    is a citizen of Nepal.

 2. There have been numerous previous decisions on this appeal,  which  has
    now been outstanding for almost 6 years.  The decision under  challenge
    is that of First-tier Judge O'Garro dated 11 November 2019, following a
    hearing on 9 October 2019 at Hatton Cross.

 3. The Upper Tribunal preserved the findings of First-tier Judge  Plumptre
    in the previous appeal hearing that the appellant  had  made  no  false
    statement or representation in her entry clearance application, as  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  alleged.   No  suitability  issue  therefore
    arises.

 4. The following facts are established and  are  sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of Annex K:

    1) The sponsor is a former Gurkha who has been granted settlement under
       the 2009 discretionary arrangements;

    2) At the date of the present application the appellant was still under
       30;

    3) The sponsor and the appellant  are  living  together  in  Nepal,  he
       having returned there after settling in the United Kingdom,  because
       she could not manage alone after her divorce in 2011; and

    4) The appellant  is  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  on  the
       sponsor.

 5. At the hearing today, Ms  Everett  for  the  respondent  accepted  that
    these, and all other requirements of Annex K, were met,  and  that  the
    appeal should be  allowed.   It  is  to  be  hoped  that,  despite  the
    sponsor's ill health (see [8] of the O'Garro decision), entry clearance
    will be swiftly granted and they will both  be  able  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom as intended.

DECISION

 6. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.



    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     1 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



