
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/08566/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2019                       |    On 20 December 2019            |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MR JUSTICE PEPPERALL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          mr tafadzwa jason chikove
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs P Chiguri of IPS Legal LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands who allowed the appeal of Mr Chikove
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. For the purposes of this decision,  we  refer  to  Mr  Chikove  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as  the
    respondent, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.




    Background

 3. Mr Chikove is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 3 February 1998.  He  came
    to the UK on 15 July 2002 at the age of 4 with his aunt and was granted
    leave to enter as a visitor until 14 August 2002.  On  14  August  2002
    his mother applied for leave as a student with  the  appellant  as  her
    dependant.  On 8 October 2002 the appellant and his mother were granted
    leave to remain until  31  January  2003.   On  13  February  2004  the
    appellant was granted further leave on the same basis until  31  August
    2012.  On 28 August 2012 the appellant's mother applied for  indefinite
    leave to remain (ILR) as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen  with  the
    appellant as her dependant.  On  10  January  2013  the  appellant  was
    granted ILR.

 4. The appellant has an extensive criminal history. Between  27  May  2015
    and 1 June 2018 he amassed eleven  convictions  for  eighteen  offences
    namely: theft - shoplifting, burglary with  intent  to  steal,  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, being drunk and disorderly, failing  to
    surrender to custody at an appointed  time,  assault  on  a  constable,
    travelling beyond the distance for which rail fare was paid, failure to
    comply with the requirements of a  community  order  and  resisting  or
    obstructing a constable.

 5. The appellant received sentences  comprising  various  fines  and  some
    periods  of  imprisonment  for  those   offences.    The   periods   of
    imprisonment were  as  follows.  On  1  June  2018  the  appellant  was
    convicted  of  assault,  resisting  arrest  and  two  counts  of  theft
    (shoplifting), and was sentenced to a total of three months' detention.
     On 8 August 2018 he  was  convicted  of  using  threatening,  abusive,
    insulting words or behaviour with intent to cause fear  or  provocation
    of violence, using threatening  abusive  insulting  words/behaviour  or
    disorderly behaviour to cause harassment/alarm  and  battery.   He  was
    sentenced to twelve weeks' detention in a Young Offenders' Institution,
    suspended for twelve months.

 6. As a result of these offences the respondent concluded in the  decision
    dated 15 February 2019 that the appellant was a persistent offender and
    that his deportation was conducive to the  public  good  under  Section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

    First-tier Tribunal Decision

 7. The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands at a hearing on 7 August
    2019.

 8.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  found  that   the   appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh for his son, O,  a  British  citizen,
    who was born on  [          ]  2018,  concluding  that  the  provisions
    contained in paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules  were  met  such
    that the appeal was allowed.

 9. The  parties  were  in  agreement  that  the  correct  approach  to  an
    assessment of undue harshness was that set out by the Supreme Court  in
    the case of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53. Lord Carnwath indicates in paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria)
    that:

         "... the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under
         Section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of  foreign  criminals.   Further,  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is the level which may be acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         Section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child facing  the
         deportation of a parent."

10. In paragraph 27  of  KO  (Nigeria),  the  Supreme  Court  approved  the
    comments of the Upper Tribunal on the meaning of "unduly harsh" in  the
    case of MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) which stated:

         "... unduly harsh does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a  considerably
         more  elevated  threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this   context,   denotes
         something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis  of  pleasant  or
         comfortable.  Furthermore, the additional adverb "unduly" raises an
         already elevated standard still higher."

11. The evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  about  the  relationship
    between the appellant and O was that although he did not live with  him
    and his mother he saw him "at least once a week"  and  was  "an  active
    father"; see paragraph 12.  The judge found in paragraph  23  that  "He
    sees the child on a regular basis and plays as much an active  part  in
    his upbringing as possible". He set out his conclusion in paragraph  27
    as follows:

         "27.     ...   The only other issue then  is  whether  it  will  be
             unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the  UK  without  the
             person who is to be deported i.e. the Appellant.  Most  people
             would agree that a child should have  the  opportunity  to  be
             brought up with both parents, that is not to say  that  single
             parents are not capable of bringing up their children  but  it
             is not the child's fault, in  this  case,  that  it  might  be
             deprived of the opportunity to be brought up in the company of
             its father.  I accept that the Appellant  has  committed  some
             terrible crimes including assaults on a police officers  (sic)
             which are not to be minimised whatsoever but it  seems  to  me
             that if it was possible for a child to be brought up with both
             its parents even if they are not living together then it would
             be wrong for the child to be deprived of that opportunity.   I
             have to take into account the welfare of the child as required
             by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
             2009 and in those circumstances I have reached the  conclusion
             that, in this particular case and on the particular  facts  of
             this case it would be unduly harsh for [O] to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom without his father  even  though  he  would  be
             properly brought up by his mother."

    Respondent's Grounds and Appellant's Response

12. The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the decision of
    Judge Rowlands by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated 9 October
    2019.

13.  The  respondent's  written  grounds  maintained  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not set out rational reasons for finding that O would face
    undue hardship if the appellant was deported. The  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge acknowledged in paragraph 27 of the decision that the child would
    be "properly brought up by his mother"  notwithstanding  the  appellant
    being deported.  Although it might be preferable  for  a  child  to  be
    brought up by both parents, O being brought up only by his  mother  was
    not a factor capable of meeting  the  high  threshold  required  for  a
    finding of undue harshness.  At the hearing Ms Everett also  maintained
    that nothing in the material before the First-tier Tribunal permitted a
    finding of undue harshness for O if the appellant were to  be  deported
    to Zimbabwe.

14. The appellant's Rule 24 response argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had not erred in finding that deportation would leave O in unduly harsh
    circumstances, particularly given his very young age. At  the  hearing,
    Mrs Chiguri maintained that there was material  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal permitting the decision on undue harshness. Paragraph 23 of KO
    (Nigeria) set out that the unduly harsh test did not require  there  to
    be "very compelling reasons".  Mrs Chiguri submitted that the difficult
    circumstances the appellant would face in Zimbabwe meant that he  would
    be unable to provide support to his son either by  way  of  contact  or
    finance  and  that  his  role  as  a  father  would  be   significantly
    diminished.  Also,  the  appellant  was  on  antidepressants  and   had
    experienced a panic attack that had required hospital treatment.  If he
    were returned to Zimbabwe his physical condition would also impair  his
    ability to develop and maintain a parental relationship with the child.
     These matters would prevent him from forming a  proper  parental  bond
    with O who was still only just over a year old and this  would  have  a
    significant impact on the child, reliance being placed on Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ  1213  for
    this submission.

    Decision on Error of Law

15. Our conclusion was that, first, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    disclosed an error on a point of law as it did not provide  a  rational
    basis for finding that the high threshold of unduly harsh circumstances
    was met. The undesirability of O growing up without his father was  the
    only reason given by Judge Rowlands in paragraph 27 of the decision for
    the finding that he would face unduly harsh circumstances. As  set  out
    in  paragraph  10  above,  KO  (Nigeria)  indicates  specifically  that
    something that is merely undesirable cannot meet the elevated threshold
    of undue harshness. The difficulties O will face growing up without his
    father are circumstances that "would necessarily be  involved  for  any
    child facing the deportation of a parent."

16. Secondly, we did not accept that the factors highlighted by Mrs Chiguri
    in her oral submissions on the appellant's difficult  circumstances  in
    Zimbabwe reducing his ability to develop and  maintain  a  relationship
    with O were matters capable of leading to  unduly  harsh  circumstances
    for the child. A child having a very limited (or no) relationship  with
    a parent who has been deported is a  very  sad  but  entirely  expected
    consequence of deportation. The First-tier Tribunal found that O  would
    still be brought up "properly" by his mother. We did not find that  the
    case of PG (Jamaica) was authority for the submission that  deportation
    would lead to unduly harsh circumstances for O because he had  not  yet
    been able to form a meaningful  bond  with  his  father.  PG  (Jamaica)
    indicates that a father who has lived with teenage children for all  of
    their lives with strong bonds having been formed was a  weighty  factor
    (see, for example, paragraph 39) but makes no comment on the separation
    of a very young child from a parent. We found the submission  that  the
    appellant being absent for O's formative years would  necessarily  give
    rise to unduly harsh circumstances was, at best, speculative.

17. For these reasons, it was our conclusion that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law and had  to  be  set
    aside to be remade.

18. The parties were in agreement that  we  could  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the materials before us  and  the  submissions
    made by the representatives. For essentially the same reasons  that  we
    have set out in our error of law decision, in our judgment the evidence
    relied upon by the appellant here is  not  capable  of  showing  unduly
    harsh circumstances for O in the event of the appellant's  deportation.
    We reach that conclusion having taken into account at their highest the
    points  made  by  Mrs  Chiguri  concerning  the   appellant's   limited
    circumstances on return to Zimbabwe and O's young age. It remained  our
    view  that  a  significantly  reduced  relationship  with  O  was   not
    sufficient to take his circumstances beyond, at best, harshness in  the
    event of the appellant's deportation and  did  not  approach  the  high
    threshold of undue harshness required under paragraph 399(a).

19. It was also our view that there is nothing  further  in  the  materials
    here that could show very compelling circumstances over and  above  the
    factors already provided for in paragraphs 399(a) and paragraph 399A of
    the Immigration Rules. We have set out above why  paragraph  399(a)  is
    clearly not met. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant  had
    relatives in Zimbabwe who could offer some support on return  and  that
    he would not face very significant obstacles to reintegration.  He  was
    not found to meet paragraph 399A notwithstanding his  lawful  residence
    since the age of 4  years'  old  therefore.  Those  findings  were  not
    challenged before us. We were not taken  to  any  further  evidence  or
    factors beyond those provided for  under  the  Immigration  Rules  that
    could outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.  We  reached  that
    conclusion mindful of the appellant's length of residence  in  the  UK,
    his circumstances in Zimbabwe on return and the  sadness  and  hardship
    that his deportation will cause for him, his son  and  his  family  who
    remain in the UK. It remains our conclusion  that  there  are  no  very
    compelling circumstances here and  that  the  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant is a proportionate one.

20. For all of those reasons, we found that the  appellant  had  not  shown
    that the decision to deport him would breach his rights under Article 8
    ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and was set aside, in part, to be remade.

The appeal under Article 8 ECHR is refused.

Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 6 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
