

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: hu/08405/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2018                           |On 3 May 2018                     |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                MISS UME AMAN
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen   (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal")  which  it  sent  to
the parties on 3 May 2017, whereupon it dismissed  her  appeal  against  a
decision of an entry clearance officer refusing to grant her leave to  enter
the  United Kingdom  with  a  view  to  settlement.   In  a  decision   of
12 February 2018 I set aside the tribunal's decision.  Put simply, that is
because I had concluded that it had erred in  law  through  failing  to  ask
itself  whether  the  claimant  was  able  to  bring  herself   within   the
requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules prior  to  deciding  she  was
not able to succeed under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (ECHR) on family life  grounds.   I  accepted  a  submission  to  the
effect that in order to properly and fully consider the Article 8  argument
it was necessary for the tribunal to,  first  of  all,  decide  whether  the
requirements of the rules were  met  because,  if  they  were,  that  would,
whilst not being determinative of itself, inform the Article 8  assessment.


2.    By way of  background,  the  circumstances  as  told  to  me,  are  as
follows:  The claimant was born on 30 April 2002  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.  Given her age it is right to say that,  at  all  material  times,
she has been a minor.  Her mother who is also her  sponsor  is  present  and
settled in the United Kingdom and is married to a British citizen.  That is
the sponsor's second marriage.  Her first  husband,  whose  whereabouts  she
says she does not know, is the father of the claimant.   That  marriage  was
dissolved and the sponsor and her  second  husband  married  in  2010.   The
sponsor  applied,  successfully,  to  join  her  second   husband   in   the
United Kingdom but no application was made on behalf  of  the  claimant  at
that time.  Indeed the claimant was, it is  said,  looked  after,  once  the
sponsor had left Pakistan, by the sponsor's mother and father.  It  is  said
that the  claimant's  father  (the  sponsor's  first  husband)  has  had  no
involvement in her upbringing and has not  shown  any  interest  in  playing
such a role.

3.    Eventually, an application for entry clearance was made on  behalf  of
the claimant.  However, that was refused by the entry clearance  officer  on
12 September 2015 because it was thought that it had not been  shown  that
the sponsor had sole responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing  nor  had
it been shown (as an alternative under the  Immigration Rules)  that  there
were  serious  and  compelling  circumstances  which  would  result  in  the
exclusion of the claimant from the United Kingdom being undesirable.  Those
requirements are  contained  within  paragraph 297(1)(e)  and  (f)  of  the
Immigration Rules.

4.      It   was   the   claimant's   appeal   against   the   decision   of
12 September 2015 which led to the appeal to the tribunal which, as already
stated, was unsuccessful albeit that  that  decision  of  the  tribunal  has
since been set aside.

5.    My having set aside  the  tribunal's  decision  there  was  a  hearing
before me to enable the  decision  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper Tribunal.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative.  I heard oral evidence from the sponsor and  also  from
her current husband Mr Jason Zahoor Ahmed.

6.     Putting  together  her  witness  statements  of  30 March 2017  and
5 April 2018, along with her oral evidence to me, the  sponsor's  evidence
may be summarised as follows:  the sponsor's full name is  Raffeeda Zahoor.
She   has   obtained   British   nationality.    She    has    obtained    a
Guardianship Order  in  relation  to  the  claimant  in   Pakistan.    Her
application for that Order had not been contested and, whilst she  does  not
know the whereabouts of her  first  husband,  her  lawyer  in  Pakistan  had
managed to serve some papers upon him and he  had,  in  response,  expressed
disinterest in the  proceedings.   The  sponsor  regularly  sends  money  to
Pakistan for the  benefit  of  the  claimant.   The  sponsor's  parents  are
elderly and infirm.  Her father is blind  and  has  a  heart  problem.   Her
mother has arthritis and high blood pressure.   The  claimant  had  obtained
her  "spouse  visa"  in  2010.   She  had  wanted  to  settle  down  in  the
United Kingdom first prior to trying to bring the claimant here.   She  had
obtained her grant of indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom some
three years after her arrival.  She and her second husband had spoken  about
matters at the time of the marriage  or  before  and  had  agreed  that  the
claimant would come to the UK later.

7.    The sponsor had chosen the school the claimant would  attend  and  the
Mosque she would attend  but  those  decisions  had  been  made  whilst  the
sponsor was still living in Pakistan.  The sponsor had advised the  claimant
as  to  what  subjects  she  should  choose  to  study  at  school  and,  in
particular, had told her that physics and chemistry would be  good  subjects
to study.  That was after the sponsor had come  to  live  in  the  UK.   The
sponsor has returned to Pakistan for a  visit  only  once.  She  thought  it
would be better to spend any spare money  on  the  claimant's  education  in
Pakistan rather than on the  financing  of  visits.   The  sponsor  and  her
second husband have two children of their own who are in the UK.

8.    Putting together witness statements and oral  evidence,  Jason  Zahoor
Ahmed's evidence may be summarised as follows:  there had been a  discussion
between him and the sponsor regarding the claimant, around the time the  two
had married.  The couple had  wanted  to  establish  themselves  in  the  UK
before sponsoring her. They send money for the benefit of the claimant.   He
had been employed  as  a  warehouse  worker  in  2010.   He  had  been  made
redundant in 2011.  He had found work again after  a  period  of  about  six
months.

9.    After hearing the evidence I received oral submissions  from  the  two
representatives.  Mrs Pattersen pointed out  that  the  appeal  could  only
succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR because the  right  of  appeal  was  on
human rights grounds only.  However, I do  not  think  she  was  seeking  to
argue that the question of compliance with the Immigration Rules was not  a
relevant consideration.  Whilst there is evidence of monies  being  sent  to
Pakistan it is entirely possible that those  funds  were  intended  for  the
benefit of others instead of or in addition to the claimant.  Whilst  it  is
said that the grandparents are not now sufficiently well to look  after  the
claimant she is no longer of an  age  where  she  would  require  very  much
looking after.  The evidence that the sponsor takes decisions in respect  of
the claimant's upbringing is sparse.  So, it has not  been  shown  that  the
claimant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  So,  the  appeal
should fail under article 8. Mr Hussain, for the claimant, argued that  the
requirements of rule 295(e) and (f) were both met though only one of  those
has to be satisfied for the claimant to succeed.  There was good reason  why
entry clearance had not been sought in  respect  of  the  claimant  earlier.
The sponsor and her second husband had had two children  since  the  sponsor
came to the UK and her husband had been  unemployed  for  a  period.   Their
evidence as to relevant matters is clear and consistent.

10.   As I indicated to the parties at  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I  have
concluded that this appeal should succeed.  That is for the reasons which  I
now set out below.

11.   I had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence from  the  sponsor.   I
have decided that, to a balance of probabilities, I am able to  accept  that
evidence as being truthful.  That is because, in general terms, I found  her
evidence to be straightforward.  She sought to answer the questions  put  to
her before me as directly  as  she  could.   She  was  not,  in  any  sense,
evasive.  Her oral evidence is, to my  mind,  consistent  with  the  written
evidence which she has  given  in  the  two  witness  statements  which  she
adopted.

12.   As to possible difficulties with her evidence, it was  suggested  that
it seemed odd that whilst she asserts she  knows  nothing  about  her  first
husband's whereabouts, he was apparently served with court  papers  relating
to the application for the Guardianship Order.  However, it may well be the
case that the lawyer whom she had instructed had been able to take steps  to
trace the sponsor's first husband for the purpose of serving documents  even
if the sponsor herself remains ignorant of his whereabouts.   So  I  do  not
regard that  as  a  matter  which  causes  any  substantial  damage  to  her
credibility.   A  point  arose  about  the  school  the  claimant  had  been
attending.  The sponsor's evidence was  to  the  effect  that  the  claimant
attends the Grand Knowledge  Girls  High  School  prior  to  the  sponsor's
departure from Pakistan and had  not  attended  any  other  school  at  all.
Whilst there was documentary evidence to show that she was indeed  attending
that school there was also documentary  evidence  suggesting  that  she  had
attended a school of a different name at  an  earlier  stage.  However,  the
matter was not put to the  sponsor  in  cross-examination  so  she  was  not
afforded the opportunity to explain. Further and in any  event,  it  may  be
that she regarded the two schools as being the  same  perhaps  because  they
might be located within the same grounds or might be linked  to  each  other
in some way.  I am not speculating here I am merely  seeking  to  illustrate
that explanations for the  apparent  inconsistency  are  possible.   I  have
decided that this is not a  matter  which  offsets  the  various  favourable
points I have identified with respect to the sponsor's credibility.   So,  I
have concluded that I am able to  accept  the  sponsor's  written  and  oral
evidence as being truthful.

13.   As to the evidence of Jason Zahoor Ahmed, it is fair to  say  that  he
found the process of giving  evidence  obviously  difficult.   That  may  be
attributable to extreme nervousness or  to  other  characteristics  of  his.
But I did not form the view that his quite long silences before  being  able
to answer questions was an attempt to be evasive.  He presented  as  a  very
straightforward individual who would not  have  been  obviously  capable  of
seeking to mislead a tribunal.  Further, the evidence he  did  give  at  the
hearing was consistent with his  written  evidence.   In  short,  I  see  no
reason at all to disbelieve him.

14.   So it is necessary for me to consider where my favourable  credibility
assessments leave matters.  I accept  that  the  sponsor  has  been  sending
money along with her second husband and that that money is for  the  benefit
of  the  claimant.   Indeed  it  is  entirely  plausible   that   a   mother
geographically separated from her child would wish to send  money  for  that
child's benefit if in a position to do so.  I  accept  that  the  claimant's
father has not played a role in her upbringing at all.  I  accept  that  the
sponsor, in contrast, has continued to play a  role  in  her  upbringing  by
maintaining contact with her and by involving herself in decisions taken  in
relation to the child.  I accept, for example, that  the  sponsor  played  a
significant role in the claimant's  choice  of  subjects  to  study  at  the
school she has been attending.  It is right to say that the sponsor was  not
able to give any additional specific examples of decisions she had taken  or
participated in taking in relation to the claimant since coming to  the  UK.
However, that may simply be because there has not  been  a  requirement  for
many major decisions to be made.

15.   Putting everything together then I conclude that  the  claimant  meets
the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) of  the  Immigration Rules  because
the sponsor has had sole responsibility for her upbringing.   The  Secretary
of State has never placed the maintenance or accommodation  requirements  in
issue.  I am able to conclude, therefore, that  the  claimant  does  satisfy
the Rules she is required to satisfy.  Mrs Pettersen did not  argue  before
me that in such circumstances the  appeal,  which  has  been  brought  under
Article 8 of the ECHR, should not succeed.  I conclude that it does succeed
under Article 8.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision I allow the claimant's  appeal  against  the  entry
clearance officer's decision of 12 September 2015 refusing  to  grant  her
entry clearance.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                Dated: 2 May 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE ORDER

I make no fee order in this case.



Signed:                Dated:  2 May 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

