
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08861/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 29 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               MOURAD HENNICHE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms F. Shaw, instructed by Kamberley Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 10  March  2016
      to refuse a human  rights  claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke
      allowed the appeal in a decision dated 11 January 2018.  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Taylor set aside the decision because it  involved  the
      making of an error of law on 19 July 2018. The appeal was listed for a
      further hearing for the decision to be remade.

2.     I  am  conscious  of  the  delay  in  promulgating   this   decision.
      Unfortunately, it has taken longer than usual to prepare  due  to  the
      complexity of some of the issues, the nature of the evidence  and  the
      pressure of other work.

Background

3.    The appellant is an Algerian citizen who entered the UK in  July  2000
      with leave to enter as a visitor. He remained in the UK after his visa
      expired in the full knowledge that he did not have  permission  to  do
      so. He says that he lived with his brother from 2000 to 2008.  He  now
      lives with friends, but his brother  continues  to  provide  financial
      support.

4.    In 2003 he was diagnosed with coeliac disease. On  21  March  2013  he
      was served with a notice of liability to  removal  (IS  151A).  On  12
      August 2013 the appellant was refused leave to remain without a  right
      of appeal.

5.    The appellant made an application for leave to remain on human  rights
      grounds on 27 November 2015. The respondent refused the application on
      10 March 2016. The appellant did not meet the requirement of 20 years'
      long residence  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  immigration
      rules. There were no 'very significant obstacles' to  his  integration
      in  Algeria  so  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi).  The  respondent  considered  whether  the  appellant's
      medical condition constituted  exceptional  circumstances  that  might
      justify a grant of  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  but
      concluded that it did not. The evidence indicated that  treatment  was
      likely to be available in Algeria.

Legal framework

6.    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human rights provides that  no
      one shall be subject to torture, inhuman and degrading  treatment.  In
      cases where the sole reason why the person asserts that they  will  be
      subjected to such treatment if removed from the UK  is  a  medical  or
      psychiatric condition a person  must  show  a  very  exceptional  case
      featuring compelling humanitarian circumstances before  their  removal
      would breach Article 3: see N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and N v UK  (2008)
      47 EHRR 39. The courts have concluded that there is  no  medical  care
      obligation on signatory states to the European  Convention  even  when
      removal might significantly shorten a person's life expectancy due  to
      less adequate medical care in their country of origin.

7.    The more recent  decision  of  the  European  Court  in  Paposhvili  v
      Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 found that the principles were not  confined
      solely to deathbed cases. The 'other very exceptional cases'  referred
      to in N v UK: "should be understood to refer to  situations  involving
      the removal of a seriously ill person  in  which  substantial  grounds
      have been shown for believing that he or she, although not at imminent
      risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of  the  absence  of
      appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack  of  access
      to  such  treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid   and
      irreversible decline in his  or  her  state  of  health  resulting  in
      intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy."

8.    In AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64  and  MM  (Malawi)  v  SSHD
      [2018] EWCA Civ 2482 the Court of Appeal observed that  if  there  was
      some relaxation of the test it was "only to a very modest extent". The
      decision of the House of Lords in N v  SSHD  was  still  binding.  The
      Article 3 threshold in medical cases remained high.

9.    Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right  to  'physical
      and moral integrity', which can include a person's health: see Bensaid
      v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10. Unlike Article 3, Article 8 is not an absolute
      right. In the absence of any  additional  factors  that  might  engage
      Article 8 the threshold for showing a breach of Article  8  solely  on
      medical grounds is equally high: see GS (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
      40 and MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279. The Court  of  Appeal
      in SL (St Lucia) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1894  concluded  that  the
      decision in Paposhvili did not affect this principle.

         "27.     ... I am entirely  unpersuaded  that  Paposhvili  has  any
             impact on  the  approach  to  article  8  claims.  As  I  have
             described, it concerns the threshold of severity for article 3
             claims; and,  at  least  to  an  extent,  as  accepted  in  AM
             (Zimbabwe), it appears to have altered the European  test  for
             such threshold. However,  there  is  no  reason  in  logic  or
             practice  why  that  should  affect  the  threshold  for,   or
             otherwise the approach to,  article  8  claims  in  which  the
             relevant  individual  has  a  medical  condition.  As  I  have
             indicated and as GS (India) emphasises, article 8 claims  have
             a different  focus  and  are  based  upon  entirely  different
             criteria. In particular, article  8  is  not  article  3  with
             merely a lower threshold: it does not  provide  some  sort  of
             safety net where a medical case fails to satisfy the article 3
             criteria. An absence of medical treatment in  the  country  of
             return will not in itself engage article 8. The only relevance
             to article 8 of such an absence  will  be  where  that  is  an
             additional factor in the  balance  with  other  factors  which
             themselves engage article 8 (see (MM (Zimbabwe)  at  [23]  per
             Sales LJ). Where an individual has  a  medical  condition  for
             which he has the benefit of treatment  in  this  country,  but
             such treatment may not be available in the country to which he
             may be removed, where (as here) article 3 is not engaged, then
             the position is as it was before  Paposhvili,  i.e.  the  fact
             that a  person  is  receiving  treatment  here  which  is  not
             available in the country of return may  be  a  factor  in  the
             proportionality balancing exercise but that factor  cannot  by
             itself give rise to a breach of article 8. Indeed, it has been
             said that, in striking that balance, only the most  compelling
             humanitarian  considerations  are  likely  to   prevail   over
             legitimate aims of immigration control (see Razgar at [59] per
             Baroness Hale).


         28.      Therefore, in my firm view, the approach  set  out  in  MM
             (Zimbabwe) and GS (India) is unaltered by Paposhvili;  and  is
             still  appropriate.  I  do  not  consider  the   contrary   is
             arguable."

10.   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules is  said  to  reflect
      the respondent's position as to where a fair balance should be  struck
      for the purpose of assessing a person's private life under Article  8.
      At the date of the respondent's decision the requirements were:

           "276ADE (1). The requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:


           (i)   does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                 Section S-LTR 1.1  to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-
                 LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and


           (ii)  has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
                 grounds of private life in the UK; and


           ...


           (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
                 has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
                 very significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration
                 into the country to which he would have to go

11.   In Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the Court  of  Appeal  considered
      the test set out in section 117C(4)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). Although the assessment related  to
      a somewhat different test, which applies  in  deportation  cases,  the
      wording 'very significant obstacles' to integration forms part of  the
      test and is equally applicable to a proper interpretation of paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi).

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
             'integration' into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the  mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration'  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

12.   Although both parties referred to the decision in  AS  v  SSHD  [2018]
      EWCA Civ 1284, the case does not develop the principles much  further.
      Although a psychological report formed part of the evidence before the
      Tribunal in that case, it does not appear that the  case  for  arguing
      that there were 'very significant obstacles'  to  integration  in  the
      context  of  deportation  proceedings  was  put  squarely  on  medical
      grounds. Nevertheless, I accept that it  is  trite  law  that  medical
      issues are capable of being relevant to an assessment under Article 8.



13.   The final case I was referred to was Parveen v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
      932, which was decided in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The
      court emphasised:

         "9.      The task of the Secretary of State, or  the  Tribunal,  in
             any  given  case  is  simply  to  assess  the   obstacles   to
             integration relied on, whether characterised  as  hardship  or
             difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they regard
             them as "very significant"."

Decision and reasons

14.   The appellant is a 52-year-old man who had  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
      period of nearly 19 years at the date of the hearing. Save for  a  few
      months when he  first  arrived  in  the  UK  the  appellant  knowingly
      remained without leave. In evidence at the hearing he said that he did
      not enter the UK with the intention of receiving medical treatment.  I
      accept that this is likely to be the case because the  evidence  shows
      that he was not diagnosed with coeliac disease until 2003. However, it
      does mean that he did not intend to return home  at  the  end  of  the
      visit because he overstayed for some time before the  diagnosis.  Save
      for three sessions of private treatment when he arrived in the UK  the
      appellant's treatment has been at the expense of the British taxpayer.



15.   The appellant told me that he worked for an oil company for  10  years
      in Algeria. He worked in the workshop where they made  parts  for  the
      pipelines and refineries. He said that it  was  a  physical  job  that
      required "some effort". He is educated to the equivalent  of  A  level
      standard.

16.   His mother, a brother and two  sisters  still  live  in  Algeria.  His
      mother lives in a one bedroom flat in Algiers. The rent is paid by his
      late father's  pension.  His  mother  spends  some  time  with  family
      members. During that time the flat is empty. The appellant  said  that
      his brother in Algeria works but the nature of his employment was  not
      drawn out in evidence. The appellant suggested that he  was  not  rich
      and had responsibilities towards his own  family.  He  said  that  his
      sisters are married and confirmed that their husbands worked for state
      companies. One of them worked for the same oil company. His brother in
      law was the one who helped him to find work there. The appellant  said
      that it would not be culturally acceptable for him to live with  their
      families.

17.   Although it is understandable that connections  with  old  friends  in
      Algeria might have become distant or may have been severed during  the
      lengthy period he has lived in the UK, the appellant's sister was able
      to contact a friend of his in Algeria when she was preparing  evidence
      for this case. It is possible that the appellant may be able to  renew
      other connections in Algeria.

18.   In the UK, the appellant lived with and was supported by  his  brother
      for many years. When his brother  married  the  appellant  moved  out.
      Friends accommodate him. His brother works as  a  security  guard  and
      still provides financial support. His brother claimed that it would be
      difficult to provide financial support if the  appellant  returned  to
      Algeria because he did not earn very  much  and  had  to  support  his
      family. The level of financial support that he currently provides  was
      not clarified in evidence at the hearing. However, it is reasonable to
      infer that he could provide the same level  of  financial  support  he
      currently does, which at the very least includes support to  buy  some
      food and clothing.

 19.  The appellant admitted to having carried out casual  work  during  his
      time in the UK. He said that he did not have  any  official  jobs  but
      helped people out when they asked. Sometimes he  might  help  to  make
      deliveries or cover when someone is on holiday. He  sometimes  covered
      for a friend of his who delivers goods to restaurants.

20.   The appellant is not  married  and  does  not  have  children.  It  is
      reasonable to  infer  that  he  has  friendship  connections  and  has
      developed some form of private life in the  UK  over  the  years,  but
      there is little evidence to suggest any significant connections to the
      UK.

21.   The appellant's case relies primarily on his  medical  condition.  The
      bundle before the First-tier Tribunal contained a number of pieces  of
      correspondence and copies of various medical records showing  that  he
      has received regular monitoring and treatment of this  condition  from
      around 2009 onwards. I will concentrate on the most recent evidence.

22.   A letter from his GP dated 09 July 2018 says  that  he  was  diagnosed
      with Type 2 Refractory Coeliac Disease in 2003, ulcerative colitis and
      associated malabsorbtion. He is under the care of Professor  Ciclitira
      at Guys and St Thomas' Hospital and had been referred to a  Consultant
      Hematologist for investigation into  monocytosis  (increase  in  white
      blood cells).

23.   A letter from Dr Joel Mawdsley, a  consultant  gastroenterologist,  to
      the appellant's GP dated 21 June 2018 noted that his  coeliac  disease
      was up and down. He was suffering from abdominal  pain,  cramping  and
      diarrhoea and had lost 8 kg over the previous 2-3 months. Dr  Mawdsley
      expressed some concern over his weight loss. He  said  that  he  would
      arrange an urgent CT scan and had checked his blood tests. Dr Mawdsley
      noted that there would be a "virtual review" in  four  weeks.  At  the
      hearing the appellant  confirmed  that  no  particular  concerns  were
      disclosed by the further tests he had in 2018.

24.   In a letter dated 27 November 2018, prepared in response to  questions
      from the appellant's solicitor, Professor Ciclitira said:

         "He is  known  to  have  type  2  refractory  coeliac  disease.  He
         underwent  a  resection  of  a  fibrotic  stricture  of  the  small
         intestine in 2011, the histology of which confirmed a diagnosis  of
         type 2 refractive coeliac disease. His condition  untreated  has  a
         greater than 50% mortality, and he was treated  at  the  time,  and
         since then with Methotrexate once weekly, Mycophenolate 500mg twice
         daily, Prednisolone 5mg daily and  other  vitamin  supplementation.
         Other investigations over a period of time reveal that he continues
         to suffer from this condition - that is type 2  refractory  coeliac
         disease, which is an expansion of a clone of T-cells  that,  in  my
         opinion, if untreated, would result in him  developing  enteropathy
         associated  T-cell  lymphoma  (EATL)  complicating   his   type   2
         refractory coeliac disease.


         If he was required to leave the  UK  it  is  inevitable  that  this
         condition would be exacerbated. There is a high - i.e: greater than
         50% chance - of resulting mortality. I do  not  believe  such  care
         would be available in his country of origin - that is,  Algeria.  I
         therefore strongly appeal to the Tribunal that  this  gentleman  be
         allowed to remain in the UK so that he can continue his  medication
         and management of what could otherwise be a fatal condition."

25.   The appellant also produced a report from Dr Robin  Knill-Jones  dated
      26 March 2019. Dr Knill-Jones is not one of the  appellant's  treating
      clinicians. According to his curriculum vitae he completed  12  years'
      accreditation in General Medicine (Gastroenterology) and Public Health
      (Epidemiology). He was licensed to practice until September 2016,  but
      the summary of his clinical appointments indicates that his period  of
      clinical practice was from 1964 to 1979. From 1979 to 2005  he  was  a
      Senior Lecturer  and  an  Honorary  Consultant  in  Public  Health  at
      Glasgow. From 2005 until the present he has been  an  Honorary  Senior
      Research Fellow at Glasgow. He outlines appointments  as  a  medically
      qualified member of various panels and tribunals. Most  of  Dr  Knill-
      Jones' experience in recent years appears to have been  academic.  The
      extent of any more recent practical experience in gastroenterology, if
      any,  is  unclear.  Dr  Knill-Jones  prepared  his  report  solely  by
      reference to the appellant's medical notes and correspondence.

26.    Dr  Knill-Jones  outlined  the  appellant's  medical   history.   The
      appellant was diagnosed with coeliac disease in 2003 and  was  advised
      to follow a gluten free diet. He was later treated  with  Azathioprine
      and steroids. By September 2010 the dose of Azathioprine  was  doubled
      to 25mg a week. The appellant had two episodes of hypocalcaemia  as  a
      result of poor intestinal calcium absorption for which he is receiving
      treatment. Intermittent abdominal symptoms led to an episode of  small
      bowel obstruction, which required surgery in  April  2011.  The  notes
      suggested that he visited his GP for regular blood tests around once a
      month in order to monitor the use of Azathioprine. The notes indicated
      that he visited the GP around 15 times in 2018 and  attended  hospital
      outpatient appointment around eight times in the same year. His weight
      remained fairly constant. His serum albumen levels have tended  to  be
      low, which Dr Knill-Jones says, without any further explanation, is  a
      poor prognostic sign.

27.   Dr  Knill-Jones  observed  that  the  notes  mentioned  the  appellant
      working at a restaurant called Momo in April 2013,  January  2014  and
      December 2017. He commented "there was no  suggestion  that  this  was
      intermittent." Dr Knill-Jones also noted a handwritten letter  amongst
      the correspondence from the appellant to his  GP  practice  requesting
      "...the last three years medical reports as my Doctor in Algeria  need
      to know more about my health to carry on providing me  with  medicines
      if... any needs while I'm on holiday". Dr Knill-Jones said  that  this
      suggested that the appellant does know doctors in Algeria.

28.    Dr  Knill-Jones'  report  goes  on  to  make   comments   about   the
      availability of healthcare in Algeria. No explanation is  provided  as
      to the source of the information. He stated that there  is  an  active
      Gastroenterological Association in Algeria and a  health  service  was
      established in 1975 to cover the whole  population.  He  said  coeliac
      disease is relatively common across North Africa and Algeria "probably
      has one of the highest prevalence in the  world,  about  1.5%  of  the
      population, compared to about 1% in the UK". He inferred that  it  was
      likely that there is  plenty  of  local  clinical  experience  of  the
      condition in Algeria, but this did not mean  that  all  the  necessary
      treatment is available.

29.   Dr Knill-Jones observed  that  the  current  aim  of  the  appellant's
      treatment would be to reduce the  possible  development  of  a  T-cell
      lymphoma, which is a known risk of type 2 coeliac disease. Type 2 is a
      rare form of  coeliac  disease.  Once  diagnosed  there  is  a  60-80%
      incidence of lymphoma within five years. Given that the appellant  was
      diagnosed with type 2 nine years ago he has done relatively well. Once
      lymphoma develops treatment  is  not  very  effective  with  a  10-20%
      incidence of survival after five years. Although he is now in a  small
      group of survivors beyond five years since  diagnosis,  the  prognosis
      remains guarded. His current treatment needs to be continued.

30.   Dr Knill-Jones was uncertain whether adequate treatment  is  available
      in Algeria. Mycophenolate (Mofetil) is available in the UK  for  about
      �100 annually but might be more expensive and less easily available in
      Algeria. Stopping the medication might have a  deleterious  effect  on
      his prognosis.  In  Dr  Knill-Jones'  view  the  other  medication  is
      standard and is likely to be available in Algeria. Regular small bowel
      endoscopy with biopsy is an important component of the  management  of
      the appellant's condition. He did not know whether this was  available
      in Algeria.

31.   The evidence shows that the appellant has received  ongoing  treatment
      for type 2 refractory coeliac disease over  a  number  of  years.  The
      condition is being managed through medication and regular  monitoring.
      Neither Professor Ciclitira nor Dr Knill-Jones purported to  have  any
      specific knowledge  of  the  availability  of  treatment  in  Algeria.
      Professor Ciclitira made an unsupported  assertion  that  it  was  his
      belief that appropriate care would not be  available  in  Algeria.  Dr
      Knill-Jones  was  able  to  provide  some  comment  about  the  likely
      availability of standard medications but made clear that he was unsure
      whether Mycophenylate was available in Algeria or endoscopy services.

32.   In the absence of any specific  or  reliable  knowledge  of  Professor
      Ciclitira or Dr Knill-Jones relating to the availability of  treatment
      in Algeria, the burden falls on the appellant to produce  evidence  to
      show what treatment, if any, is available.

33.   A letter from the appellant's sister dated 15 July 2018 says  that  it
      would be difficult to manage his disease in Algeria.  Firstly,  it  is
      not listed among the chronic diseases giving entitlement to  benefits.
      Secondly, the hospitals in Algeria are overloaded and lack  means  and
      equipment. Thirdly, the expense of care in private clinics  is  beyond
      the means of most people on a limited income. She says that  there  is
      less food available appropriate for people on gluten free diets.  What
      there is, is more expensive. She said that her  family  would  not  be
      able to afford to take care of  the  appellant  because  they  have  a
      limited income. Although she is well educated and is completing a  PHD
      in Demographic Sociology relating to "Health Culture", she  is  unable
      to find work due to the  lack  of  job  opportunities  caused  by  the
      economic crisis in the country.

34.   The bundle includes a document dated 02 July 2016  entitled  "List  of
      26 Diseases Taken in Charge". Little  other  information  is  provided
      about the document. However,  it  indicates  that  it  is  a  list  of
      diseases that  give  entitlement  to  benefits.  I  find  that  it  is
      reasonable to infer that this is the list of diseases mentioned by the
      appellant's sister for which funding  for  healthcare  appears  to  be
      available although the source is unclear. The list includes "cancerous
      diseases" at (3), "serious and lasting complications of  gastrectomies
      and ulcerative disease" at (22), and  "ulcerative  colitis"  at  (24).
      Although I note that  the  last  two  are  different  gastrointestinal
      diseases, it indicates that some treatment is likely to  be  available
      for gastrointestinal problems in Algeria.

35.   Other background new articles talk about high levels  of  unemployment
      in Algeria and the scarcity of some  medications.  Two  articles  that
      appear to be from online sources in Algeria discuss  the  difficulties
      faced by people with coeliac disease. The first  is  an  article  from
      News Today dated 10 November 2015, which  discusses  the  difficulties
      coeliac patients have in accessing gluten free alternatives for  their
      diet. Such foods are limited. Alternatives such as rice  are  imported
      and therefore cost more. The second article is from a  website  called
      El-massa.com and appears to be undated.  The  article  covers  similar
      ground to the first in relation  to  the  price  and  availability  of
      gluten free foods in Algeria. The article discusses the difficulty  in
      finding good quality gluten free foods such as pastries and pasta.

36.   Another piece of evidence relating to the situation in  Algeria  is  a
      letter from Dr Henniche Abdellah dated 30 November 2018. The  original
      copy of the letter is not provided, only an unsigned  translation.  No
      explanation is provided as to who Dr Abdellah is or his  expertise  to
      comment on the appellant's medical condition. It is unclear whether he
      has treated the appellant in the past. The translation of a seal  that
      is said to be on the original document indicates that Dr Abdellah is a
      rheumatologist   and   does   not   appear   to   be   a    specialist
      gastroenterologist. The translation states:

         "Patient Mourad  Henniche  suffers  from  celiac  disease  (chronic
         enthetopathy)  due  to  gluten  intolerance  diagnosed  clinically,
         biologically and conformed by intestinal biopsies in 2003.


         Mister Mourad Henniche suffers from all the  complications  of  the
         disease: an anemia by deficiency in Folate and B12,  an  osteopenia
         by calcium deficiency due to malabsorption.  Given  his  condition,
         the patient requires care and rigorous follow up, a strict  regime,
         drug treatments,  biological  assessments  and  annual  fibroscopy,
         according to the evolution of the disease. This makes the  care  of
         such a disease and its complications very expensive and  difficult,
         due to the incapacity of  the  patient  to  take  care  of  himself
         financially in Algeria. (sic)"

37.   The last piece of evidence that might  be  relevant  is  a  letter  in
      English dated 04 April 2013 purporting  to  be  from  Professor  Nabil
      Debzi of the Mustapha Hospital in Algiers. The letter states:

         "I'm Professor Nabil  DEBZI  Hepatogastroenterologist  at  Mustapha
         Hospital Algiers and have been asked to provide an assessment as to
         whether treatment for Mr Mourad HENNICHE is available in Algeria.


         Mr. HENNICHE suffers from coeliac  disease  and  severe  ulcerative
         jejunitis and I regret that we do not have the facilities to  treat
         the bowel related problems of Mr HENNICHE  in  Algeria.  I  confirm
         that we do not have the expertise to deal with this  condition  nor
         the aftercare required."

38.   I find that little weight can be placed on this letter as evidence  to
      show that treatment  is  not  available  in  Algeria.  The  letter  is
      unsigned. It is not on headed paper. It is  unclear  what  information
      Professor Debzi was given in order to provide this opinion. Even then,
      the letter is vague in nature and does not  explain  how  or  why  the
      appellant's condition is so complicated that  the  hospital  would  be
      unable to provide the necessary treatment. Given that the  appellant's
      care consists of monitoring through blood tests and  endoscopy  it  is
      not plausible that such basic care is  not  available  in  a  hospital
      gastroenterology department. Professor Debzi does not  say  that  such
      care  is  not  available,  nor  does  he  go  into  detail  about  the
      availability or otherwise of the necessary medication. In  short,  the
      letter is too vague to be given any meaningful weight.

39.   The evidence shows that the appellant suffers  from  a  chronic  long-
      term disease that is managed through diet, monitoring, medication, and
      on one occasion, through surgical intervention. The appellant is in  a
      category of people whose coeliac disease places him at higher risk  of
      developing T-cell lymphoma, which would be difficult to treat. If  his
      condition is untreated there is more than 50% risk of death.  However,
      Professor Ciclitira does not say how rapidly the appellant's health is
      likely to deteriorate if his condition is untreated.

40.   The first issue is whether the appellant's  condition  would  be  left
      untreated if returned to Algeria. There is  no  reliable  evidence  to
      suggest that treatment is not in fact available in Algeria. Nothing in
      the evidence given by the appellant's sister nor  by  Dr  Abdellah  or
      Professor Debzi suggests that the required treatment is not available.
      It is reasonable to infer that basic  monitoring  techniques  such  as
      blood tests are available. It is also reasonable  to  infer  from  the
      fact  that  treatment  is  available  for  other   gastroenterological
      conditions that other basic monitoring procedures  such  as  endoscopy
      services are likely to be available.

41.   Dr Knill-Roberts considered most of the medication that the  appellant
      is receiving to be of a basic nature that is likely to be available in
      Algeria. The only concern that he had was the possible availability of
      Mycophenolate, which the appellant takes on a daily basis. There is no
      evidence to show that Mycophenolate is not available in  Algeria.  The
      only evidence given by Dr Abdellah  and  the  appellant's  sister  are
      general assertions  that  medications  and  associated  treatment  are
      likely to come at some cost. Even if Mycophenolate is  not  available,
      the evidence of Dr Knill-Roberts indicates that  a  yearly  supply  is
      eminently affordable if bought in the UK. It might be possible for his
      brother to enquire  about  the  possibility  of  buying  the  relevant
      medication here if necessary. In short, the appellant  has  failed  to
      show that the necessary treatment is not available in Algeria.

42.   While I have no doubt that the appellant will  have  times  where  his
      condition flares up and he is more unwell than  others,  the  evidence
      shows that, despite his condition, the appellant has been well  enough
      to work in the  UK  on  a  seemingly  regular  basis,  albeit  without
      permission. It also shows that he was able to  find  stable  long-term
      work through his brother in law in Algeria in the past. I accept  that
      it may not be the cultural norm for an unmarried man to live with  his
      sisters' families in Algeria. However, the appellant  is  not  without
      family support. If he were to return to Algeria  his  brother  or  his
      mother may be able to provide him with accommodation. He is  currently
      reliant on friends for such support and I can see  no  reason  why  he
      couldn't rely on family or friends in Algeria  in  a  similar  way.  I
      accept that his brother in the UK has  responsibilities  for  his  own
      family, but his evidence  is  that  he  still  able  to  provide  some
      financial support to the appellant. I can see no reason why  he  could
      not contribute similar amounts to support his brother if  he  returned
      to Algeria.

43.   The fact that specialist gluten  free  products  such  as  pastry  and
      pasta are less readily available in Algeria is in my view  immaterial.
      While they are widely available in  the  UK  such  foods  are  not  an
      essential part of a gluten free  diet,  which  could  be  followed  by
      eating fresh local produce. The evidence relating to this point is too
      vague to place any weight on it.

44.   The fact that the  appellant  can  work  and  has  family  support  in
      Algeria indicates that he would not be returning to a situation  where
      he would be destitute or  unable  to  afford  any  treatment  for  his
      condition. The evidence relating to the availability of  treatment  in
      Algeria is vague. So too is the medical evidence as to how rapidly the
      appellant's condition might decline if he were  unable  to  afford  to
      access treatment that is likely to be available in Algeria.

45.   I turn to consider these facts with reference to  the  relevant  legal
      framework. The evidence falls far short of showing the  kind  of  very
      exceptional circumstances of a compelling humanitarian nature  of  the
      kind that would engage the operation of  Article  3  of  the  European
      Convention. It is understandable that the appellant is concerned  that
      he might not be able to afford the same level of treatment in Algeria,
      but the courts have repeatedly made clear that a  signatory  state  to
      the European Convention does not have  an  obligation  to  treat  non-
      nationals. There is insufficient evidence to show that  the  appellant
      would not receive treatment or to show that the absence  of  treatment
      would lead to a rapid decline  in  his  condition  of  the  compelling
      nature needed to engage Article 3. The evidence does not show that the
      appellant is a particularly vulnerable person who could not look after
      himself, he continues to have  familial  connections  in  Algeria  and
      would not be left wholly unsupported.

46.   The case law shows that absent a combination  of  other  circumstances
      that might be relevant  to  an  assessment  under  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention the threshold is equally high. In  this  case  the
      only other element that might be  relevant  to  the  assessment  under
      Article  8  is  the  appellant's  length  of  residence  in  the   UK.
      Undoubtedly, 19 years' residence is  a  long  time.  However,  section
      117B(4) NIAA 2002 states that little weight  should  be  placed  on  a
      private life formed at a time when the  person  has  been  in  the  UK
      unlawfully.  Although  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that   he   has
      established some form of private life here  in  that  time,  there  is
      little evidence to suggest that he has established particularly strong
      connections. The appellant's length of residence is not  a  compelling
      factor, even taken with his medical condition, which would elevate the
      circumstances to the threshold  that  might  be  required  to  show  a
      disproportionate breach of Article 8.

47.   Indeed, Ms Shaw did not argue that the appellant's circumstances  were
      sufficiently compelling to meet the  elevated  threshold  required  in
      medical cases under Articles 3 and 8. The case was  argued  solely  in
      relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

48.   The first  thing  to  note  about  paragraph  276ADE(1)  is  that  the
      provision is intended to reflect the respondent's position as to where
      a fair balance is struck in relation to various situations that  might
      engage a person's right to respect for  private  life.  The  provision
      sets out specific situations in which the respondent accepts that,  if
      the person meets the requirement,  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
      expect him to leave the UK. The provision does not provide a  holistic
      assessment of the circumstances in the same way that a full Article  8
      balancing exercise would do.

49.   The second point to note is  that,  although  Article  8  can  include
      consideration of a person's health condition, the wording of paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) is clearly focused  on  'integration'  in  the  person's
      country of origin. The provision is more likely to apply to those  who
      have no meaningful connections or knowledge of life in  their  country
      of origin, mostly likely because they were brought  to  the  UK  at  a
      young age. On the  face  of  it  the  provision  is  not  specifically
      designed to include consideration of health concerns for a person  who
      might otherwise have  continuing  linguistic,  cultural  and  familial
      connections with their country of  origin.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not
      difficult to imagine that a small  minority  of  medical  cases  might
      engage the considerations  outlined  in  Kamara.  Those  circumstances
      would have to be unusual and compelling in order to show that a person
      would not understand of how life in the society is carried on or would
      not have capacity to participate in it and to operate on a  day-to-day
      basis. One example might be a person who suffers  from  severe  mental
      illness such that they  do  not  have  capacity  or  insight  to  seek
      treatment and did not have familial or other support in their  country
      of origin, who would as a result,  suffer  the  kind  of  inhuman  and
      degrading treatment envisaged to reach the Article 3 threshold.

50.   The third point of note is that, even if  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  is
      capable of including an assessment of a  person's  medical  condition,
      and it forms the main reason why it is said  that  person  would  face
      'very significant obstacles' to integration, the  threshold  for  that
      test must be equally as stringent as in other medical cases. It cannot
      be  right  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  as  a  reflection  of  the
      respondent's position relating to Article 8, provides a less stringent
      test than the case law dictates in relation to  a  more  wide  ranging
      assessment of medical cases under Article 8. In a  case  where  it  is
      argued that there are  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  a  person's
      integration in their country of origin based on  a  medical  condition
      the   evidence   must   disclose   equally   compelling   humanitarian
      considerations in order  to  show  that  removal  would  amount  to  a
      disproportionate breach of Article 8.

51.   In this case, the appellant was born and brought  up  in  Algeria.  He
      was educated there and worked for 10 years before coming to the UK. He
      is familiar with Algerian culture. He still has  contact  with  family
      members there. Within the general meaning of the term 'integration' it
      is not arguable that the appellant would not be familiar with how day-
      to-day life in Algeria works or would not  have  social  and  familial
      connections upon which to build a meaningful private life there.

52.   The appellant's medical condition is not of the kind  where  he  would
      not have the capacity or  understanding  to  seek  treatment.  He  has
      failed to produce  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  treatment  is
      unavailable in Algeria. He might have to pay for treatment.  He  might
      find it difficult to raise the funds for some of  the  treatment,  but
      the appellant is well enough to find work and is likely  to  have  the
      benefit of the combined financial support of his  family  members.  He
      might not be able to afford to have as many  tests  and  such  regular
      monitoring; it might be that some medication must be prioritised if he
      cannot afford the full range of treatment. It is  understandable  that
      the appellant is concerned that he might not be  able  to  afford  the
      same level of care as in the UK,  which  might  in  turn  lead  to  an
      increased risk in developing T-cell lymphoma. However, the UK is under
      no obligation to continue to treat the appellant, who is not a British
      national and does not otherwise meet the  requirements  for  leave  to
      remain in the UK, unless the circumstances he is  likely  to  face  on
      return to Algeria disclose the kind of very  exceptional  humanitarian
      considerations required to show a breach of Articles 3  or  8  of  the
      European Convention.

53.    Although  I  accept  that  the  'very   significant   obstacles'   to
      integration test contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  is  capable  of
      being engaged in a medical case, given the focus on  'integration'  as
      the test, it seems likely that it  would  only  be  in  an  usual  and
      compelling cases that a case might succeed given  the  high  threshold
      required in medical cases.

54.   Unfortunately, this is not one of those cases. Those representing  the
      appellant, quite rightly, did not argue that the evidence met the high
      threshold required under Articles 3 and 8. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  is
      still intended to reflect Article 8. Even then,  it  is  not  arguable
      that the difficulties that  the  appellant  might  face  in  obtaining
      treatment in Algeria comes anywhere near showing that  he  would  face
      very significant obstacles to integration in Algeria given  his  other
      connections there.

55.   I conclude that the removal of the appellant  in  consequence  of  the
      decision would not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998.


DECISION

The appeal brought on human rights grounds is DISMISSED


Signed   [pic]   Date   27 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








