
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/08197/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                              |On 4 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS WAJEEHA IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Milestone Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals,  with  permission,  against  a
    decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andonian  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23 May 2017  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mrs
    Wajeeha Iqbal against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    Islamabad to refuse to grant her entry clearance to come to Britain  as
    the spouse of a British citizen.

2.   Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier, similarly I will  refer  to  Mrs  Wajeeha
    Iqbal as the appellant as she was the appellant before  the  First-tier
    Judge.

3.    The appellant had been refused on the basis that the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer did not consider that the marriage was genuine and  because  he
    considered that certain of the financial requirements of the Rules were
    not met.  It was also said that the English language certificate  could
    not be verified on-line.

4.      Judge Andonian heard evidence from  the  sponsor  and  considered  a
    large number of documents.  He found that the marriage  was  subsisting
    and was genuine, that the financial requirements of the Rules were  met
    and that the appellant also met the English  language  requirements  of
    the Rules.  He then stated that he found that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules and allowed the appeal.

5.     The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the judge  did  not
    have jurisdiction to allow the appeal  under  the  Rules  as  the  only
    ground of appeal before him was  whether  or  not  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR were infringed by  the  decision.
    The grounds also stated that  there  appeared  to  be  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the couple could not live in the appellant's home  country
    and there was no evidence that in  making  a  fresh  application  there
    would be any disproportionate interference with the status quo  of  the
    appellant's family life.

6.   It was accepted by both parties that I should  firstly  set  aside  the
    determination of the judge in the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that
    he did not had jurisdiction to allow the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules but rather should have directed his attention  to  the  issue  of
    whether or not the rights of the appellant  to  family  life  with  her
    husband were infringed.  I agreed that it would be appropriate on those
    grounds to set aside the decision.

7.     However, I also preserved the findings of  Judge  Andonian  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules.  That was not  opposed  by
    Mr Nath.  I consider it appropriate to remake the decision.

8.    Given  that  the  Rules  are  human  rights  compliant  and  that  the
    appellant met the requirement of the Rules for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse and furthermore that there were no countervailing factors  which
    would mean that the refusal of  entry  clearance  was  a  proportionate
    response, I now allow this appeal on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 3 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
