
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08600/2018
                                                               HU/08595/2018
                                                               HU/08602/2018
                                                               HU/08603/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2019                      |On 9 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                FATOUMATA [K]
                                    [N N]
                                    [R N]
                                    [P N]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes (counsel) instructed by Cartwright King
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge James promulgated on 28 November 2018,  which  dismissed
the Appellants' appeals.

Background

3.    The  first  Appellant  was  born  on  30  December  1985.  The  second
appellant was born on 4 December 2005. The third appellant  was  born  on  5
August 2007. The fourth appellant was born  on  11  August  2017.  All  four
appellants are nationals of Senegal. The first appellant is  the  mother  of
the remaining appellants. On 15 December 2017  the  Appellants  applied  for
entry clearance to join the first appellant's partner  (the  father  of  the
second, third and fourth appellants), who has been granted limited leave  to
remain in the UK.  On 9 March 2018 the respondent  refused  the  Appellants'
applications.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  James  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  7  January  2019  Judge  Bird
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The appellants seek permission to appeal against this  decision.
    It is alleged that the Judge has made conflicting findings -  reference
    to paragraph 22 where the judge found that the first appellant did  not
    have a subsisting relationship with the sponsor  and  in  paragraph  23
    where he said she did.

    3.     It is arguable that the judge's findings on this  issue  appears
    to be conflicting. Either the relationship was  subsisting  or  it  was
    not. The findings are unclear. It is arguable that the judge  has  made
    an arguable error of law in that conflicting findings have been made on
    a core issue. All the other grounds raised are arguable."

The Hearing

6.    (a) For the appellants, Mr Vokes  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
adopted the terms of his written submissions. He told me that there are  two
challenges of the Judge's decision; the first is  a  reasons  challenge  and
the second is a challenge to the rationality of the Judge's findings.

(b) Mr Vokes took me to [22] and [23] of  the  decision  and  told  me  that
there is a glaring contradiction when the first sentence of 23  is  compared
with what is said in [22]. He told me that the Judge finds at [23] that  the
marriage between the first appellant and the sponsor is subsisting.  In  the
same sentence, the Judge then finds that the sponsor and first appellant  do
not intend to live permanently together in the UK. Mr  Vokes  told  me  that
the first sentence of [23]  contains  an  unreconciled  contradiction  which
fundamentally  undermines  the  decision.  He  told  me  that  a  subsisting
marriage implies a genuine relationship. That  genuine  relationship  should
be viewed against the fact that the second, third and fourth appellants  are
indisputably the children of the first appellant and the  sponsor.  He  told
me that the subsistence of the marriage is sufficient to  enable  the  first
appellant to succeed.

(c) Mr Vokes told me that the Judge's decision is tainted by  an  inadequacy
of reasoning which amounts to a material error of law. He took  me  to  [18]
of the decision and told me that the Judge fails  to  take  account  of  the
sponsor's visits to Gambia to maintain contact with the appellants. He  told
me that the Judge does not make adequate findings about enduring contact  by
text messages, nor does he make meaningful findings about money  remittances
through a third party. He told me that the Judge's  ignores  the  fact  that
the fourth appellant was born after the sponsor visited the first  appellant
in Gambia.

(d) Mr Vokes returned to [23] of the decision and told me that  the  Judge's
final two sentences (of that paragraph of the  decision)  are  demonstrative
of flaws in the Judge's reasoning. He urged me to  set  the  decision  aside
and remit this case to the First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the  fact-finding
exercise can be carried out of new.

7.    For the respondent Mr Walker told  me  that  there  is  merit  in  the
submissions made for the appellants. He  told  me  that  the  appeal  is  no
longer resisted and asked me to set the decision  aside  because  the  Judge
has ignored evidence of contact  between  the  sponsor  the  appellant  post
flight; because there  are  conflicting  findings  on  whether  or  not  the
relationship continues between the sponsor  and  the  first  appellant;  and
because there is inadequate consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
second, third and fourth appellants, who are all children.

Analysis

8.    In the first sentence of  [23]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  marriage
between the first appellant and  the  sponsor  is  "subsisting".  The  Judge
focuses on the two part test in paragraph  352(A)(v)  of  the  rules,  which
says

    '(v) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other  as
    their partner and the relationship is genuine and subsisting'

It is at least  implicit  that  the  first  appellant  meets  the  remaining
requirements of paragraph 352A of the rules.

9.    Although the  Judge  makes  a  clear  finding  that  the  marriage  is
subsisting, his  finding  that  there  is  no  intention  to  live  together
permanently is inadequately reasoned. Three  of  the  appellants  are  young
children. It may well be that the Judge's reasoning is unduly influenced  by
consideration of the reason the sponsor was granted refugee status, but  the
focus in this case should not be  on  the  sponsor,  it  should  be  on  the
appellants. The three children of the sponsor do not care  why  the  sponsor
was  granted  refugee  status.  What  is  important  is   the   quality   of
relationship. Neither 352A of the  rules  nor  352D  of  the  rules  require
consideration of the reasons the sponsor  is  granted  refugee  status.  The
starting position is that he has been granted refugee status.  There  is  no
need to go behind the grant of refugee status.

10.   [16] to [27] of the decision are preceded by the heading

      'Findings and conclusions'

[18], [19] and [20] of the decision are neither  findings  nor  conclusions.
They are a summary of evidence. The evidence that  is  summarised  there  is
relevant, but no findings of fact are drawn from that evidence.

11.   The third last sentence of [21] is inadequately  reasoned.  The  Judge
finds that the first appellant and the sponsor are married.  He  finds  that
the fourth appellant was born after the sponsor was granted  refugee  status
and because the first appellant and the sponsor  were  briefly  reunited  in
Gambia. Despite finding that the  fourth  appellant  was  born  because  the
first appellant and sponsor are husband-and-wife who  have  access  to  each
other, the Judge finds that the birth  of  the  fourth  appellant  does  not
confirm  an  ongoing  relationship.  The  use  of  the  words  "definitively
confirm" indicates that the Judge applies the wrong standard of proof.

12.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

13.    Because  the  fact-finding  exercise  is  incomplete  &  because  the
decision contains no meaningful analysis of relevant evidence lead  for  the
appellant, the decision is tainted by material  errors  of  law.  I  set  it
aside.

14.   I consider whether or not I can substitute my own decision. there  was
an inadequacy of fact finding in the First-tier Tribunal. I find  that  none
of the First-tier Judge's findings of fact can  be  preserved.  One  of  the
central issues in this case is the intentions of the sponsor and  the  first
appellant. The determinative question is whether or not they intend to  live
together permanently in the UK. That is a question which cannot be  answered
without further  evidence  and  clear  fact-finding.  I  am  asked  by  both
parties' agents to remit this case the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  material
error of law in the decision relates to an inadequacy  of  fact  finding.  I
cannot substitute my  own  decision.  A  further  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary.





Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

17.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Birmingham
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge James.

Decision

18.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

19.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 28 November 2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed      Date 8 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


