
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08943/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    S A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Vatish, Counsel, instructed by JS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant's
    partner or child. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
    court. I make this order because the case turns on the welfare  of  the
    child and wife and  I  see  no  legitimate  public  interest  in  their
    identities.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State on 7 August 2017 refusing him leave to remain on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant lives with his partner who is  a  British  citizen.  They
    live as a nuclear family and they have  a  child  who  was  born  on  4
    January 2016.  Unsurprisingly she too is a British citizen.  The First-
    tier Tribunal decided that it was reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the jurisdiction  and  go  with  her  mother  to  live  with  the
    appellant in Bangladesh.  I find this a startling decision.  It is  not
    only remarkable on its own facts but it is quite contrary to a line  of
    cases of  which  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) is  probably  the  most
    recent good example.  It is not in the  best  interests  of  a  British
    citizen child to leave the advantages of living in the  European  Union
    to go and live in Bangladesh.  This is recognised and is  reflected  in
    policy which the Secretary of State follows.  Given that the  Secretary
    of State was represented before the First-tier Tribunal and given  that
    the proposition of law summarised in SF is very well known,  or  should
    be, it is very difficult indeed to see how  the  judge  could  possibly
    have reached the conclusion that he  did.   I  have  no  hesitation  in
    setting aside the decision.  It is wrong in law.  Mr Duffy really could
    not say much against this.  It is a clear and obvious point.

 4. I decided that the decision can and should be remade now.  I  note  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings that the evidence is  credible  and  the
    judge commented  favourably  on  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and
    partner.  The judge should have had in his mind Section 117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

 5. For the reasons indicated it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the United  Kingdom;  that  in  my  judgment  is  beyond
    argument.   Clearly  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
    relationship.  This is not a case  involving  deportation  and  statute
    says the public interest does not require the person's removal in these
    circumstances.  It might be that that is all that needs to be said.   I
    will however put the matter in context.  The appellant has done himself
    no good by overstaying in the United Kingdom.  He entered lawfully  but
    his leave ran out in May 2010 and he chose  to  remain  and  his  close
    relationship with his partner, and  of  course  his  experiences  as  a
    parent, all postdate that.  If he was the only person to be  considered
    there would be little of merit in his case.  But of course  he  is  not
    the only person to be considered.   His  partner  and  his  child  have
    rights too.

 6. There is an additional element in this case which is not brought out in
    the witness statements but was recognised by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and that is that the mother suffers a degree of disability from a
    condition known  as  ASD.   This  can  present  in  different  ways  in
    different degrees of intensity and I note that the appellant's  partner
    did not  in  fact  mention  it  expressly  in  her  statement  at  all.
    Nevertheless, it is a feature in the case which would make it even more
    difficult for the mother of the child to  manage  on  her  own  if  the
    father were removed  although  the  extent  of  that  is  a  matter  of
    conjecture.

 7. This is a case where the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  for
    some time. There is every reason to accept that he is willing  to  work
    if that is permitted. He gave his  evidence  in  the  English  language
    which suggests that his command of English  is  good.   These  are  all
    factors weighing in favour of his being allowed to remain.

 8. Without in any way seeking to condone his irresponsibility in remaining
    in the United Kingdom when he should not have done I find the Article 8
    balancing exercise guided by statute clearly goes in favour of allowing
    the appeal for the sake of the child and to some extent the sake of the
    partner.

    Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and  I
    allow the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 November 2018               |



