
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08157/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 November 2017                        |On 05 December 2017             |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                          CONSTANTINE LEROY WALKER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Waite, Counsel instructed by Okofor & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who is an overstayer, appeals from the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  27  June
    2017) dismissing his appeal brought on human rights grounds against the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  grant  him  leave  to
    remain as the parent of  a  British  national  child.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the appellant requires anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal ("UT").



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 September 2017, Judge Pickup granted permission to appeal for the
    following reasons:

       It is arguable that the judge  should  have  considered  EX.1  under
       Appendix FM in relation to the appellant's accepted  involvement  in
       the upbringing of his British  citizen  child  and  thus  the  judge
       should have assessed the reasonableness of expecting  the  child  to
       leave the UK. Similarly, there  was  no  consideration  outside  the
       Rules of s117B(6) when considering proportionality. It  is  arguable
       that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
       qualifying child and thus  the  same  reasonableness  test  applied.
       Following MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the  wider  public
       interest would also have to be taken into account. None of this  was
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal..

Reasons for Finding an Error of law

 3. By a Rule 24 Response dated 3 October  2007,  Mr  Chris  Avery  of  the
    Specialist Appeals Team said that the Respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    appeal. He invited the UT to determine the appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    (continuance)  hearing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and/or succeeded under section 117.

 4. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

 5. The Judge did not make a finding on  the  principal  issue,  which  was
    whether the appellant could bring himself within EX.1  He  appeared  to
    accept that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with Child  "T",  but  he  failed  to  address  the  legal
    ramifications of this.  Instead,  he  proceeded  to  find  against  the
    appellant on proportionality grounds, including the fact  that  he  had
    been overstayer since April 2004, and accordingly little weight  should
    be given to his private life. The judge  made  no  mention  of  Section
    117B(6) when considering proportionality,  although  this  section  was
    plainly in play.

 6. Accordingly, the decision is vitiated by a material error  of  law  for
    the reasons given in the grant of permission, and it must be set  aside
    and remade, as is conceded by the Respondent.



The Remaking of the Decision

 7. The appellant is not in a relationship with the mother of T,  and  they
    do not live under the same roof. As Judge Sweet found, there is  "clear
    evidence" of him nonetheless being involved in T's upbringing, and  his
    appeal is supported by T's mother,  who  was  present  at  the  hearing
    before me with T. Ms Fijiwala accepts that the appellant has a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with T.  She also accepts that the
    appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proving  that  he  takes  and
    intends to take an active role in the child's upbringing.

 8. Thus, the  appellant  meets  all  the  necessary  preconditions  to  be
    eligible for a grant of leave to  remain  under  EX.1(a).  Ms  Fijiwala
    accepts that it would not be reasonable to expect T to leave the UK  in
    order to accompany his father to Jamaica, as T is  a  British  national
    whose primary carer  is  his  mother,  and  his  mother  is  not  in  a
    relationship with his father.

 9. Part of Ms Fijiwala's reasoning is derived from the relevant  IDIs.  As
    noted by the Tribunal in SF & Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act)  Albania
    [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) at paragraph [7], the IDIs on family  migration
    - Appendix FM, section 1.0(b), headed "Family  life  as  a  partner  or
    parent and private life,  10  year  routes",  and  dated  August  2015,
    contain at paragraph 11.2.3 guidance on the following question:  "Would
    it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK?"
    The relevant parts of the guidance are as follows:

       Save in cases involving criminality,  the  decision-maker  must  not
       take a decision in relation to the parent  or  primary  carer  of  a
       British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be  to
       force that British citizen to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
       that child.  This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
       Zambrano ...

       Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
       primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must
       always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent  or
       primary carer.

       In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave  to  the
       parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
       child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship.

       It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave  where  the
       conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to  considerations
       of such weight as to justify separation, if a child could  otherwise
       stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the  UK  or
       in the EU.

       The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

       -     Criminality falling below the threshold set out  in  paragraph
           398 of the Immigration Rules;

       -   a very poor immigration history, such as whether  a  person  has
           repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

       In considering whether refusal may  be  appropriate,  the  decision-
       maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.   If
       the decision-maker is  minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
       separation would be the result, this  decision  should  normally  be
       discussed with a senior caseworker and,  where  appropriate,  advice
       may be sought from the office of  the  children's  champion  on  the
       implications for the welfare of the child, in order  to  inform  the
       decision.

10. Ms Fijiwala invites the Tribunal to give a broad interpretation to this
    policy guidance with the consequence that,  absent  misconduct  by  the
    parent of the gravity envisaged in the  exception  (criminality  or  "a
    very poor immigration history"), the  Respondent  should  be  taken  as
    conceding, with reference to EX.1(a) and Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act, that the public interest does not  require  the  parent's  removal
    where that parent has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the British national child.

11. I accept that the appellant does  not  have  a  very  poor  immigration
    history. There are no aggravating features beyond his overstaying.

12. Nonetheless, I do not consider that, upon its proper construction,  the
    policy discussed in SF will avail  all  applicants  who  in  a  similar
    position to that of this appellant  (i.e.  applicants  who  are  "mere"
    overstayers). However, in any given case, it is  clearly  open  to  the
    Respondent  to  concede  the  issue  of  reasonableness;  and  on   the
    particular facts of this case, the concession made by  Ms  Fijiwala  is
    entirely proper.

13. Accordingly, the appellant qualifies for leave to remain  as  a  parent
    under paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM, and it is not  unnecessary  for
    me to consider an alternative claim outside the Rules.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellant's appeal is allowed on human  rights  (Article  8
ECHR) grounds.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 3 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal, I have given consideration as to  whether  to
make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid  or  is  payable,
and I decided to make no  fee  award,  as  the  appellant  needed  to  bring
forward further evidence in order to succeed in his appeal.


Signed                              Date 3 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

































