

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: HU/08427/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 8 June 2017                           |on 21 June 2017                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TAMOOR TARIQ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Bloomer instructed by AMS Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker ('the Judge')  promulgated  on  31
        October 2016 in which the  Judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
        under the Immigration Rules.
     2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on two  grounds.
        Permission was granted by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        on 19 April 2017 in the following terms:


        2.    The  respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  this
             decision on the grounds that the judge made an arguable  error
             of law in finding that the requirements of Appendix FM (parent
             route) were met. It is  argued  that  there  was  no  evidence
             referred to by the judge and no reasoning given  to  make  the
             finding that the appellant had sole responsibility for any  of
             the children as was required under R-LTRPT 2.3 or 2.4.


        3.   It is arguable that in failing to  make  a  finding  that  the
             appellant had sole responsibility for the children  the  judge
             has failed to give reasons why the appellant  succeeded  under
             the Immigration Rules.


        4.   The respondent further argues  that  in  his  assessment,  the
             judge  has  given  no  indication  that  the  public  interest
             question was part of his  proportionality  assessment.  It  is
             also argued that the judge's approach  to  the  reasonableness
             test under EX1 is an error  given  the  countervailing  public
             interest was not considered.


        5.   It is arguable that in finding for the appellant  and  finding
             that it would be unreasonable to expect the children and their
             mother to continue family life with the appellant in Pakistan,
             the judge has failed to  show  that  he  balanced  the  public
             interest against  the  interests  of  the  appellant  and  his
             family. An arguable error of law has arisen.



Error of law


     3. The Judge sets out a legal self-direction regarding the burden  and
        standard of  proof  at  [6-12]  of  the  decision  under  challenge
        including, from [7], in relation to Article 8 ECHR.
     4. The findings of fact are set out  between  [25]  and  [33]  of  the
        decision under challenge noting at [30]:


         30.  The Appellant's partner is a British Citizen, having been born
             in the UK. Her two children are also British Citizens  and  as
             will be the third when born. This is a situation where Section
             EX.1. of Appendix FM applies.   I  accept  from  the  evidence
             today that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with his stepson and his daughter. They  are  now
             aged six and five months.


     5. The Secretary of State asserts arguable legal error in that it  was
        not open to the Judge to consider EX.1. The Judge had found at [14]
        that the appellant lives with his partner, her mother, and her  two
        children. Pursuant to R-LTRPT 1.1 (d) (i)  an  applicant  must  not
        fall for refusal under S - LTR; Suitability leave  to  remain;  and
        (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2-
        2.4 and E-LTRPT.3.1 - 3.2.; and  (iii)  EX.1.  applies.  The  Judge
        fails to identify evidence referring to, or  adequately  reason  or
        make  findings  that  would  indicate  the   appellant   has   sole
        responsibility for any of the children as required pursuant  to  E-
        LTRPT 2.3 or 2.4. As one of the mandatory requirements could not be
        satisfied paragraph EX.1 could not lead to the appeal being allowed
        in isolation - Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing)  [2014]
        UKUT 00063 (IAC) refers.
     6. There was no challenge to the Secretary States assertions  on  this
        ground which is properly made out.
     7. Ground 2 asserted the Judge focused exclusively  upon  the  matters
        specific to the appellant's side of the scales  and  is  completely
        silent in  respect  of  any  countervailing  public  interest  when
        assessing the proportionality of the decision under Article 8 ECHR.
        It is submitted this is entirely inconsistent with the  requirement
        to undertake a balanced assessment as confirmed  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2006] EWCA Civ 705.
     8. Although it was submitted by Mr Bloomer that any error made was not
        material, as findings  had  been  set  out  by  the  Judge  in  the
        decision, it was also accepted that what appears to  have  happened
        in this matter is that the Judge set out an accurate self-direction
        in relation to the Article 8 element but then  became  'distracted'
        in considering the matter  by  reference  to  Appendix  FM  without
        returning to what was required, namely  to  follow  the  Article  8
        assessment in a structured and adequately  reasoned  manner  which,
        when considering the proportionality of the decision, required  the
        need to assess  the  competing  interests  before  determining  the
        proper outcome in accordance with the guidance  provided  in  cases
        such as MA (Pakistan) and Razgar.
     9. I find the Judge has erred in law in making  material  misdirection
        in relation to Appendix FM and also  in  failing  to  set  out  and
        explain what weight was given to the countervailing public interest
        as part of the Article  8  assessment.  The  determination  is  set
        aside.


   Remaking the decision


    10. It was accepted the decision could be remade on the day.
    11. The burden was therefore on Mrs Petterson to establish the decision
        was proportionate to the legitimate aim, the remaining elements  of
        the Razgar test not being in dispute.
    12. The finding of the Judge that the appellant is  in  a  genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship with his stepson and daughter, now
        aged six years and five months, and the existence of a third  child
        born on 11 April 2017 is not disputed.  It  is  also  not  disputed
        that the appellant has a genuine relationship with his  partner,  a
        British citizen.
    13. The Secretary of State did not seek to challenge the Judges finding
        at [31 - 33] of the decision which are set  out  in  the  following
        terms:


         31.  I find it would not be reasonable  to  expect  either  of  the
             children to leave the UK  with  the  appellant.  Their  mother
             whilst being of Pakistani heritage  is  British-born  and  has
             spent all her life in the UK. Additionally she is the  primary
             carer for her mother and  who  lives  with  them.  Her  mother
             suffers ill-health having experienced a stroke and  which  has
             left her partially paralysed. The Appellant's partner is  very
             much involved in looking after to  include  bathing,  cooking,
             washing and transporting. The  Appellant's  relationship  with
             his partner has led to their estrangement  from  most  of  the
             partner's family apart from her mother. She is  the  only  one
             providing care for the mother and so she is very much tied  to
             this task. For this reason she cannot leave her  mother.  Also
             her eldest child  is  in  school  and  has  started  with  the
             education system. She does not want to remove  him  from  this
             and to unknown circumstances in Pakistan.


         32.  Also the appellant's stepson is apparently close  to  him  and
             regards him  as  his  father.  He  has  no  contact  with  his
             biological father in Pakistan.


         33.  All of this adds up to a  situation  where  it  would  not  be
             reasonable to expect either of  the  children  or  indeed  the
             Appellants partner to leave the UK. Given that the  Appellant,
             his partner, his stepson and his daughter are  a  family  unit
             they must  at  all  times  be  regarded  as  such  and  remain
             together. This situation will be  further  reinforced  by  the
             arrival of the further child in May of next year.


    14. It was submitted by Mrs Petterson that the children  are  a  family
        unit and that it had been not been found that the family unit could
        return to Pakistan together. This is therefore a case in  which  to
        remove the appellant from the United Kingdom will be to split  this
        family unit.
    15. Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act  2002  has
        been considered which sets out matters to which the  Tribunal  must
        give due consideration when considering Article 8 ECHR.
    16. No countervailing factors were shown to exist in  relation  to  the
        appellant's conduct that would warrant a finding that his  presence
        in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.
    17. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  student
        although such leave was curtailed to expire on 4 July 2012.  It  is
        accepted that such a status is precarious warranting little  weight
        being attached to a private or arguably family life  formed  during
        such a time.
    18. It was not argued before the Upper Tribunal that this meant that no
        weight should be placed upon the protected rights  relied  upon  by
        the appellant and it was not submitted that this case is a suitable
        one in which the appellant should be expected to return to Pakistan
        to make an application to return to the United Kingdom lawfully.
    19. Indeed, Mrs Petterson's closing  submission,  having  analysed  the
        competing interests, was to submit that this is a matter  in  which
        it is arguable that  the  finding  to  be  made  is  one  that  any
        interference with a protected right was not proportionate.
    20. Having carefully considered the competing arguments, and  in  light
        of Mrs Petterson's submissions and the failure  to  establish  that
        any interference with the  protected  rights  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant is warranted in the circumstances of this case, I re-make
        the decision allowing the appeal pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

    21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make such an order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 20 June 2017
