
                                  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08171/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2021                              |On 15 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MARIA MANTILLA FLUENTES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr B Haseldine, counsel, instructed by Lisa's Law
Solicitors

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the  appellant")
         has been granted permission to appeal against the decision of Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal Devitte ("the judge"), promulgated on 11
         October 2019, in which he allowed the human  rights  appeal  of  Ms
         Maria Mantilla Fluentes ("the respondent") against the  appellant's
         decision dated 24 April 2019 refusing her human rights claim  based
         on her private life rights.

      2. The respondent is a national of Venezuela, born on 8 July 1951. She
         entered the UK as a visitor in April 2005. She overstayed. She made
         a human rights claim on 7 January 2019. She relied on, inter  alia,
         her age (67 years old), her length of residence in the  UK  (almost
         14 year at the date of decision), her heart condition  (Arrhythmia)
         and  the  deteriorating  social  and  economic   circumstances   in
         Venezuela. The appellant considered  the  respondent's  application
         under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The  appellant  was  not  satisfied
         there would be 'very significant  obstacles'  to  the  respondent's
         integration  if  removed  to  Venezuela.  The  appellant  noted  in
         particular that the respondent was  born  in  Venezuela  and  lived
         there most of her life, and that she would  be  familiar  with  the
         culture and customs and social norms. In concluding there  were  no
         exceptional circumstances such as to constitute a  disproportionate
         breach of Article 8 if the application was  refused  the  appellant
         noted the respondent's ties with friends and a church in the UK and
         her heart condition, but concluded that  the  respondent's  friends
         would be able to provide financial assistance  should  she  return,
         that she had two sister in Venezuela who could provide support, and
         that Venezuela has a functioning healthcare system. The  respondent
         appealed  the  appellant's  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      3. In his decision the judge accurately summarised the  basis  of  the
         respondent's appeal and the basis of  the  appellant's  refusal  to
         grant the respondent leave to remain. The  judge  quoted  from  the
         respondent's witness statement concerning the social  and  economic
         situation in Venezuela. The judge noted the respondent's  assertion
         that there were no functioning banking services in Venezuela,  that
         the financial system had collapsed, as had  the  telecommunications
         system, and that there was no healthcare system that she  would  be
         able to access. The  respondent  maintained  that  her  one  sister
         remaining in the country was 83  years  old  and  her  husband  was
         disabled, and  so  would  be  unable  to  provide  any  support  or
         assistance. Her other sister was a refugee in Colombia.


      4. At [4] the judge noted that the respondent  had  not  produced  any
         medical evidence detailing her heart condition. At  [5]  the  judge
         expressed concern that there was only limited  background  evidence
         before him relating to the situation in Venezuela. At  the  end  of
         the hearing the judge indicated that  he  would  either  allow  the
         respondent's representatives to provide further evidence or that he
         (the judge) would have regard to UNHR documents and other documents
         in the public domain relating to the situation in  Venezuela,  with
         particular  reference  to  whether  the   respondent,   given   her
         particular  circumstances,   would   encounter   very   significant
         obstacles even if she was able to get financial  support  from  the
         UK. It is important to note that there was no objection  registered
         by either party to this proposed course of action. In the event the
         judge considered a number of relevant documents himself. At [7] the
         judge set out an extract from a UNHCR Briefing  on  Venezuela  from
         July  2019,  and  then  identified  all  the   documents   he   had
         additionally considered. At [8]  the  judge  identified  the  other
         reports he had considered, which  included  a  Human  Rights  Watch
         report, an article from The Telegraph from  May  2019,  a  UN  news
         report and Foreign and Commonwealth Officer Report  from  2019,  an
         UNHCR Agency report and a United Kingdom Nations online report from
         2018.


      5. At [9] the judge summarised the  evidence  that  emerged  from  his
         consideration of the various reports. He noted,  inter  alia,  that
         hyperinflation had reached one million percent, that Venezuela  was
         in total economic collapse, that people could not afford  food  and
         basic commodities, and that millions were fleeing the country.  The
         judge quoted a UK Minister for International Development who  spoke
         of "awful scenes of  human  suffering  and  families  resorting  to
         eating rotten food to survive."

      6. At [10] the judge noted that the respondent's difficulties would be
         compounded by the fact that, after so  much  displacement  and  the
         respondent's long absence from the country,  she  was  unlikely  to
         have any social contacts or even  family  support  upon  which  she
         could rely in Venezuela. The judge accepted  that,  to  the  extent
         that the respondent could be sent funds from the UK, this would  be
         of little help to her given the collapse in the banking system.  At
         [11] the judge found, based on his  assessment  of  the  background
         material, that Venezuela was in the midst of a humanitarian  crisis
         that had indiscriminately affected millions and that the  breakdown
         in social services and the economy was of such magnitude that there
         were very significant difficulties for a significant proportion  of
         the population in respect of their day-to-day lives and that  their
         very lives were at risk from a lack of basic  services.  The  judge
         found that the respondent, who was 67 years old and  who  would  be
         returned after an absence of at least 15 years, would face  equally
         if not more  challenging  obstacles  in  seeking  to  integrate  in
         Venezuela.

      7. At [12] the judge did  not  consider  it  appropriate  to  take  an
         armchair view by asserting that it was open to  the  respondent  to
         avoid the adverse conditions because she would be able  to  receive
         financial support from the UK. According to the judge  the  country
         background evidence showed in compelling terms that sanitation  and
         other  basic  services  had  broken  down,  that  the  economy  had
         collapsed and that living conditions had  become  intolerable.  The
         judge therefore concluded  at  [13]  that,  having  regard  to  the
         respondent's age, her need for medication and the  total  breakdown
         in basic governance and basic social  services  without  which  one
         cannot  live  a  normal  life,  the  respondent  would  face   very
         significant  obstacles  in  integrating  in  Venezuela.  The  judge
         accepted that the only person the respondent had in  Venezuela  was
         her 83 year old sister and that even if  she  was  able  to  obtain
         financial support from friends in the UK it was  difficult  to  see
         how this would mitigate  the  difficulties  that  she  would  face.
         Having found that the respondent met the requirements of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi),  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      8. It is important to note that the appellant did  not  challenge  the
         judge's  reliance  on  and  consideration  of  the   documents   he
         identified at [7] and [8] of  his  decision.  Nor  do  the  grounds
         challenge  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  social  and  economic
         conditions in Venezuela, summarised in particular at [9], but  also
         in respect of his references at [10] to [13]. At no stage in  these
         protracted proceedings  has  the  appellant  sought  to  amend  her
         grounds, and there was no application to amend the grounds  at  the
         'error of law' hearing. Mr Diwnycz  confirmed  that  this  was  the
         case. There has therefore been no challenge to the judge's reliance
         on the  background  materials  he  considered  or  to  his  factual
         assessment of those materials and his factual conclusions based  on
         those materials.


      9. The first ground is difficult to follow. It asserts that the  judge
         failed to apply the correct test when finding in  the  respondent's
         favour. It claims that the test that should have been  applied  was
         that determined  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  and  that,  as  the
         respondent has resided in the UK unlawfully for 14 years,  she  was
         required to  meet  the  "high  threshold"  of  the  "insurmountable
         obstacles" test. Mr Diwnycz was, despite his best  efforts,  unable
         to illuminate the first ground any further.

     10. The 2nd ground of appeal contends that the  judge  failed  to  deal
         with the issue of proportionality. It notes again the length of the
         respondent's unlawful residence and that her  private  life  should
         have  been  afforded  little  weight.  It  was  claimed  that   the
         respondent's  age  and  medical  condition  were  insufficient   to
         displace the public interest, that the respondent did  not  provide
         any evidence that there would be a deterioration in  her  Arrythmia
         if removed or that she'd be unable to obtain medication,  and  that
         she had the support of her family  members  in  Venezuela.  It  was
         claimed that that  nothing  had  been  identified  in  the  country
         situation that would reach the  threshold  required  to  support  a
         grant of leave to remain. The third ground contends that the  judge
         failed to consider  the  factors  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Diwnycz
         indicated that he was unable to expand upon the  grounds,  that  he
         saw force in the skeleton argument provided by  Mr  Haseldine,  and
         made no further submissions.
Discussion

     11. There is no merit in the first ground. The judge  was  demonstrably
         aware of the correct legal test under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) (see,
         for example, [2] and [13]). By contrast, the author of the  grounds
         has quoted the wrong test. Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  was  concerned
         with the "insurmountable obstacles" test in EX.1 of Appendix FM  in
         respect of the  difficulties  that  a  couple  would  encounter  in
         continuing their relationship  outside  the  UK.  The  judge  self-
         directed himself correctly. There was no material  misdirection  of
         law.


     12. The second ground amounts to no more than a disagreement  with  the
         factual assessment undertaken by the judge. It is abundantly  clear
         from the decision, read holistically, that the judge was aware that
         the respondent has resided in the UK in excess of 14 years  without
         lawful leave, that there was no medical evidence  relating  to  her
         Arrhythmia, that  she  had  spent  the  majority  of  her  life  in
         Venezuela, and that she had an elderly  sister  in  Venezuela.  The
         judge expressly considered  the  possibility  that  the  respondent
         would be able to obtain some financial assistance from the UK,  but
         concluded, having regard to the breakdown of services in Venezuela,
         that this would not militate the difficulties the respondent  would
         have in integrating ([11], [12], [13]). The judge weighed up  these
         factors against his assessment of the social and economic crisis in
         Venezuela and concluded that the situation was so bad that  someone
         in the respondent's position and  circumstances  would  face  'very
         significant obstacles'. This was a conclusion  rationally  open  to
         the judge for the reasons he gave and based on the evidence that he
         considered. Although the judge did not quote  from  SSHD  v  Kamara
         [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it is satisfactorily clear that he applied  the
         essence of the approach identified in that authority to  the  issue
         of integration.

     13. There is no merit in the 3rd ground.  If  a  person  satisfies  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, whether or not by  reference
         to an Article 8 informed requirement, then this will be  positively
         determinative of that person's Article  8  appeal,  provided  their
         case engages Article  8(1).  This  is  because  it  would  then  be
         disproportionate for that person to be removed (TZ  (Pakistan)  and
         PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109). The judge's conclusion  that  the
         respondent would face very significant obstacles to her integration
         if removed to Venezuela meant  that  the  respondent  met  all  the
         requirements for  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
         276ADE(1). This was positively determinative  of  the  respondent's
         Article 8 appeal. As such, the judge's decision to allow the  human
         rights appeal was open to him.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum                              4 March 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

