
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08981/2015
                                                               HU/08984/2015
                                                               HU/08985/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2017                             |On 7 November 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                        monaben [p] (First Appellant)
                         [k p-1] (Second Appellant)
                          [k p-2] (Third Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are a family who came to the UK lawfully, and ultimately
    in 2015 applied  for  a  further  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   Those
    applications were refused on  15  October  2015.  The  Appellants  duly
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where  their  appeals  came  before
    Judge Scott on 22 November 2016. As both parties accept before me Judge
    Scott clearly misunderstood  the  nature  of  the  appeals  before  him
    because he purported to allow the First and Second Appellants'  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules, to dismiss the  Third  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, but then to allow her appeal under Article
    8.

 2. The Respondent sought  to  challenge  that  decision  and  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kelly on 21 July  2017.   Judge  Kelly  identified  that
    Judge Scott had misunderstood the nature of the  jurisdiction  that  he
    had as a result of section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014, and he  also
    went on to grant permission in relation to the  second  ground  of  the
    Respondent's challenge which was the complaint  that  Judge  Scott  had
    failed to provide adequate reasons for the findings that he had made to
    the effect that the Secretary of State had  not  discharged  the  legal
    burden of establishing that the First Appellant had  acted  dishonestly
    in acquiring a TOEIC certificate in 2013 which  he  had  then  used  to
    support an application for leave to remain that had been made in  2013.



 3. There is no Rule 24 response before me but the  Appellants  resist  the
    appeal.

 4. This is not one of those appeals in which the only  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal was evidence from officers of  the  Home
    Office, what one might describe as the first phase  of  the  ETS  TOEIC
    litigation, where the only evidence relied upon was that of Mr Collings
    and Ms Millington.  This was one of the later phase of appeals in which
    the Respondent offered expert evidence in the form of a  report  of  20
    April 2016 by Professor French which analysed the manner in  which  ETS
    conducted their testing. The reason that this  was  relevant  was  that
    this was a case in which it was alleged that the  First  Appellant  had
    not sat the language test herself, but a proxy  had  been  used,  whose
    voice could be identified as a proxy, because he or she was  a  speaker
    that could be identified as having been  used  in  a  number  of  other
    tests.  Professor French's evidence was that the  percentage  of  false
    positive errors in the ETS analysis was likely to be below 1%.  On  the
    face of it this was  compelling  evidence  that  dishonesty  had  taken
    place, which was not rebutted by other expert evidence relied  upon  by
    the Appellants.

 5. The judge in the First-tier was not helped by the  parties  failing  to
    provide all of the relevant jurisprudence that was  then  available  at
    the date of the hearing.  The parties for  whatever  reason  appear  to
    have confined themselves to referring only to  the  decision  in  Qadir
    [2016] UKUT 229 in the Upper Tribunal without making any  reference  to
    the Court of Appeal decision in Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ  1167  which  had
    been promulgated the month before the hearing.  Nor  had  the  parties'
    representatives chosen to provide the judge with the  decision  of  the
    Presidential Panel in MA [2016] UKUT 450, or Shahzad in  the  Court  of
    Appeal [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  Neither parties are able to shed any light
    on why that was the case before me today.

 6. If the judge had had the benefit of that jurisprudence, and if  he  had
    had  the  benefit  of  submissions   that   were   informed   by   that
    jurisprudence, it is difficult to see how he could have ended up making
    the decision that he did make. In my judgement that is the  root  cause
    for the errors that followed.

 7. This was an appeal that concerned the allegation that  the  appellant's
    test had in fact been taken by  a  proxy.  The  evidence  of  Professor
    French properly analysed (as we now know from the  analysis  undertaken
    by Judge Freeman in the Upper Tribunal decision of  Nawaz  [2017]  UKUT
    288), was directed to, and a  rebuttal  of,  the  criticisms  that  his
    colleague Dr Harrison had raised about the manner  in  which  the  test
    company identified proxy  test  takers.  Professor  French's  evidence,
    which has been accepted by the Upper Tribunal now in a number of cases,
    was that the percentage of false positive errors was likely to be below
    1%.   That  was  compelling  evidence  that  in  this   case   it   was
    overwhelmingly likely that the test certificate obtained by  the  First
    Appellant had been obtained by dishonesty. Not because  she  failed  to
    attend  the  test  centre,  but  because  someone  else  undertook  the
    substantive part of  the  test  for  her.   That  evidence  not  merely
    discharged the evidential burden that lay upon the Respondent,  but  it
    did so conclusively. Thus the situation  before  the  Judge  was  quite
    unlike the situation in Qadir itself where the Tribunal was faced  with
    no rebuttal evidence to  Dr  Harrison's  evidence  and  the  evidential
    burden was only just satisfied.

 8. The Judge's task was then, having  recognised  (as  he  did)  that  the
    evidential burden upon the Respondent had been discharged,  to  analyse
    the evidence before him to identify whether the legal burden  upon  the
    Respondent was also discharged by her.  In  undertaking  that  task  he
    needed to demonstrate that he had asked himself the correct  questions,
    and that he had analysed the relevant evidence, rather than taking into
    consideration irrelevant evidence. In my judgement he fell  into  error
    in looking at whether the First Appellant could  describe  to  him  the
    route that she had taken to the test centre and how the test centre  on
    the day of the test  had  been  laid.  This  was  irrelevant  evidence.
    Nobody had suggested that she had not been to  the  test  centre.   The
    question was whether she had sat the test.  It was relevant, of course,
    to consider that the First Appellant had undertaken courses in  the  UK
    in English and that she  had  obtained  educational  qualifications  in
    consequence, about  which  there  was  no  dispute,  and  no  issue  of
    dishonesty.  However, I am satisfied that overall he  fell  into  error
    for looking at irrelevant matters. In my judgement it  is  quite  plain
    that he looked at  irrelevant  matters  and  failed  to  focus  on  the
    relevant factors.  As to the test itself, and indeed the description of
    relevant factors, I agree with Mr Nasim's argument that this should not
    be seen as a checklist, but a description of the  relevant  factors  is
    most usefully set out by the Court of Appeal in Qadir at paragraph  18.
    That confirms and adopts  the  President's  view  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when considering an allegation of dishonesty in  this  context
    should consider the relevant factors to include the following:-

      a) what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest;

      b) what he had to lose;

      c) what is known about his character;

      d) the cultural environment in which he operated;

      e) how the individual accused of  dishonesty  performed  under  cross-
         examination;

      f) whether the Tribunal's assessment of that person's English language
         proficiency is commensurate with the TOEIC scores; and

      g) whether his or her academic  achievements  are  such  that  it  was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated.

 9. In my judgement the judge fails to demonstrate in his decision that  he
    has taken that guidance on board. As indicated at the outset,  that  is
    undoubtedly because the parties failed to address him  in  relation  to
    the relevant guidance. Thus he did not analyse the evidence with  those
    factors clearly in mind, or demonstrate that he bore  clearly  in  mind
    Professor French's evidence  that  the  percentage  of  false  positive
    errors, that is to say an incorrect  identification  of  a  proxy  test
    taker, is below 1%.

10. That being so, I am satisfied that the  only  proper  course  with  the
    appeals raised by the members of this family is to remit  them  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The  fact  finding  exercise  must  be  undertaken
    afresh, in the light of the relevant guidance. Moreover,  although  the
    judge did not demonstrate that he understood this, the appeals were all
    only ever Article 8 appeals.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  need  to
    identify whether the Appellants' "family life" is in  truth  only  with
    one another, and thus whether these are "private life"  appeals,  which
    has not yet been done. In any event should Article 8  be  engaged,  the
    balancing of the public interest will need  to  be  undertaken  in  the
    correct factual context, of whether or not the Respondent has made  out
    her case of dishonesty.

11. The effect of the error of law has been to deprive the parties  of  the
    opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First  Tier
    Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement  of  25  September
    2012. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise is such
    that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that
    the appeal should be remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Having  reached
    that conclusion, I make the following directions;

      a) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
         Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is not to be listed  before
         Judge I. M. Scott.

      b) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

      c) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
         witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.

      d) The parties are to file and serve any further evidence to be relied
         upon at the hearing of the appeals by 5pm 27 November 2017

      e) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
         available date at the Taylor House hearing centre after 27 November
         2017.

      f) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
         necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
         change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
         details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.




Decision

12. The decision promulgated on 11 January 2017 did involve the  making  of
    an error of law sufficient to require that decision to be set aside and
    reheard. Accordingly  the  appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal with the directions set out above.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes




To the Respondent
Fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holme
