
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08887/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7th May 2019                     |On: 4th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DG
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Caseley, Counsel instructed by Advisa Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Malaysia born in 1932. He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Welsh)  to
    dismiss his appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 2. The background to the appeal before me can be shortly put. On the  26th
    August 2016 the Appellant Mrs G made an application to be permitted  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with her daughter. The application stated,
    inter alia, that Mrs G is suffering from dementia and wishes to  remain
    in the care of her family in the United Kingdom.   The application  was
    refused on the 18th July 2017 on the grounds  that  Mrs  G  had  sought
    leave for a purpose not covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that
    paragraph 322(1) thereof therefore applied.    The  Appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds.

 3. When the matter came before Judge Welsh at a 'Case  Management  Review'
    hearing the Respondent  raised  the  matter  of  jurisdiction.  It  was
    submitted that  since  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  had  nowhere
    referred to Mrs G's human rights, this could  not  be  said  to  be  an
    appeal  against  a  human  rights  decision.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that this must be so, and dismissed the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.

 4. The Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal erred in law in its interpretation of the statutory framework.
    Before me the Respondent agreed; I was invited to set the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal aside and to remit the matter to the First-tier
    Tribunal with a direction that the  case  proceed  as  a  human  rights
    appeal. I agree but it is appropriate that I set out in a  little  more
    detail why that is the correct outcome.

 5. The Appellant's right of appeal derives from s82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014):

         "82 Right of appeal to the Tribunal


         (1)      A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-

             (a) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
             claim made by P,

             (b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human
             rights claim made by P, or

             (c) the Secretary of State has decided to revoke P's
             protection status.

 6. What might constitute a 'human rights claim' has been  the  subject  of
    some litigation in this Tribunal and above (see for  instance  Robinson
    (formerly JR (Jamaica)) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department (Respondent) [2019] UKSC 11, Waqar v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2015] UKUT 169 (IAC), Juliana Baihinga v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] UKUT 00090 (IAC)) but the  whys
    and wherefores of that jurisprudence need not be explored here since it
    was expressly accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the  application
    made by Mrs G in August 2016  did  indeed  constitute  a  human  rights
    claim, raising issues under both Articles 3 and 8: see paragraph 17  of
    the decision.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal went on to find as follows:

         "However, I am satisfied that the decision maker who considered the
         application did not consider it to be a human rights claim and  did
         not decide it as a human rights claim. There is no specific mention
         of either Article 3  or  Article  8,  nor  is  there  any  indirect
         reference to human rights. For instance, there is no reference to a
         balancing of interests or issues of proportionality"

 8. As Mr Bramble accepts, it was here that the First-tier Tribunal  erred.
    The fact that the decision-maker apparently failed  to  understand  the
    nature of the application before him did not preclude a right of appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal: there had been a human rights claim, and it
    had been refused. This was all that was required by s82(b).

 9. It may be that the First-tier Tribunal had in  mind  the  jurisprudence
    relating to 'fresh claims'.  Where an applicant has already had a human
    rights claim decided and makes further representations, it is a  matter
    for the Secretary of  State  whether  those  submissions  amount  to  a
    'fresh' human rights claim. His decision must be made with reference to
    paragraph 353 of the Rules,  and  it  may  only  be  challenged  by  an
    application for judicial review, i.e. it  cannot  be  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That was not the case here. This was not a 'fresh
    claims' case and in those circumstances  the  only  questions  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal were whether Mrs G had made a human  rights  claim,
    and whether  she  had  been  refused.  Since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    answered both of  those  questions  in  the  affirmative,  in  my  view
    rightly, it followed that Mrs G  had  a  substantive  right  of  appeal
    before it.

    Anonymity Order

10. This case concerns sensitive personal information relating to  Mrs  G's
    health. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Decisions

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

12. The decision in this human rights appeal is to be re-made  de  novo  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

13. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                7th May 2019
