
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08191/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2018                           |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                Abdullah [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson promulgated on 2 August 2018 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated  19  March  2018  to  refuse
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


2,   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 October  1988.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 10 March 2010 with entry clearance  as  a
    student valid until  30  June  2013.   On  28  June  2013  he  made  an
    application for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  Migrant.   The
    application was granted on 29 November 2013 with leave  until  31  July
    2015.  On 31 July 2014 the Appellant made an  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card on the basis of a  marriage  to  an  EEA  citizen.   The
    application was refused on 23  June  2015.   The  Appellant  lodged  an
    appeal against the latter decision which was later withdrawn by him  on
    19 September 2016.


3.   On 12 October 2016 the Appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.  The application was in due course refused
    for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 19
    March 2018.


4.   The Appellant's application of 12 October 2016 was made  on  the  basis
    that he claimed to have been cohabitating from 15 November 2015 with Ms
    Fateha  [M]  (d.o.b.  10  March  1983),  a  British  citizen.   In  his
    application it was said that he was in a parental relationship with  Ms
    [M]'s two British citizen children (born 7 January 2002 and 9  February
    2006) - as a step-parent, being the partner of their mother - and  also
    that Ms [M] was expecting the Appellant's child. Ms [M]  was  delivered
    of a son on 28 March 2017.  It has not been disputed that the Appellant
    is the father of the latter British citizen child.


5.   The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    did not satisfy the suitability requirements because  he  had,  in  the
    Respondent's view, submitted in support of his application for  further
    leave to remain in June 2013 a false English language test  certificate
    dated 15 March 2013 from the Queensway College.   The  Respondent  also
    considered that the Appellant did not meet the definition of a  partner
    under GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM because even on his claim he had not  been
    cohabiting with his partner  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the
    application.  In those circumstances paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  was
    considered to be of no application  and  therefore  not  to  avail  the
    Appellant.


6.   The RFRL  also  gives  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  application
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules   under   the   heading   'Exceptional
    Circumstances'.  In this regard it is pertinent to note the following:

         "You have applied for leave to remain on the basis of  your  family
         life with your British partner and child as well  as  her  children
         from a previous relationship.  However,  due  to  your  application
         falling for  refusal  in  regards  to  your  use  of  deception  by
         obtaining a fraudulent TOEIC certificate this outweighs your  right
         to family life in regards to your British child."


7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


8.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson.


9.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  in  the  Appellant's  favour  in
    relation to the English language certificate.


10.  The allegation against the Appellant was in  respect  of  the  speaking
    component of the English language test.  In substance it was said  that
    the voice that appeared on the tape recording of the  candidate  taking
    the speaking test did not match the voice of the Appellant.


11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised the force of the  Respondent's
    generic evidence pursuant to the case of SM and Qadir,  and  that  such
    evidence was sufficient to satisfy the evidential  burden;  indeed  the
    Appellant's representative before the First-tier Tribunal conceded that
    the Respondent had discharged the evidential burden. (See paragraphs  6
    and 8.  The Judge also necessarily reached this conclusion.


12.  However  the  Judge  decided  that  the  Appellant  had  not  knowingly
    submitted a false test certificate: "I have found  that  the  Appellant
    has submitted a false test in his application made in 2013 but that  he
    did not do that knowingly" (paragraph 10).


13.  Having found in the Appellant's favour on this point,  the  Judge  went
    on to consider Article 8.  The Judge found that the Appellant was in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms Fateha but did  not  accept
    that there had been a  period  of  cohabitation  for  as  long  as  the
    Appellant had claimed.

         "I find that the Appellant entered into a relationship which  is  a
         genuine and  subsisting  relationship  sometime  in  2015  with  Ms
         Fateha.  The Respondent does not put into issue the genuine  nature
         of the relationship.  I find that they have  not  shown  that  they
         lived together prior to March 2017." (paragraph 35).


14.  The Judge noted that the Respondent did not challenge the paternity  of
    the child born on  28  March  2017  and  accordingly  found  that  "the
    Appellant is the father of a British citizen child" (paragraph 36).  In
    respect of  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  other
    children of his partner, and the family unit more generally, the  Judge
    stated:

         "I find that the Appellant had not played a major role in the lives
         of the elder children of Ms Fateha for any  significant  period  of
         time. ... I have found that the Appellant has not shown that he has
         lived with the children for a lengthy period. ... I find  that  the
         five persons now live  together  as  a  family  and  that  for  the
         Appellant to leave  will  necessarily  involve  disruption  to  the
         family unit of some sort." (paragraph 40).


15.  The Judge ultimately determined that on  an  overall  consideration  of
    the case,  including  having  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, that the removal of the  Appellant  would  be  proportionate.
    Accordingly the Judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.


16.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal, which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 5 September 2018.  So far  as  is
    material the grant of permission to appeal is in these terms:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give   appropriate
         consideration to the appeal in  light  of  the  claimed  number  of
         inaccuracies in the factual findings".


17.  The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  10  October  2018.
    Included in the response is a cross-challenge to the  Judge's  approach
    to the issue of the ETS English language  certification.   It  has  not
    been disputed before me that it is open to the Respondent to raise such
    matters by way of the Rule 24 response - as indeed was pleaded  in  the
    Rule 24 response with reference to EG and NG (UT Rule  17:  withdrawal;
    Rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 143.


18.  Accordingly, before  me  the  Appellant  submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  fell  into  error  in  respect   of   the   issue   of
    proportionality; the Respondent resists that  submission,  but  in  any
    event submits in the alternative that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    fell into error  in  respect  of  the  ETS  test.   Ultimately  I  have
    concluded that there is substance in both parties' challenges -  albeit
    in respect of the Appellant's challenge not specifically  by  reference
    to the matters identified in the grant of permission to appeal.


19.  In this latter regard it is convenient  at  this  juncture  to  comment
    briefly upon the inaccuracies referenced in the grant of permission  to
    appeal.

         (i)  In the opening paragraph of the Decision it is wrongly  stated
         that the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
         basis of family life; he actually applied for further limited leave
         to remain on the basis of family life.


         (ii)  The  paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules  identified   in
         paragraph 1 as forming the basis of the  Respondent's  refusal  are
         also inaccurately stated.


         (iii)    At paragraph 2  the  Judge  wrongly  states  the  date  of
         hearing as 18 April 2018 rather than 13 July 2018.


         (iv) At paragraph 3 the Judge sets out a brief  chronology  of  the
         Appellant's  immigration  history  and  other   pertinent   events.
         Nothing specifically is suggested to be in error in respect of that
         chronology.  However, at paragraph 4  -  inconsistently  -he  Judge
         refers to the Appellant coming to the  UK  as  a  student  in  2013
         rather than in 2010, and renewing his Tier 4 visa on 31  July  2015
         when in fact 31 July 2015 was the date upon which his Tier  4  visa
         expired.

     These are indeed errors of fact. However, it seems to me that there  is
    nothing specific in any of the errors, or in  any  other  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, that suggests anything  material  turns
    upon such inaccuracies - which have the appearance of being mere  slips
    rather than revealing fundamental misconceptions as to  the  nature  of
    the case and issues.


20.  The Judge has appropriately set out the key chronology at paragraph  3,
    and in engaging with the substantive issues in the appeal does not seem
    to fall into any other error of facts - save perhaps  in  one  respect.
    The Judge otherwise engages with the facts and evidence appropriately.


21.  The one exception appears at paragraph 40, where the  Judge  refers  to
    the school records of Ms Fateha's older children having been updated to
    include the Appellant as a contact, and finds that they "arranged  this
    after the appellant had made his application for leave and with a  view
    to this being supportive of his leave application".  The grounds  plead
    that one letter from the school dated 7 September  2016  suggests  that
    the amendment to the records had been made prior to the application (12
    October 2016). However, it seems to me that it was so closely prior  to
    the application that the substance of the Judge's observation  that  it
    appeared to be done with a view to being supportive of the  application
    still carries weight. I am not persuaded that anything  material  turns
    on this matter.


22.  In the  circumstances  I  do  not  consider  that  there  is  any  real
    substance to the submission that the decision is unsafe  by  reason  of
    the Judge's lack of attention to detail.


23.  However, in my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  err  in  its
    approach to Article 8  and  proportionality  in  seemingly  failing  to
    acknowledge that the basis upon which the Respondent sought to  justify
    the interference with the Appellant's Article 8 protected  private  and
    family life was limited to the circumstance of having used deception by
    obtaining a fraudulent TOEIC certificate.  I have quoted from the  RFRL
    the passage in which the Respondent sets out his case in this regard  -
    see paragraph 6 above.


24.  The Judge found in the Appellant's favour on the  issue  of  deception.
    Having so found, without more it is difficult to see why the Judge  did
    not then reach  the  conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that the decision to  refuse  leave,  and  the  Appellant's
    consequent prospective removal from the United Kingdom,  was  justified
    and proportionate.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  Judge's  failure  to
    recognise the exact terms of the Respondent's  case,  and  in  turn  to
    recognise that on his findings the Appellant had met  the  Respondent's
    case, amounts to a material error of law.


25.  There are further aspects of the Judge's analysis of the  family  life,
    and the interference with it that might result in  consequence  of  the
    Respondent's decision, that give cause for concern.


26.  At paragraph 43 the Judge found that it was in the Appellant's  child's
    best interests to be with one or both parents, noting  also  "the  best
    possible environment for a child is to be brought  up  by  two  parents
    living together in a loving relationship."  Although the Judge went  on
    - uncontroversially - to state that that could be in any  country,  and
    also to observe that the welfare  of  many  children  is  protected  by
    single parents, in the premises the Judge found  that  it  was  in  the
    Appellant's child's best interests to be with both parents.  So far  as
    the other two children were concerned the Judge found - it seems to  me
    sustainably - that the nature of the relationship  with  the  Appellant
    was not such that they themselves  would  be  unduly  affected  by  his
    removal.


27.  At paragraph 48 the Judge continued this theme in these terms.

         "I find that the Appellant does not have  a  parental  relationship
         with Ms Fateha's two elder children.  He is not their stepfather in
         UK  law  and  is  not  their  guardian.   He  has  no   rights   or
         responsibilities in law towards these two children.  I  have  found
         that he is part of the family unit from 2017 but this does not make
         a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  in  such  a  short
         period.  As such I do not consider whether  it  is  reasonable  for
         these two children to leave the UK.  If I am wrong in that  I  find
         that it is reasonable for the  family  to  make  a  decision  about
         whether the children should  relocate,  whether  Ms  Fateha  should
         sponsor the Appellant's application  for  entry  clearance  in  the
         normal  way  or  whether  the  children  remain  in  the  UK   with
         relatives."


28.  Then at paragraph 49 the Judge states this

         "With regard to the youngest child the Appellant is the  father  of
         this child.  The child is very young and it is reasonable  for  him
         to leave the UK if that is what the family decide."


29.  Paragraph 50 similarly goes on to discuss the possible  decisions  that
    the family might make.  It is said "the situation is  entirely  of  the
    couple's making"; and "the couple have some hard choices  to  make  but
    the situation is of their own making".  However,  the  Judge  does  not
    expressly state that the situation was not of  any  of  the  children's
    making.


30.  The Judge essentially concludes that it is not unreasonable  to  expect
    the adults of the family unit to make a decision as  to  how  the  unit
    might be structured in the event of the  Appellant's  removal.   In  my
    judgment that is incomplete and not adequate; it was incumbent upon the
    Judge to give consideration  to  the  different  scenarios  that  might
    result, and to consider whether any interference inherent  in  the  re-
    arrangement of the family could be justified  as  being  proportionate.
    It was not enough to say - as was the substance of paragraph 49 -  that
    if the family decided the Appellant's child should leave the  UK,  then
    that was  reasonable.   It  was  the  Judge's  task  to  make  such  an
    evaluation.


31.  The Judge should have 'played out' the scenarios likely in  consequence
    of the Respondent's decision to evaluate the circumstances in which  it
    might or might not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK  -
    the country of his nationality. One scenario would be for the child  to
    accompany the Appellant whilst his mother remained in the UK  with  her
    two other children - the child's half-siblings.   This  would  separate
    the child from the mother and his siblings.  Another potential scenario
    would be for the child to leave in  the  company  of  both  mother  and
    father - but that would then require an evaluation of the circumstances
    of the other British citizen children, of 16 and 12 years of age: would
    it  be  reasonable  for  them  to  quit  the  UK,  or  would  it  be  a
    proportionate interference with their family life for them to remain in
    the UK without their mother?


32.  The Judge in substance concluded that any such option was ultimately  a
    matter for the Appellant and his partner,  and  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect them to make the choice.  It  seems  to  me  that  that  was  to
    abdicate  the   responsibility   for   making   a   decision   on   the
    proportionality of the Respondent's decision.


33.  Accordingly I find that the decision in respect of Article  8  must  be
    set aside for error of law.


34.  I am also persuaded that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    allegation of using a false English language certificate in a  previous
    application. Necessarily this means that this aspect of the  case  also
    requires to be revisited, and in the circumstances it is  inappropriate
    to proceed to remake the decision in the appeal on the premise  of  the
    Judge's favourable finding on deception.


35.  The evidential burden as to the use of a  false  test  certificate  was
    conceded. Accordingly what was required was for the Appellant to  offer
    an 'innocent explanation' for how he came to submit a false document in
    support of his earlier application for leave  to  remain.   Necessarily
    that innocent explanation had to be an explanation of how, without  his
    knowing, somebody else's voice had got to be on the tape for  the  test
    he supposedly took himself.


36.  Having reviewed the case law  and  the  generic  evidence,  and  having
    noted that the evidential burden issue had  been  conceded,  the  Judge
    then poses the wrong question:

         "The question for me to decide is whether the  Appellant  has  been
         wrongly identified as submitting a fraudulent test." (paragraph 8).


37.  The question thus posed runs contrary to the  concession  that  it  had
    been shown that the Appellant had  submitted  a  false  test.  and  the
    question was in fact whether he had done so innocently.


38.  This error is potentially ameliorated in that the  Judge  implies  that
    he took the correct approach when he later states that he was satisfied
    that the Appellant had submitted a false test "but that he did  not  do
    that unknowingly" (paragraph 10). However, in my judgement there are in
    any event errors in the approach of the Judge to the key question.


39.  The Judge's reasons and  conclusion  as  to  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge are set out at paragraph 9:

         "The Appellant's bundle does not have any documents which  indicate
         that the Appellant made any contact with either the college or  ETS
         to find out details as to why his test had been cancelled after  he
         received a decision letter which notified  him  of  the  allegation
         that he had been involved in fraud  and  his  test  cancelled.   He
         however claims that he was unaware of the allegation regarding  the
         false test until the decision letter of 19 March  2018  was  served
         upon him and he then entered his appeal.  I find this a  reasonable
         explanation.  He has produced various certificates of  prior  tests
         including a IELTS one for his first visa, and  higher  level  exams
         from Bangladesh.  He gave evidence consistent with attending at the
         centre, indicating the number of people attending and the location.
          Whilst of course this could all be gleaned from  the  Respondent's
         bundle I find that the Appellant did not knowingly  participate  in
         fraud.  His  English  was  excellent  at  the  hearing  and  whilst
         obviously five years has passed since the disputed test it shows  a
         real aptitude for the language and is entirely consistent with  his
         partner's evidence that whilst his English has possibly improved  a
         little over the years that he has known her  (since  2012)  he  has
         always been fluent.  His explanation as to why he chose  this  test
         and centre was reasonable.  I find  that  the  Respondent  his  not
         shown that this Appellant knowingly  participated  in  fraud.   The
         description of the 'secret room' in the Project Fa�ade document  is
         consistent with some test takers being unaware  of  the  widespread
         cheating."


40.  The first section of paragraph 9 addresses the Appellant's  explanation
    for not having raised matters directly with ETS upon  learning  of  the
    allegation of fraud.  In substance the Judge accepted  the  Appellant's
    explanation to the effect that he thought he was in  substance  dealing
    with the matter by entering his appeal.  Indeed, Mr Shah suggested that
    in his very considerable experience of such matters little  would  have
    been forthcoming if the  Appellant  had  sought  to  raise  the  matter
    directly with either the college or ETS.  The Judge's approach in  this
    regard is uncontroversial. However, the satisfactory explanation as  to
    why no action was taken directly can be no more than a  neutral  factor
    in seeking the necessary 'innocent explanation'.


41.   The  Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's  competence  in  English,  by
    reference both to various certificates and qualifications and  his  use
    of English at the hearing.  In so doing the Judge appears not  to  have
    had regard to what was said by the Upper Tribunal in MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
    testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 in particular at paragraph 57

         "...in the abstract of course there was  a  range  of  reasons  why
         persons proficient in English may engage in the TOEIC fraud.  These
         include inexhaustively lack of confidence, fear of failure, lack of
         time and commitment and contempt for the immigration system.  These
         reasons could conceivably overlap in individual cases and there  is
         scope for other explanations for deceitful conduct in this sphere."




42.  I acknowledge that competence is  not  irrelevant  to  the  issue;  but
    plainly neither  is  it  determinative  in  favour  of  any  particular
    individual's offered 'innocent explanation'.  The Judge, in failing  to
    identify the guidance in MA and the non-determinative impact  of  these
    matters, is in error - bearing in mind, as will be seen, there  are  no
    other positive factors in the reasons offered  by  the  Judge  for  his
    conclusion.


43.  The remaining reasons set out by the Judge relate  to  the  Appellant's
    choice of test centre and seeming familiarity with the  test  centre  -
    its  location  and  the  procedures  at  the  location.   However,  the
    fraudulent exam taker nonetheless is just as likely to attend the  test
    centre as the genuine applicant. The difference is that the  fraudulent
    applicant once he or she has presented his personal details will  stand
    aside to allow the proxy tester to take over. As  such  being  able  to
    explain why a particular test centre was  chosen,  and  being  able  to
    demonstrate familiarity with the test centre does not  distinguish  the
    genuine from the fraudulent.


44.  In this context I fail to understand the Judge's reasoning  in  respect
    of the possible use of a 'secret room'  which  would  allow  fraudulent
    activity to take place away from the eyes of other innocent candidates.
     The possibility that cheating was going on behind closed doors  in  no
    way begins to explain how it is that a different voice came  to  be  on
    the  tape  recording  of  the  Appellant's  speaking  test.    In   the
    circumstances  I  do  not  understand  this  to  add  anything  to  the
    Appellant's explanation.


45.  In all such circumstances I find that the Judge  has  not  demonstrated
    adequate analysis of the issues, and his reasons are  unsustainable  to
    an extent that they constitute an error of law.


Notice of Decision

46.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  material
    errors of law and is set aside


47.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson  with
    all issues at large.


48.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:                                 Date: 22 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


