
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/08960/2016

                                              HU/08964/2016

                                                      HU/08967/2016

                                                      HU/08970/2016

                                                      HU/08974/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |       Decision and Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 2 May 2018                         |       On 09 May 2018               |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE



                                   Between

                                   O S ON
                                   K P ON
                                   S J ON
                                    O ON
                                   N V ON
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson (Counsel) instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellants.

2.  These are appeals by the Appellants against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Shergill promulgated on 21 June  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The First Appellant is the mother of the remaining four  appellants.  The
first appellant entered the UK in 2007 as a student.  The  second  appellant
is now 19 years old, and was 8 years  old  when  she  entered  the  UK.  The
remaining appellants were born in the UK. The second  and  third  appellants
had been in the UK for more than 7 years at the date their applications  for
leave to remain were submitted.

4. The appellants  are  all  Nigerian  nationals.  On  23  April  2015  they
submitted applications for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds. Those applications were refused  by  the  respondent  on  14  March
2016.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Shergill ("the Judge") dismissed the appeals against the  Respondent's
decision.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged,  and,  on  28  November  2017,
Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Peart  granted  permission  to
appeal, stating

      3. The grounds claim that the Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
      principles  underlying  276ADE  and  section   117B(6),   applied   an
      inconsistent approach including failing to resolve the argument as  to
      whether or not the second appellant was to be treated as an adult or a
      child and failed to address properly or at all  the  question  of  the
      children's best interests.


      4. The Judge was obliged to carry  out  an  analysis  of  the  various
      family members ability to meet the rules and then consider  the  wider
      context of the family unit's circumstances both here and on return  to
      Nigeria.  There  was  a  necessity  to  weigh  in  the  assessment  of
      reasonableness  the  mandatory  terms  of  s.117A-B,   an   individual
      assessment with regard to s.117B(6) and then a  consideration  of  the
      appellants circumstances outside the rules in  so  far  as  a  general
      approach to article 8 was required.


      5. It appeared that  two  of  the  children  satisfied  paragraph  276
      ADE(iv). Alternatively, one  of  them  satisfied  276ADE(iv)  and  one
      satisfied (v) but the Judge failed to resolve that at [38] - [52].


      6. Whilst the Judge referred to various caselaw at  [11]  -[12]  there
      was no attempt to  set  the  appellants'  circumstances  against  that
      caselaw in his analysis.


      7. For all these reasons, I find the judge  carried  out  an  arguably
      inadequate analysis of the appellants' circumstances  and  accordingly
      reached a decision there was arguably perverse.


      8. All grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellants, Mr Nicholson moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
referred me to MT & ET (child's best interests; ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
[2018] UKUT 88(IAC). He said that powerful reasons are required to  overcome
the length of residence of children in the UK. He told me  that  the  second
appellant has been in the UK for more than 10  years,  the  third  appellant
will have been in the UK for 10 years  tomorrow.  The  third  appellant  was
born in the UK and, tomorrow, can apply for British citizenship.

(b) Mr Nicholson told me that the Judge had failed to take  account  of  the
best interests of the children and failed to take account of the  length  of
residence of the four child appellants when considering this case.  He  told
me that the Judge did not make  any  proper  findings  in  relation  to  the
children's best interests and that there is no finding  on  strong  powerful
reasons which were in favour of removal. He took me to [54] to [58]  of  the
decision, telling me that [54]  to  [57]  were  correct  but  that  [58]  is
completely wrong.

(c) Mr Nicholson insisted  that  the  second  appellant's  appeal  had  been
incorrectly decided. He agreed that at the date of  application  the  second
appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of
the  rules,  but  told  me  that  because  the  appellant  can  meet   those
requirements at the date of decision the Judge should have  made  a  finding
that an application by the second appellant now  is  bound  to  succeed.  By
analogy the second appellant  should  succeed  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds
outside  the  rules  (because  the  respondent's  position   is   that   the
immigration rules embrace all article 8 considerations)

(d) Mr Nicholson turned to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and  argued  that
there is no public interest in removing the four child appellants.  He  told
me that, now, the second  appellant  is  an  adult  and  can  succeed  under
paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.  Tomorrow  the  third  appellant  can
make an application for British citizenship. Today the fourth appellant  has
been in the UK for seven years.

(e) Mr Nicholson urged me to set the decision aside  and  to  substitute  my
own decision in line with MT  &  ET  (child's  best  interests;  ex  tempore
pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88(IAC) & PD and Others (Article  8  -  conjoined
family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).

7. (a) For the respondent, Mrs Aboni told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. Mrs  Aboni  relied  on  the  rule  24
response and told me that the Judge directed himself correctly. She told  me
that the first appellant chose not to give evidence and that the  respondent
was not represented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  so  that  there  was
little  evidence  placed  before  the  Judge  about  the  first  appellant's
circumstances & her ties to Nigeria, or the circumstances that  this  family
would face if they go to Nigeria.

(b) Mrs Aboni took me to [21] of the decision, where the Judge  bemoans  the
paucity of evidence, and told me that  the  findings  the  Judge  made  were
based on a careful analysis of what was actually pled.

(c) Mrs Aboni told me that the second appellant was under 18  years  of  age
at the date of application and over 18 years of age at the date of  hearing.
She told me that the Judge correctly dealt with the second  appellant  as  a
child  and  then  considered  the  second  appellant's  appeal  outside  the
immigration rules as an adult. She told me that the Judge's  proportionality
assessment for each appellant is careful and  beyond  criticism.  Mrs  Aboni
referred to [73] to [80] and told me that, there, the Judge  carries  out  a
proportionality assessment weighing the public interest factors against  the
best interests of the child appellants.

(d) Mrs Aboni urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

8. The Judge's consideration commences with the first  appellant,  not  with
the best interests of the remaining appellants. It is only at  [38]  of  the
decision of the decision that the  Judge  turns  to  the  second  appellant.
There the Judge finds that the second appellant has been in the UK for  more
than 10 years and is now over 18 years of age. At [40] of the  decision  the
Judge appears to try to incorporate the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
letter brevitatis causa. At [43] the Judge's  assessment  of  reasonableness
for the second appellant is clearly dependent on  the  Judge's  findings  in
relation to the first appellant.

9. Between [45] and [52] the Judge considers the second appellant's  article
8 appeal outside the immigration rules. At [49] the  Judge  finds  that  the
public interest outweighs the argument advanced for the second appellant.

10. It is apparent that the Judge has gone to a lot of effort  in  preparing
this decision, but it is also clear that the Judge has not  made  a  finding
about the best interests of the second appellant, who was  a  child  at  the
date of the application. It is difficult to see how the  Judge  reaches  his
conclusions at [49] the decision. It is difficult to see whether or not  the
Judge has applied section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act.  In  his  analysis  of
article 8 outside the immigration rules, the Judge does not take account  of
the fact that the second appellant  can  now  succeed  under  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(v) of the rules.

11. The Judge moves on to consider the third, fourth  and  fifth  appellants
from [53] of the decision. The Judge acknowledges that the  third  appellant
is a qualifying child, and assesses the test of reasonableness between  [65]
and [70] of the decision. Although the Judge takes correct guidance  in  law
the Judge does not make any findings about the best interests of  the  third
appellant nor does the Judge factor in  the  importance  of  the  length  of
residence of the second and third appellant in his analysis.

12. Between [73] and  [78]  the  Judge  considers  proportionality  for  all
appellants  cumulatively.  Despite  reminding  himself  a  number  of  times
throughout the decision that the first appellant's  immigration  history  is
irrelevant when considering the remaining appellants, he  starts  [74]  with
the first appellant's immigration history at the forefront of his mind.

13. At [76] the Judge fails to take  guidance  from  Kaur  (children's  best
interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14  (IAC),  so  that  his
findings that little weight can be attached  to  the  private  life  of  the
second, third, fourth and fifth appellants is undermined.

14. Although the Judge discusses the best  interests  of  the  children  and
discusses whether or not it would be reasonable for each appellant to  leave
the UK, in reality the decision contains inadequate findings  about  whether
or not there  are  strong,  powerful  reasons  to  overcome  the  length  of
residence of the second, third, fourth and fifth  appellants.  The  decision
contains inadequate consideration of the best  interests  of  the  children.
There is a material error of law.

15. I set the decision aside.

16. Although I set the decision aside there is enough material before me  to
let me substitute my own decision.

My Findings of Fact

17. At the date of  application  none  of  the  appellants  could  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules. The first appellant  entered  the  UK
in 2007 as a student. Her leave to remain  expired  on  31  July  2010.  The
first appellant made a series of  unsuccessful  applications  for  leave  to
remain in the UK. On 23 April 2015 all  five  appellants  made  applications
for leave to remain, which were refused by the respondent on 14 March  2016.
It is against those decisions that each appellant appeals.

18. At  the  date  of  application  the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth
appellants were all children. The second appellant is now 19 years old.  The
second appellant came to the UK as an 8 year old.  She has her  primary  and
secondary education in the UK and is now moving on to tertiary education.

19. The third, fourth and fifth appellants were born  in  the  UK  and  have
never lived anywhere else. The third appellant has now been present  in  the
UK for 10 years. She is entitled  to  apply  for  British  citizenship.  The
fourth appellant is now a qualifying child.

20. The second appellant was praised as a model pupil at  secondary  school.
The third, fourth and fifth appellants are following in her footsteps.  They
are happy and well settled  at  school.  They  are  studying  well  and  are
academically gifted.

21. If the second appellant  submits  an  application  today  for  leave  to
remain on private life grounds, she could succeed under paragraph  276ADE(v)
of the immigration rules.

The Immigration Rules

22. The respondent accepted that the first  appellant  met  the  suitability
requirements, but not the eligibility requirement. The focus was on  E-LTRPT
2.2 of the rules because the respondent believed that the first  appellant's
children could return to Nigeria with the first appellant.
23. E-LTRPT.2.2. says
   The child of the applicant must be-
        (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or where
        the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant was first
        granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent under this
        Appendix, must not have formed an independent family unit or be
        leading an independent life;
        (b) living in the UK; and
        (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or
        (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
        immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph EX.1.
        applies.

24. EX.1 says
   EX.1. This paragraph applies if
              (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
              relationship with a child who-
                    (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age
                    of 18 years when the applicant was first granted leave
                    on the basis that this paragraph applied;
                    (bb) is in the UK;
                    (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                    continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and
              (ii) taking into account their best interests as a primary
              consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect the child
              to leave the UK;

25.  Since the date of decision in this case the Upper Tribunal  has  issued
the decision in MT & ET (child's best interests; ex tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
[2018] UKUT 88(IAC).

26. The circumstances of the second appellant are  on  all  fours  with  the
circumstances of the child appellant  in  MT  &  ET.  Relying  on  R(on  the
application MA (Pakistan) and Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705, there must  be  a  powerful
reason why a child who has been in the United  Kingdom  for  over  10  years
should be removed. There is a dearth of evidence of such a powerful  reason.
The second appellant can  make  a  successful  application  under  paragraph
276ADE of the rules today. Consideration  under  the  immigration  rules  is
restricted to the date of application. Becoming an  adult  is  a  change  in
circumstances since the date of  application,  but  the  fact  remains  that
there is no evidence of powerful reasons which would outweigh the length  of
residence. That is what  was  found  in   MT  &  ET  on  similar  facts  and
circumstances.

27. As there are no powerful reasons to  remove  the  second  appellant,  it
cannot be  reasonable  for  the  second  and  third  appellants  (Qualifying
children at the date of application) to leave the UK.  The  first  appellant
meets the requirements of appendix FM.

28. For the same reasons, at the date of application the  second  and  third
appellants met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which says

      276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
      of application, the applicant:
            (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
           imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
           applicant to leave the UK;

29. Three of the five appellants meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
Rules.

Article 8 ECHR

30.  The sole ground of appeal is on article 8 ECHR grounds.  Section  117B
of the 2002 Act  tells  me  that  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
interest. Family life within the meaning of article 8  is  established  for
the appellants. The respondent's decision  is  an  interference  with  that
family life. The burden therefore shifts to the respondent to show that the
interference was justified. The respondent  relies  solely  on  the  public
interest in effective immigration control.

31.  The  third  and  fourth  appellants  are  (now)  qualifying   children.
S.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which says

    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

32.  The focus in this case is on sub-section (6) of Section  117B.  Section
117B(6) is in two parts which are conjunctive. Section 117B(6)(a) weighs  in
favour of the first appellant because  she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
paternal relationship with qualifying children.  It  is  Section  117B(6)(b)
which is determinative of this case.

33. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means  a  person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue is whether it is not reasonable for that child  to
return.

34. The third and  fourth  appellant's  are  now  qualifying  children.  The
question for me is whether or not it is reasonable for the child  appellants
to leave the UK.

35.  I remind  myself   of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009. In ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC  4   Lady  Hale  said
that "Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
importance in assessing the best interests of any child".

36.  In R(on the application MA (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held that in light of the jurisprudence of the  Supreme  Court,  courts  and
tribunals were not mandated to approach the proportionality  exercise  where
the best interests of the child were in issue in any particular  order  such
that it was an error of law for them to fail to do so:.  Although  it  would
usually be sensible to start with the child's best interests, ultimately  it
did not matter how the balancing exercise was conducted  provided  that  the
child's best interests were treated as a primary  consideration  (paras  49,
53-57 and 72).   In  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest
interface) [2017] UKUT  14  (IAC)  in  which  it  was  held  that  the  best
interests assessment should normally be carried out at the beginning of  the
balancing exercise.

37. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

38. On the facts as I find them to be, today the second appellant meets  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v). At the date of decision, the  second
and third appellants met the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE(iv).  Today,
the third appellant is entitled to apply  for  British  citizenship.  Today,
the third and fourth appellants are qualifying children. On the facts  as  I
find  them  to  be,  the  first,  second  and  third  appellants   met   the
requirements of the immigration rules at the date of decision.

39. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  the
Tribunal  further  held  that  the  claimant's  ability   to   satisfy   the
Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,  but
is capable of  being  a  weighty,  though  not  determinative,  factor  when
deciding whether such refusal is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
enforcing immigration control.

40. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
confirmed that if section 117B(6) applies then "there can be no  doubt  that
section 117B(6) must be read as a  self-contained  provision  in  the  sense
that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified  in  the
sub-section are satisfied, the public interest will  not  justify  removal."
It was additionally held that the fact that a child had been in the  UK  for
seven years should  be  given  significant  weight  in  the  proportionality
exercise because it is relevant to determining the nature  and  strength  of
the child's best interests and as it established as a  starting  point  that
leave should be granted unless there were powerful reasons to the  contrary.


41. The second appellant's circumstances are the same as  the  appellant  in
MT & ET. In that case the Upper Tribunal looked for powerful reasons  why  a
child who has been in the UK for over 10 years should be removed  and  found
that there were no such powerful reasons. Paragraphs 30 to 34  the  decision
in MT & ET could have been written with the second appellant in mind.

42. Applying exactly the same logic to the facts as I find them to  be,  the
first appellant's immigration history is not so bad that it  can  constitute
a powerful reason  that  would  render  reasonable  the  second  appellant's
removal to Nigeria.

43. The second, third and fourth appellants succeed on  article  8  grounds.
In line with PD their success leads to success for all five appellants.

Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 21 June  2017  is
tainted by material errors of law and is set aside.

45. I substitute my own decision

46. The appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed  Paul Doyle
   Date  8 May 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
