
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08631/2019
                                                               HU/08634/2019
                                                         & HU/08640/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2020                    |On 15 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              Prem Kumari Begha
                             Prem Bahadur Begha
                             Jyoti Prakash Begha
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 3 August 2020.

The appellants, mother, father and son, are nationals of  Nepal.  They  have
been granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Swinnerton, promulgated on 4 February 2020, dismissing  their
appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant   entry
clearance to settle in the UK.

The second appellant is an ex-Gurkha  soldier  who  served  in  the  British
Gurkha Regiment for 15 years, from 1984 until his discharge, with  exemplary
conduct, in 1999. He applied, in August 2018, for entry clearance to  settle
in the UK under the ex-Gurkha discretionary policy, together with  his  wife
and son who applied as his dependants under the policy.

The second appellant's application was  refused  on  2  April  2019  on  the
grounds that he did not qualify for entry clearance outside the  immigration
rules under the ex-Gurkha discretionary policy because he did not  apply  to
settle in the UK within the relevant time period. He did not  qualify  under
Appendix Armed Forces paragraph 11(b)(i) as he had not made his  application
for entry  clearance  within  2  years  of  his  discharge.  The  respondent
considered that the decision to refuse the appellant's application  did  not
breach Article 8. The first and third appellants' applications were  refused
in line with that decision.

The appellants' appeal against the decisions came  before  Judge  Swinnerton
on 28 January 2020. The judge found that  the  second  appellant  could  not
meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  as  he  was  not  applying
within 2 years of being discharged from the  Army.  The  judge  went  on  to
consider the Home Office policy guidance entitled 'HM  Forces:  applications
on discharge' (the HM Forces policy), which  addressed  circumstances  where
the only reason for refusal was because the applicant  had  been  discharged
more than 2 years ago. The judge rejected the  appellant's  explanation  for
having only applied in 2018,  namely  that  there  had  been  a  failure  of
communication by the Ministry of Defence in informing him of an  opportunity
for settlement. The judge noted that, whilst the appellant was  deployed  in
the UK for a total of more than 4 years, the last occasion ended  almost  23
years ago, and he concluded  in  the  circumstances  that  the  respondent's
decision was not disproportionate. The judge dismissed the appeals.

The appellants sought permission to  appeal  the  judge's  decision  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to consider that  historic  injustice  had
been established. It was asserted in the grounds that the judge  had  failed
to consider that the second appellant relied  on  the  discretionary  policy
which permitted the respondent to disregard the 2-year time period  to  make
an application after discharge. The fact that the second appellant  met  the
discretionary  criteria  of  Chapter  15,  section  2A  of  the  IDI  was  a
determinative  factor  in  the  human  rights  appeal.  The  judge  had  not
considered the respondent's failure to apply discretion under  Chapter  29.4
of  the  DSP  Entry  Clearance  Volume  1  General   Instructions   entitled
"Settlement entry for former members of HM Forces and their  dependants"  to
disregard the requirement for the application to be  made  no  more  than  2
years after discharge from the British Army. The judge had erred in  law  by
concluding that family life did not exist in this case.

Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 17  June  2020  on  all
grounds.

The case was then reviewed by the Upper Tribunal due  to  the  circumstances
relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions sent out on  3  August  2020,
Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  indicated  that  he   had   reached   the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.

Written submissions have been received  from  the  appellant,  in  which  no
objection was made to the matter being dealt with on the papers  under  rule
34. It was conceded on behalf of  the  appellants  that  they  were  wrongly
advised to pursue a human rights appeal and that  their  grounds  of  appeal
were misconceived as this was a pure entry clearance  case  which  ought  to
have been challenged by way of judicial review. However,  the  Tribunal  was
invited to set  the  judge's  decision  aside  on  the  basis  that  he  had
misconstrued the HM Forces policy and had failed to  treat  the  case  as  a
historic injustice case. It was also asserted that the judge  had  erred  in
his adverse credibility findings by failing  to  refer  to  the  appellant's
explanation for the delay in making his application. It  was  accepted  that
the decision on the re-making would be to dismiss the human rights appeals.

I am  not  persuaded  by  the  assertion  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge
misconstrued the HM Forces policy.  The  judge  gave  consideration  to  the
policy and to the discretion to be exercised in cases where the only  reason
for refusal was because the applicant was discharged from the  British  Army
more than 2 years ago. The grounds rely, in section C, on  page  11  of  the
policy in that regard and assert that the reason for the delay in making  an
application outside the 2  year  time  limit  was  not  a  relevant  factor.
However, that section of the policy refers to  applications  for  settlement
after entry, whereas the  relevant  section  would  have  been  at  page  9,
relating to applications for  indefinite  leave  to  enter,  which  requires
compliance with the general eligibility requirements at page 7.

As for the reliance in the grounds on Chapter 29.4 of the DSP  Instructions,
that requires "strong reasons why settlement in the UK is  appropriate".  In
that respect, the grounds at [9] assert that the judge erred by  not  taking
account  of  the  respondent's  failure  to  exercise  discretion   in   the
appellant's favour owing to his stay in the UK for more than 3  years  prior
to discharge from the Army. However, the relevant factor within  the  policy
was 3 years of living in the UK after discharge and  plainly  that  did  not
apply to the appellant who, according  to  his  own  evidence,  returned  to
Nepal after he was discharged from the Army. The relevant  factors  referred
to in the DSP Instructions were considered by the judge at [25] and it  does
not seem to me that there  was  anything  within  those  Instructions  which
assisted or benefitted the appellant, as the judge clearly found.

As for the question of "historic injustice", that  was  clearly  the  matter
which the judge was considering at [24] when having regard  to  the  lengthy
delay by the appellant in making his application and  his  reasons  for  the
delay. Contrary to the  assertion  in  the  grounds,  the  judge  gave  full
consideration to the appellant's explanation  for  the  delay  and  provided
cogent reasons for rejecting  that  explanation.  The  judge  was  perfectly
entitled, in my view, to draw the adverse conclusions that he  did  in  that
regard and, as such, the  question  of  "historic  injustice"  was  accorded
appropriate weight in the judge's  decision.  The  grounds  challenging  the
judge's adverse findings in that regard are simply a disagreement.

In the circumstances it seems to me that the judge was entitled to make  the
findings that he did and to conclude that the appellant  could  not  succeed
within the terms of the policy and could not make out  a  case  outside  the
immigration rules.

In any event, as the submission on the error of law rightly  acknowledge  at
[4], the appellants could not succeed in their appeals  in  any  event.  The
only grounds available to them were human rights grounds, yet  it  is  clear
that Article 8 could not be  engaged  and  that  the  respondent's  decision
could  not  have  given  rise  to  any  interference  with  the  appellants'
protected rights.

For all these reasons I do not find that the judge erred in  law  and  I  do
not agree to set aside his decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeals stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 5 October 2020
