
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08189/2016
                                                               HU/08193/2016
                                                               HU/08194/2016
                                                           and HU/08197/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2018                         |On 26 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                               Mr parvez iqbal
                                                       First Named Appellant

                            Mr raja Hamza pervaiz
                                                      Second Named Appellant

                            mr raja aqib pervaiz
                                                       Third Named Appellant

                             mrs sajida pervaiz
                                                      Fourth Named Appellant

                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)



Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Pickering, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First Named Appellant is  Mr  Parvez  Iqbal  whose  nationality  is
    Pakistani. The other Appellants are also citizens of Pakistan and  they
    are the wife and dependent children of the First Named Appellant.  They
    made an application to the Respondent for leave  to  remain  which  was
    refused and following a hearing, and in a  decision  promulgated  on  8
    June 2017, Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  David  C  Clapham  SSC
    dismissed their appeals.

 2. An application was made for permission to appeal  which  was  initially
    refused. However, a renewed application was made to the Upper  Tribunal
    and in a decision dated 18 May 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill gave  the
    following reasons for her partial grant of permission to appeal: -


         "It is unnecessary to hold an oral hearing of the  application  for
         permission to appeal because I consider that  it  can  properly  be
         dealt with on the papers.


         Permission to appeal is granted but limited as explained below.


         The second appellant (DOB: 11 March 1998) and the  third  appellant
         (DOB: 19 November 1996) arrived in the United Kingdom  on  8  April
         2008. As at the date of their applications (on  18  December  2015)
         for leave to remain under Article 8, they had  both  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom for 9 years. As at that date, the  second  appellant
         was 17 years old but the third appellant was 20 years old.  By  the
         date of the hearing before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal David C
         Clapham SSC, they were both over 18 years of age.


         Hence the second appellant was under the age of 18 years as at  the
         date of his application and had lived in the United Kingdom for  at
         least 7 years,  his  private  life  claim  fell  to  be  considered
         initially under para 276ADE(1)(iv) and then (if necessary)  outside
         the Rules.


         It is arguable that, in deciding the second appellant's case  under
         para 276ADE(1)(iv), the judge may have erred by  failing  to  apply
         the guidance in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 704;  in  particular,
         para 49.


         If (and only if) his claim succeeds under  para  276ADE(1)(iv),  it
         may be necessary to consider the impact of this on the family  life
         claims of the remaining appellants.


         Permission is therefore granted on the following grounds only:


         1. In relation to the judge's assessment of the  third  appellant's
         case under para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.


         2.  In  relation  to  the  family  life  claims  of  the  remaining
    appellants.
         Permission is otherwise refused for the following reasons:


         1. To the extent that the grounds contend that the judge  erred  by
         failing to consider the best interests of the children, they ignore
         the fact that the third and fourth appellants were over the age  of
         18 years as at the date of the hearing. Accordingly, s.55  was  not
         relevant.


         2. It is unarguable that the judge did not consider the position of
         each of the appellants individually. The mere fact that he referred
         to them as a family does not mean that  he  did  not  decide  their
         cases individually. For example, he referred to the first appellant
         specifically at para 24 and the third appellant at para 27.


         3. The submission that the children should not be  blamed  for  the
         parents' and their own immigration history ignores the judgment  in
         MA (Pakistan), where the Court of Appeal  held  that  wider  public
         interest considerations are to be taken into  account  in  deciding
         reasonableness.


         Factual comparisons with  other  cases  are  unhelpful.  They  most
         certainly do not establish that  the  judge  in  the  instant  case
         arguably erred in law."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms Pickering relied upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    emphasising that the Judge had materially erred at paragraph 27 of  his
    decision in considering whether it would be reasonable  for  the  third
    Appellant to return to Pakistan.  The  Judge,  she  said,  had  focused
    solely on the issue of his being returned with his parents and had  not
    looked at his circumstances individually under paragraph  276  ADE  (1)
    (iv) of the Immigration Rules and in relation to the family life claims
    of the remaining Appellants. She referred me to  the  authority  of  MA
    (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and in particular paragraphs 46 to
    49. She submitted that the Judge had erred by failing to treat the best
    interests of the third Appellant as a primary consideration and had not
    taken into account relevant authorities. Further there was  an  absence
    of a holistic assessment and inadequate reasoning  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that he did. The Judge had failed to make findings  of  fact
    on relevant issues which should have been subsumed within  his  overall
    analysis.

 5. Mr Diwnyz did not resist these arguments. Both representatives urged me
    to accept that further findings need to be made  and  that  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal on  a  limited  basis.  I
    share that analysis.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside  to  the  limited
extent that findings need to be made to assess the  third  Appellant's  case
under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) of the Immigration Rules and the impact  of
any such findings on the family life claims  of  the  remaining  Appellants.
Beyond this all other findings are preserved. The appeal is remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Direction  7(b)
before any Judge aside from Judge Clapham.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                                     Date:          24
September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



