
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08608/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2020               |On 29th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MRS SADIA [C]
                     (Anonymity Direction Made Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Shah Law Chamber


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Introduction


   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mrs
      Sadia [C].  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this
      decision I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I
      refer to Mrs [C] as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the
      respondent.


   2. The hearing before me on 22nd September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  Neither the
      appellant nor her sponsor joined the hearing.  I sat at the Birmingham
      Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were open to
      the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was addressed by
      the representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been, if
      the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that
      this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice
      principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and
      that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
      interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was
      satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
      with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
      of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
      19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would
      ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
      proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
      issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
      parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
      had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


The Background


   3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  On 9th January 2019, she
      made an application for entry clearance as a partner.  The application
      was refused for reasons set out in a decision made by the respondent
      dated 18th April 2019.  The respondent did not accept that the
      eligibility relationship requirement set out in paragraph E-ECP.2.1 of
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules is met by the appellant.  The
      respondent noted that the appellant relies upon a 'Marriage
      Registration Certificate' as evidence of her marriage to Mr Tariq [C]
      on 9th March 2013 in Pakistan.  The respondent noted that the
      appellant had provided evidence that she was divorced on 23rd August
      2011, and, evidence that her sponsor was divorced on 21st March 2014,
      a year after their wedding had taken place in March 2013.  The
      respondent noted that the marriage that had taken place in March 2013
      in Pakistan had taken place whilst the sponsor was domiciled in the
      UK.  The respondent did not accept that it was therefore a valid
      marriage. Furthermore, the respondent noted that the sponsor continued
      to live together with his ex-wife in the same house, causing the
      respondent to doubt that the relationship between the sponsor and his
      ex-wife has genuinely broken down.


   4. At paragraph [16] of his decision, Judge Clarke noted that the
      appellant and Mr Tariq [C] have a child together born on 6th December
      2013, who is a British citizen.  He noted the child lives with the
      appellant in Pakistan and has done so since birth.


   5. The appellant's sponsor and his ex-wife gave evidence before the First-
      tier Tribunal.  Judge Clarke found, at paragraph [17] of his decision
      that the sponsor and appellant are not in a valid marriage.  He noted
      that although the appellant was divorced in 2011 and was therefore
      free to marry, the sponsor's decree absolute from the Family Court
      sitting at Romford is dated 21st March 2014, some months after the
      sponsor and appellant were married in Pakistan.  At paragraph [19] of
      his decision, Judge Clarke said:


         "Under British law, the sponsor was not free to marry in 2013 as he
         was still married to Mrs Valerie [C].  I therefore find that the
         marriage between the appellant and sponsor is invalid. In so
         finding, I rely on Section 11(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973
         which states that a polygamous marriage entered into outside
         England and Wales shall still be void if either party at the time
         of the marriage was domiciled in England and Wales. This provision
         was set out by the Upper Tribunal in Abdin (domicile - actually
         polygamous marriages) [2012] UKUT 00309"


   6. Judge Clarke concluded that as the marriage is not a valid marriage,
      the appellant cannot meet the requirement in E-ECP.2.7, and therefore
      cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  He went on to
      address the Article 8 claim outside the immigration rules.  He was
      impressed by the evidence of Ms Valerie [C] in particular, and found
      that the relationship between the appellant and her sponsor is
      genuine.  At paragraph [29], Judge Clarke said:


         "The unconventional living arrangements of the Appellant, the
         Sponsor and the Sponsor's ex-wife living under one roof in the
         former matrimonial home of the Sponsor and Ms [C] does not mean
         that the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor is not
         genuine. Taking all the evidence before me, I find that there is a
         genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant and
         sponsor and the marriage between the sponsor and Ms [C] has broken
         down irretrievably and they are not in a relationship. They live
         together as friends."


   7. Judge Clarke found the appellant and her sponsor have established a
      family life together. He found the Article 8(1) rights of the
      appellant are engaged.  He noted, at paragraph [37], that his decision
      turns on the issue of proportionality.  He found that the public
      interest requires effective immigration control, the appellant can
      speak English, and that she is financially independent in the sense
      that she is not dependent on the British taxpayer. In adopting the
      'balance sheet approach' endorsed by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v
      SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, Judge Clarke noted the strong public interest in
      the maintenance of effective immigration controls and that the
      appellant's inability to meet the requirements of the immigration
      rules militate against the appellant. On the other side of the
      balance, Judge Clarke noted the appellant is in a genuine and
      subsisting relationship with her sponsor and she has a subsisting
      parental relationship with her son who is a British citizen.  At
      paragraphs [45] to [47] of his decision, Judge Clarke said:


         "45. I have firstly considered the best interests of the appellant
         and sponsor's son and remind myself of the Section 55 duty and that
         [N's] best interests are a primary, but not the paramount,
         consideration.


         46.  In terms of the best interests of the appellant's son, I rely
         on the fact that he is a British citizen and therefore has the
         right to come to the United Kingdom, even if his mother is denied
         entry clearance. I also remind myself that it is normally in the
         best interests of a child to be brought up by both parents, if at
         all possible, as was held in Azimi-Moayes and others (decisions
         affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197.


         47.  The refusal of entry clearance means that either the British
         child of the appellant will remain in the care of the appellant,
         separated from his British father or the appellant and sponsor will
         decide that their son should leave his mother and live with the
         sponsor here in the United Kingdom, separated from his mother."


   8. Judge Clarke acknowledged there is a strong public interest in
      maintaining effective immigration controls, but found the refusal of
      entry clearance is a disproportionate interference with the
      appellant's Article 8 rights.


   9. The respondent claims that in reaching his decision Judge Clarke
      failed to assess whether there are any insurmountable obstacles to
      family life between the appellant and her sponsor continuing in
      Pakistan. The respondent refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, in which
      the Court of Appeal held that Article 8 does not guarantee a right to
      choose one's country of residence, and, that where Article 8 is
      engaged the Tribunal should consider whether there are insurmountable
      obstacles to the continuation of family life abroad, before
      considering the exceptional circumstances test outside the Rules. The
      evaluation of whether there are insurmountable obstacles would be
      relevant to the question of exceptional circumstances.


  10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
      Hutchison on 5th May 2020.  It was noted:


         "The Appellant's appeal against refusal of entry clearance was
         allowed on Article 8 grounds outside the immigration rules. It is
         arguable that the Judge has erred in law when undertaking the
         Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise in failing to assess
         whether there are any insurmountable obstacles to family life
         continuing in Pakistan especially so as the marriage is found to be
         polygamous when it was entered into and does not satisfy the
         requirements of said rules.."


  11. Mr Howells submits that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements
      of the immigration rules and in reaching his decision, Judge Clarke
      only considered two alternatives at paragraph [47] of his decision.
      The first is the child remaining in Pakistan in the care of the
      appellant, separated from his father.  The second is the child leaving
      his mother in Pakistan to live with his father in the UK, separated
      from his mother.  Mr Howells submits that at no point in the decision
      does Judge Clarke address the fundamental question and third
      alternative.  That is, whether the appellant her sponsor and the child
      could live together as a family unit in Pakistan. He submits that in
      the respondent's decision, the respondent had noted that in the
      covering letter to the application, the appellant's representatives
      claimed it would be difficult for the sponsor to relocate to Pakistan
      as he lives and works in the UK.  The respondent had addressed that
      claim and had noted in the decision that although the appellant may
      wish to live in the UK rather than Pakistan, Article 8 does not oblige
      the UK to accept the choice of a couple as to which country they
      prefer to reside in.


  12. Mr Howells refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SD (British
      citizen children - entry clearance) Sri Lanka [2020] UKUT 00043 in
      which the Tribunal held that in assessing whether refusal to grant a
      parent entry clearance to join a partner has unjustifiably harsh
      consequences, the fact that such a parent has a child living with him
      or her who has British citizenship is a relevant factor. However, the
      weight to be accorded to such a factor will depend heavily on the
      particular circumstances and is not necessarily a powerful factor.  In
      SD, the appellant was a national of Sri Lanka who had married a
      British citizen and there were two children of the relationship, both
      British citizens.  SD applied for  entry clearance as a spouse under
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and her application was refused.
      As here, the two British citizen children were residing with the
      appellant abroad, and so the issue of the significance or otherwise of
      their British citizenship arose in the context of the refusal of the
      application made by children's mother to join her husband and their
      father in the UK.  At paragraphs [93] and [94], the Upper Tribunal
      considered the submission made on behalf of the SSHD that it was
      reasonable to expect the sponsor to move to or go and live in Sri
      Lanka in order for their family life to take place in that country.
      The Tribunal said:


         "93.  Mr Lindsay has submitted that it was reasonable to expect the
         sponsor to move to or go and live in Sri Lanka in order for their
         family life to take place in that country. Mr Lewis opposes that,
         submitting that that there would be insurmountable obstacles in the
         way of the sponsor doing so. He highlights that the sponsor is
         categorical that he does not want to go back and live in Sri Lanka
         We find the evidence relating to this issue somewhat mixed. The
         sponsor had lived there before: between 2011 and November 2017 he
         appears to have spent a considerable amount of time there. He says
         he has learnt Tamil. Even though he expressed concerns about being
         able to find properly remunerated employment there, he did have a
         job there for two months and he has not raised any other concerns
         about his own position if residing there. Although the sponsor
         suffers from depression and psychological problems, both he and his
         GP describe this as resulting from his separation from his wife and
         children. Even if being reunited with his family did not relieve or
         reduce his depression, there was no medical evidence, and it was
         not suggested by Mr Lewis, that he would be unable to access
         medical help for this condition in Sri Lanka. Notwithstanding his
         depression, he had worked and even after his recent accident, he
         said he was hopeful of finding work soon. On the other hand, it is
         clear that both the sponsor and the appellant badly want to live
         together as a family in the UK and that is also the keen wish of
         their children. If he returns to Sri Lanka to be with them, even
         though it is likely he will be able to find employment there, as he
         did before, it may well be at a level of remuneration lower than
         that required to meet the MIR.


         94. Weighing up the above considerations, we are satisfied that the
         sponsor returning to live in Sri Lanka would cause difficulties.
         But we are not satisfied that for him to go and live in Sri Lanka
         with his family would pose insurmountable obstacles or result in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences. We remind ourselves what was said
         in relation to the test of "insurmountable obstacles" in R (on the
         application of Agyarko) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department (Respondent) [2017] UKSC. The Supreme Court stated
         at [45] that:


             "By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"
             are treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under the
             Rules in cases to which that paragraph applies. Accordingly,
             interpreting the expression in the same sense as in the
             Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally be
             granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain under
             the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
             unless the applicant or their partner would face very serious
             difficulties in continuing their family life together outside
             the UK, which could not be overcome or would entail very
             serious hardship."


  13. In reply, Mr Jesurum quite properly in my judgment, acknowledged that
      Judge Clarke does not directly and expressly consider whether family
      life between the appellant, sponsor and their child can continue in
      Pakistan.  However, he submits it is implicit when the decision is
      read as a whole that the Judge had considered that possibility, and in
      any event, given what else is said by the judge in the decision, that
      omission, if there is one, is immaterial.  Mr Jesurum submits the
      focus at the hearing of the appeal appears to have been upon whether
      the appellant and her sponsor are in a genuine and subsisting
      relationship.  Judge Clarke found the marriage was not a valid
      marriage but accepted the relationship between the appellant and
      sponsor is genuine and subsisting.  Mr Jesurum submits Judge Clarke
      found, at [22], that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the
      immigration rules, and at [43], acknowledged the strong public
      interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls.  He
      submits Judge Clarke carefully considered the evidence before the
      Tribunal and it was undoubtedly open to him to have regard to the fact
      that the appellant can speak English, and is financially independent.
      He submits Judge Clarke properly adopted the balance sheet approach
      and although he accepts there is no explicit reference to the ability
      of the appellant, her sponsor and their child to live together in
      Pakistan, it would be astonishing if that was not in the mind of the
      judge.  Mr Jesurum submits the fact of British Citizenship can only
      ever be a matter of great weight, and the judge was plainly aware that
      the appellant has a job and home in the UK, when reaching his
      decision.  He submits that reading the decision as a whole, it must be
      implied that the Judge considered whether the family unit could live
      together in Pakistan.  He submits the public interest is not fixed and
      here, although the appellant's sponsor was not divorced when he
      entered into the marriage with the appellant, he is now divorced, and
      any concern regarding the genuineness of the relationship was
      addressed by the Judge.


  14. I reject the submission made by Mr Jesurum that it is implicit when
      the decision is read as a whole, that the judge did have in mind
      whether it might be possible for the family unit to live together in
      Pakistan. It is correct that at paragraph [7], Judge Clarke recorded
      that the entry clearance officer had noted it was submitted that the
      sponsor would find it difficult to relocate to Pakistan as he lives
      and works in the United Kingdom and the child needs the love and
      support of his father and cannot migrate to the United Kingdom without
      his mother. Beyond the very broad assertion made by the appellant's
      representative in the covering letter dated 31st January 2019, there
      appears to have been no evidence before Judge Clarke to support a
      claim that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life between
      the appellant and the sponsor continuing outside the UK or that living
      in Pakistan together would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.
       There is in my judgement, nothing said in paragraphs [30] to [48] of
      the decision of Judge Clarke that even begins to suggest that the
      judge had in mind or considered whether it might be possible for the
      family unit to live together in Pakistan, let alone whether there are
      insurmountable obstacles to them doing so or that it would be
      unjustifiably harsh.


  15. Although in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD, the Court of Appeal
      was concerned with appeals and decisions upholding the SSHD's refusal
      to grant leave to remain, Sir Ernest Ryder said:


         "31.  Where article 8 is in issue within the Rules there will of
         necessity have to be a conclusion on the question of whether there
         are insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of the appellant and
         his or her family. That involves an evaluation or value judgment
         based upon findings of fact. When a tribunal goes on to consider an
         article 8 claim outside of the Rules (as it will do where article 8
         is engaged, see Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799 at [80]), it will
         factor into its evaluation of whether there are exceptional
         circumstances both the findings of fact that have been made and the
         evaluation of whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles -
         that being a relevant factor both as a matter of policy and on the
         facts of the case to the question of exceptional circumstances.


         32.  In the circumstance that an FtT does not need to make an
         evaluation about insurmountable obstacles, the question arises: how
         does that tribunal or a subsequent tribunal relying on the same
         facts approach the question of exceptional circumstances outside
         the Rules? Again, the answer is to be found in Agyarko at [47] and
         [48]. By reference to Hesham Ali at [44 to 46], [50] and [53], Lord
         Reed made it clear that in striking a proportionality balance (i.e.
         when undertaking an article 8 evaluation outside the Rules) a
         tribunal must take the Secretary of State's policy into account and
         attach considerable weight to it 'at a general level'.


         33.  This means that a tribunal undertaking an evaluation of
         exceptional circumstances outside the Rules must take into account
         as a factor the strength of the public policy in immigration
         control as reflected by the Secretary of State's test within the
         Rules. The critical issue will generally be whether the strength of
         the public policy in immigration control in the case before it is
         outweighed by the strength of the article 8 claim so that there is
         a positive obligation on the state to permit the applicant to
         remain in the UK. The framework or approach in R (Razgar) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 2
         AC 368 at [17] is not to be taken to avoid the need to undertake
         this critical balance.


         34.  That leaves the question of whether the tribunal is required
         to make a decision on article 8 requirements within the Rules i.e.
         whether there are insurmountable obstacles, before or in order to
         make a decision about article 8 outside the Rules. The policy of
         the Secretary of State as expressed in the Rules is not to be
         ignored when a decision about article 8 is to be made outside the
         Rules. An evaluation of the question whether there are
         insurmountable obstacles is a relevant factor because considerable
         weight is to be placed on the Secretary of State's policy as
         reflected in the Rules of the circumstances in which a foreign
         national partner should be granted leave to remain. Accordingly,
         the tribunal should undertake an evaluation of the insurmountable
         obstacles test within the Rules in order to inform an evaluation
         outside the Rules because that formulates the strength of the
         public policy in immigration control ' in the case before it' ,
         which is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held was to
         be taken into account. That has the benefit that where a person
         satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to an article 8
         informed requirement, then this will be positively determinative of
         that person's article 8 appeal, provided their case engages article
         8(1) , for the very reason that it would then be disproportionate
         for that person to be removed."


  16. By analogy, here, Judge Clarke failed to carry out any evaluation of
      the question whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
      continuing in Pakistan, and thus an evaluation of the insurmountable
      obstacles test within the Rules that is required in order to inform an
      evaluation the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  There is quite
      simply nothing in the decision of Judge Clarke that supports the
      submission made by Mr Jesurum that the judge implicitly had in mind
      whether the parties could live together as a family unit in Pakistan.
      There is in any event a complete absence of any reasons to support a
      conclusion that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
      continuing in Pakistan.  The Judge noted the sponsor is in employment
      and has a home in the UK but that does not even begin to imply that
      the judge considered whether family life could continue in Pakistan.


  17. In my judgement the decision of Judge Clarke to allow the appeal on
      Article 8 grounds outside the immigration rules is vitiated by an
      error of law and must be set aside.


  18. It follows that I allow the appeal by the SSHD.  As to disposal, the
      parties agree that the appropriate course is for the matter to be
      remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.  I have decided that it is
      appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the
      appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary
      will be extensive.


  19. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  20. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Clarke promulgated
      on 3rd April 2020 is set aside.


  21. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date; 24th September 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

