
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08390/2015
                                                               HU/08392/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |                              |
|On 20 July 2017                               |On 17 August 2017             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                       EDIDIONG [U] (First Appellant)
                          [R E] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Ojo, Legal Representative, CW Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants in this case are both nationals of Nigeria.   The  first
    appellant was born in 1975 and the second appellant is her son who  was
    born on [ ] 2008 in the UK.  The first appellant has a poor immigration
    history.  She entered this country in 2003 with entry  clearance  as  a
    student; she was granted further to remain  up  until  2007,  and  then
    subsequently to 2009 (there having been a small period in between  when
    she did not have leave).  After that date the first appellant  remained
    in this country without leave.  Further applications which she made for
    leave to remain were rejected  in  2011  and  2013,  but  she  remained
    without leave.

 2. The second appellant, the first appellant's son, was born,  as  already
    noted, in May 2008 and has remained in this country ever  since,  apart
    from three weeks in 2009 when the first appellant returned with him  to
    Nigeria, presumably in order to visit relatives in that country.

 3. In July 2015 (that is after the second appellant  had  passed  his  7th
    birthday) the first appellant applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of her family and private life in this country.  This  application  was
    refused in a decision of the respondent made on 7 October of that year.
     The first appellant then applied for leave to remain on the basis of a
    relationship with a Mr Robert Lawrence, to whom she  was  not  married,
    and in circumstances where Mr Lawrence did not live with her.  Although
    it was  acknowledged  that  the  first  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the second appellant, her  child,
    the respondent considered that the eligibility criteria under the Rules
    were not engaged.

 4.  The  respondent  considered  the  first  appellant's  position   under
    paragraphs 276ADE  of  the  Rules,  but  concluded  that  none  of  the
    requirements set out  within  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  to  (vi)  were
    satisfied (with regard to (vi) the appellant had  spent  her  formative
    life in Nigeria and it was accordingly not accepted that there would be
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration into  that  country  on
    return, given that she had spent the majority of her life there and was
    familiar with the language, culture and society).

 5. The respondent also made a refusal decision in relation to  the  second
    appellant, and in respect of both appellants, the respondent  concluded
    that there were no exceptional circumstances such as should warrant the
    grant of leave to remain  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    respondent in her decision did take into account the need to  safeguard
    and promote the welfare of children in the United Kingdom in accordance
    with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,
    but considered that both  appellants  could  return  to  Nigeria  as  a
    complete family unit.

 6. The appellants appealed against the refusal decisions and their  appeal
    was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  sitting   at
    Harmondsworth (which at the  time  was  being  used  for  Taylor  House
    appeals as Taylor House was then being refurbished) on 13 October 2016.
     In a Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  25  October  2016  Judge
    Greasley dismissed the appeals.  The appellants now appeal against that
    decision with leave having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  P
    J M Hollingworth on 5 April 2017.

 7. This appeal was listed originally before Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun and
    there were subsequently directions given by the Resident  Judge,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dawson, which were made on 13 June 2017.  I  will  refer
    to these below.

 8. In the course of his decision, Judge Greasley did not refer to what  is
    set out within Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002  (which  is  contained  within  Part  VA  of  that  Act
    introduced by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and effective from
    28 July 2014).  Although the judge did make reference to  what  is  set
    out within Sections 117B(4) and (5) (whereby it is enacted that  little
    weight should be given to a private life or relationship formed with  a
    qualifying partner that is established by a person at a time  when  the
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully, and also that little weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is precarious), Section 117B(6) is
    not mentioned.  This provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation  [and
             the first appellant is not],  the  public  interest  does  not
             require the person's removal where -

               (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

              (b)      it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom".

 9. What  is  a  "qualifying  child"  is  defined  at  Section  117D  under
    "Interpretation of this Part" as follows:

         "(1)     In this Part-

             ...

             'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-

             (a)      is a British citizen, or

             (b)      has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of seven years or more".

10. Although what  is  "continuous"  is  for  the  purposes  of  continuous
    residence is not defined  within  Section  117D,  in  the  respondent's
    published guidance (very helpfully provided by Mr Ojo, representing the
    appellants today) it is stated as follows:

         "Short periods outside the country - for example  for  holidays  or
         family visits - would not count as  a  break  in  the  seven  years
         required.  However, where a child has spent more  than  six  months
         out of the UK at any one time this should normally count as a break
         in continuous residence unless any exceptional factors apply".

11. It is clear therefore that for the purposes of this appeal, in light of
    the respondent's guidance, the second appellant must be regarded  as  a
    qualifying child in that he has lived in the UK for a continuous period
    of seven years.  Accordingly,  before  deciding  whether  or  not,  for
    Article 8 purposes, it was in the public interest to remove  the  first
    appellant, consideration had  to  be  given  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the UK  as  required
    by Section 117B(6)(b) (it being accepted as is the case that the  first
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her
    son, the  second  appellant).   So  far  as  the  second  appellant  is
    concerned, obviously the length of time he had  been  present  in  this
    country was a very relevant consideration when considering his  Article
    8 rights.

12. At paragraph 27 of his decision Judge Greasley said as follows:

         "I also  conclude  that  the  appeal  in  relation  to  the  second
         appellant must also be refused in relation to the  child  route  as
         the second appellant is not able to meet the  eligibility  criteria
         within paragraph E-LTRC1.6 [because his mother did not  have  leave
         to enter  or  remain]  and  nor  does  he  satisfy  or  engage  the
         eligibility criteria contained within paragraph 276ADE."

13. Then, however, dealing with the crucial aspects  of  this  case,  Judge
    Greasley stated as follows:

         "Mr Shoye, for the appellant, conceded that  the  second  appellant
         had not resided for a continuous seven-year period  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

14. As I have made clear above, the second appellant had  in  fact  resided
    for a continuous seven year period in  the  United  Kingdom,  not  just
    prior to the hearing but also prior to the application which was  made,
    because he had been born in May 2009 and the application was  not  made
    until July 2016.  Furthermore, in the grounds it  is  stated  in  terms
    that no such concession was made.  Even if such a concession  had  been
    made, given that the child had only been away from the  United  Kingdom
    for  some  three  weeks  in  2009,  the  judge  should  arguably   have
    appreciated that such a concession should not have been made;  however,
    as noted, it is denied in the grounds that such  a  concession  was  in
    fact made.

15. When this appeal came before Judge Eshun, she directed that it would be
    appropriate for Mr Shoye  to  be  available  to  give  evidence  as  to
    precisely what may or may not have been conceded and subsequently on 13
    June 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson directed as follows:

         "It is noted that the Presenting Officer who  appeared  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge has provided a note dated 13 October 2016
         in respect of his understanding of matters  at  the  hearing.   The
         appellant's representatives are directed to  file  with  the  Upper
         Tribunal and serve on the respondent any  further  evidence  it  is
         intended to be relied on in  support  of  the  assertion  that  the
         concession had not been made  ...  That  evidence  is  expected  to
         include a copy of any contemporaneous note of the proceedings by Mr
         Shoye before the First-tier Tribunal."

16. Subsequently, Mr Shoye was present at the hearing before this  Tribunal
    in which he confirmed (as was contained in a witness statement which he
    had provided for this hearing) that he had not made such  a  concession
    and Ms Pal, on behalf of the respondent chose not to cross-examine  him
    on this point.  It was Mr Shoye's position that the only concession  he
    made was that the mother, the first appellant, could not succeed  under
    the Rules, although it is clear that when making this concession he did
    not have in mind the provisions of Section 117B(6), but rather that the
    mother could not succeed under the parent Rules as such.

17. Accordingly, it is clear that the crucial  issue  in  this  appeal  was
    whether or not, having regard to the best interests of the child  as  a
    primary, although not paramount factor on the  one  hand,  but  on  the
    other hand the public interest in removing people  such  as  the  first
    appellant with a  bad  immigration  history,  it  was  "reasonable"  to
    require  the  child  to  leave  the  UK.   It  is  on  that  basis  the
    proportionality exercise should have been conducted but it was not.

18. Having regard  to  my  finding  that  the  concession  as  recorded  in
    paragraph 27 had not in fact been made, Ms  Pal  accepted  that  absent
    such concession the decision made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley
    was not sustainable, and in my judgement she was right to accept  this;
    this error was clearly material.

19. The consequence is that the appeal will have to be reheard, and  as  no
    findings can be retained, the appropriate course is that the appeal  be
    remitted to Taylor House for rehearing by any judge  other  than  Judge
    Greasley, and I will so order.

Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  is  set  aside  as
containing a material error of law and this appeal  is  remitted  to  Taylor
House for rehearing before any judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Greasley.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 25 July 2017
