
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/08582/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2018                     |  On 27 November 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                         mr Roshanprakash Bhoojedhur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 27 May 1993.  His
    sister is a British citizen who suffers, amongst other things, from
    bipolar disorder and depression.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 22 March 2015 with entry clearance as a
    visitor valid for six months.  He returned to Mauritius and applied for
    a further visa which was granted with entry clearance valid until 9
    December 2015.  On 8 December 2015 he applied for leave to remain in
    the UK in order to care for his sister.  On 14 March 2016 the
    application was refused on the basis that the appellant was unable to
    satisfy any of the routes to leave to remain under the Immigration
    Rules, and that his sister's health problems did not constitute
    exceptional circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave outside
    the Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where the appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese.  In a decision
    promulgated on 4 July 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant is now appealing against that decision.

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant argued that the appeal
    should be allowed outside the Immigration Rules because refusing him
    leave to remain would be inconsistent with the Home Office's policy in
    respect of carers found at Chapter 17 Section 2 of the Immigration
    Directorate Instructions.  The judge considered the policy and
    concluded that the appellant did not satisfy its requirements.  The
    judge stated at paragraph 25 of the decision:-

         "The appellant is claiming to come within the policy but at the
         hearing it became apparent that the authorities have not as at the
         date of the hearing recognised him as a person who is residing with
         his sponsor or even providing her with any assistance.  The
         appellant claimed that he had written to them but that they had not
         respondent (sic) to his letter.  The appellant however, could not
         provide me with a copy of the letter which he had written to the
         Council and this therefore cast (sic) doubt as to whether he had
         actually written to them.  It appears that the Council are not
         aware that the appellant is residing on the premises with the
         sponsor there is no evidence before me to suggest otherwise and
         therefore the respondent could not in the circumstances have
         granted the appellant discretionary leave."

 5. The judge proceeded to consider the appellant's case under Article 8
    ECHR.  The judge found at paragraph 29:-

         "The evidence is that the appellant resides with her in the flat.
         I accept the evidence that the appellant resides with [his sister]
         but he does so without the consent of the local authority as he has
         not provided evidence to suggest that they are aware of his
         presence.  The sponsor and the appellant in my view have a normal
         brother and sister relationship and it is not one which is over and
         above normal emotional ties between siblings.  The sponsor's (sic)
         is also under the supervision of her doctor and a psychiatrist so
         her medical needs are being dealt with by experts.  The
         relationship which she has with her brother is in essence
         friendship she says that he provides her with company and without
         her presence her condition would worsen.  I do not find that the
         evidence of both the appellant and the sponsor suggest that the
         decision of the appellant is disproportionate.  The evidence before
         me is not exceptional and this appeal is dismissed under Article 8
         of ECHR."

 6. The appellant did not attend the error of law hearing.  Prior to the
    hearing a fax was received from the appellant's representatives
    requesting that the appellant be excused from attending the hearing and
    that the matter be decided in light of the permission application
    grounds.

 7. In light of the aforementioned letter I proceeded to hear submissions
    from Mr Whitwell, notwithstanding the absence of the appellant or a
    representative on his behalf.

 8. It is argued in the grounds of appeal that the judge erred by failing
    to accept that the appellant had requested the local authority's
    permission to reside with the sponsor.  Attached to the grounds was
    correspondence with the local authority that was not before the First-
    tier Tribunal concerning the residential arrangements.  Mr Whitwell
    argued that this submission has no merit as the evidence relied on in
    the grounds was not before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore the
    judge cannot be said to have erred by failing to have regard to it.  He
    also maintained that it was a matter for the judge to decide whether or
    not to accept the evidence before him (which consisted only of the
    witness evidence of the appellant and sponsor) as to whether the
    council were aware of the appellant residing with the sponsor.  I agree
    with Mr Whitwell that it is not a sustainable argument that the judge
    erred by failing to have regard to documents that were not before him.
    It was for the judge to determine, based on the evidence before him
    (which did not include the correspondence appended to the grounds of
    appeal), whether to accept the appellant's claim to have informed the
    local authority that he was residing with his sister.  The judge's
    conclusion on this point was therefore open to him.

 9. The grounds also argue that the judge erred by finding that the
    respondent's carer's policy would only apply in the event that a local
    authority was aware of support provided by an applicant when there is
    no such requirement in the policy.  Mr Whitwell did not challenge this
    ground but maintained, for the reasons set out below, that any errors
    made by the judge in respect of the carer's policy were not material.

10. A further argument in the grounds is that the judge mistakenly
    characterised the appellant as an overstayer, at paragraph 28 of the
    decision.  I do not accept that there is a factual basis for this
    submission.  At paragraph 28 the judge observed, correctly, that the
    appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor with the expectation that he
    would leave the UK upon expiry of his leave.  This is an accurate
    statement and does not imply that the appellant is an overstayer.
    Indeed, it is clear from the analysis undertaken by the judge in
    paragraph 28 - and from reading the decision as a whole -  that the
    judge recognised that the appellant applied whilst he had leave and
    therefore was not an overstayer.

11. The final argument in the grounds is that the judge referred to
    sections of the respondent's carer's policy that were not relevant.
    There is merit to this submission.  At paragraph 24 the judge referred
    to section 17.10 as being directly applicable.  However, this section
    is irrelevant as the appellant's sister is a British Citizen and
    Section 17.10 applies only to applications for leave to remain to care
    for relatives who do not have settled status in the UK.  Mr Whitwell
    accepted that the judge referred to the wrong paragraphs of the carer's
    policy.  However, he maintained that although this is an error, it is
    not material because the sponsor's circumstances are not such as to
    bring the appellant within the ambit of the carer's policy in a way
    that would give rise to a conclusion that removal of the appellant from
    the UK would be a disproportionate interference with family life
    enjoyed by him and his sister.

12. Section 17.3 of the carer's policy provides that it would normally be
    appropriate to grant leave to remain for three months to care for a
    sick relative on the strict understanding that during this period
    arrangements will be made for the future care of the patient by a
    person who is not subject to Immigration Rules.

13. Section 17.4 of the policy states that where an application is received
    requesting a further period of leave to continue to care for a sick
    relative the applicant must produce, amongst other things, a letter
    from the local social services department where they are known to be
    involved, advising of their level of involvement, the perceived
    benefits of the presence in the UK of the applicant, and an explanation
    as to why suitable alternative care arrangements are not available,
    along with further evidence that alternative arrangements for the care
    of the patient have been, or are being, actively explored.

14. None of the evidence required under Section 17.4 was before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Nor did the appellant provide any evidence to show that
    arrangements were being made for a person not subject to immigration
    control to care for his sister, as required by Section 17.3. Given the
    absence of evidence to establish compliance with Sections 17.3 and 17.4
    of the respondent's policy, on any legitimate view the judge was
    correct to find that the appellant did not satisfy the requirements of
    the policy. There was therefore no error of law in assessing the
    proportionality under article 8 ECHR of the appellant's removal from
    the UK on the basis that he was unable to satisfy either the
    Immigration Rules or the respondent's carer's policy.

15. The appellant has not established that the judge made a material error
    of law and therefore his appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

The appeal is dismissed.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 20 November 2018              |

