

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/08453/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2017                     |    On 8th November 2017            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                               KADIJATU JALLOH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, instructed by Portway solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leone, sought and was refused entry
      clearance on 21st September 2015 as an adult dependant relative of her
      daughter who is a British Citizen living in the UK  with  her  husband
      and daughter. Her human rights (Article 8) appeal was dismissed by the
      First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 26th May 2017.


   2. Permission to appeal was sought,  in  essence,  on  the  grounds  that
      inadequate consideration had been given to the evidence relied upon by
      the appellant. The grounds set out 6 claimed examples of that lack  of
      consideration. It is  submitted  in  the  grounds  that  had  adequate
      consideration been given then the refusal of entry clearance would  be
      a breach of Article 8 and  furthermore  that  the  appellant  met  the
      Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal appears to have been  granted,
      essentially, on the basis that it was arguable the judge  should  have
      considered the evidence in the broader context of Article  8  "outside
      the Rules".


   3. The application was refused on the basis the appellant  did  not  meet
      the requirements of Appendix FM paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d)  (relationship)
      and E-ECDR.3.1 (financial requirements). The ECO  decision  refers  to
      the evidence before him: a letter from Dr Willoughby  Memorial  Clinic
      that it would be beneficial for the appellant to receive support  from
      her daughter. The ECO states that the appellant has not  provided  any
      documents to show that the other daughter was living in Senegal or why
      the required level of support cannot be arranged  by  family  members;
      has not provided any  documents  to  demonstrate  that  she  had  been
      supported financially by her UK based daughter although  had  provided
      evidence that her UK daughter was employed in the UK; had produced  no
      documents to establish why the required level  of  support  cannot  be
      arranged by the daughter who lives in Senegal.  The  ECO  refused  the
      application.


   4. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the hearing of which
      took place on 16th May 2017, take issue with the ECO decision that  no
      evidence of financial support had been produced. Copies of  remittance
      slips were in the respondent's bundle. There was also medical evidence
      that the appellant had suffered a heart attack and been found  by  her
      carer, Ayesha. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant
      had been supported financially by her UK based daughter  and  although
      no specific finding is made, he  sets  out  and  appears  to  reach  a
      decision predicated on the  basis  that  the  appellant  is  in  daily
      contact with her UK based  daughter  and  that  she  receives  monthly
      medical attention.


   5. An updating medical report and an  updating  letter  from  Ayesha  was
      before the First-tier Tribunal judge. These clearly appertain  to  the
      decision the subject of the appeal, given the length of time that  has
      elapsed before the hearing took place. The updated medical  report  is
      described by the First-tier Tribunal judge as being essentially in the
      same words as the earlier report: that she has  continuing  medication
      needs and that she would "be able to maintain her  health  and  social
      care needs with the assistance of her daughter if she were to move  to
      the UK". The judge refers to the evidence from Ayesha that in 2015 she
      said she could not continue to provide support but did  so   and  that
      there is also another carer, Fudia, who the UK based daughter  is  not
      happy that she is providing the care she is supposed to.


   6. The judge acknowledges that the appellant is illiterate and  that  she
      sometimes declines the care and assistance provided by the carer.  The
      judge addresses the requirements of the Immigration Rules and makes  a
      clear finding that he is not satisfied, on  the  evidence  before  him
      that the appellant cannot continue to receive the care  she  has  been
      receiving in Sierra Leone. He makes a finding that  although  she  has
      declined support she has managed to maintain  her  health  and  social
      care needs in Sierra Leone and that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules which state that she must, as  a
      result of age, illness or disability, require long-term personal  care
      to perform every-day tasks.


   7. Although the grounds upon which permission to appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal submit that the appellant meets the immigration rules on  the
      basis of the evidence, that is  simply  not  the  case.  The  evidence
      before the judge did not and could not have led to a  conclusion  that
      the appellant required (or at the date of hearing requires) long  term
      personal care. The more recent evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
      judge refers to the offers of assistance from  friends  and  community
      and to continuing assistance from Ayesha. The appellant  clearly,  and
      understandably, wishes to be with her UK daughter but the  Immigration
      Rules require more than such a desire, however trenchantly expressed.


   8. The grounds submit that a different view of the evidence  should  have
      been taken. But the conclusions reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge on the evidence before him were plainly and clearly open to him.
      There is no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  that  the
      appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal judge was referred to Britcits [2016] EWHC 956
      (Admin) which was under appeal to the Court of Appeal.  In  fact,  the
      Court of Appeal judgment came out on 24th May  2017  (Britcits  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 368)[1]. I was not specifically referred to that judgment  by
      Ms Sharma. The tenor  of  her  submissions  was  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge failed to take proper cognisance of the  evidence  that
      the care previously available could not continue, the cultural  aspect
      that the appellant should be looked after by her daughter and that the
      appellant  now  requires  intimate  personal  care,  which   was   not
      previously the case. The major difficulty with  those  submissions  is
      that there was no  evidence  to  that  effect  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge. The evidence before the judge does  not  support  that
      submission. The Appellant's UK based daughter refers to  the  cultural
      traditions and her obligations to look after her mother but there  was
      no explanation why the appellant's other daughter could not  put  some
      such arrangement in place save that there was no contact and  she  was
      in Senegal. There was no explanation why she could not assist  or  why
      there was no contact. There was no explanation how, if  there  was  no
      contact, it was known she was in Senegal.


  10. The First-tier Tribunal judge does not consider  Article  8  with  any
      particular clarity and appears to  take  the  view  that  because  the
      appellant in Britcits lost then the appellant must lose.  That  is  an
      error of law.


  11. The judge should have considered whether there was family life such as
      to engage Article 8 and should have considered the proportionality  of
      refusing entry clearance rather than adopting another decision with  a
      different factual matrix. But taken  at  its  highest  that  there  is
      family life between the appellant and  her  UK  daughter  such  as  to
      engage Article 8, it cannot be concluded on the basis of the  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal that the refusal of entry clearance was
      disproportionate. The appellant does  not,  on  the  evidence  require
      personal, intimate and long-term day to day care that is not available
      to her in Sierra Leone. At most  there  is  a  strong  desire  between
      mother and daughter to be united in the UK but the desire to  be  with
      her daughter is simply  insufficient  to  counter  the  strong  public
      interest given the factual matrix this appellant presents.


  12. In the absence of some other factor it cannot be  concluded  that  the
      refusal of entry clearance is a disproportionate interference  in  the
      right to respect for family life.


        13. There is no material error of law in the decision of the First-
            tier Tribunal.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision








                                    Date 7th November 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] 1.   Britcits was a judicial review seeking, inter alia, a declaration
that the Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012 in so far as adult
dependants were concerned, were incompatible with Article 8 and as such
fall to be either quashed or a declaration made as to their
incompatibility. In giving the lead judgment, Sir Terence Etherton MR
refused the order sought and rejected " the appellant's submission that
there is family life which engages Article 8 in every case where a UK
sponsor wishes to bring their elderly parent to the UK to look after them"
[74].....In particular, rejection on the basis of the availability of
adequate care in the ADR's home country turns upon whether the care which
is available is reasonable for the ADR to receive and of the level required
for that applicant. Contrary to the submission of the appellant, those
considerations are capable, with appropriate evidence, of embracing the
psychological and emotional needs of elderly parents[76]...... the balance
depends on the facts of any particular case - the particular strength of
the family bond and all other matters in favour of the particular
applicant, on the one hand, and the public interest in achieving the policy
and objectives of the new ADR Rules, on the other hand: see the observation
of Baroness Hale and Lord Carnwath in MM (Lebanon) at [57] [78].

.

