
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08607/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 5 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                mr Abul Basar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilcox, Counsel instructed by J S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  8  July  1980.   He
    arrived in  the  UK  on  5  November  2007  with  a  student  visa  and
    subsequently made applications for leave to remain as a Tier 4  Student
    valid until 7 December 2015.  He then applied, in time,  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life and varied  this  application  to  a
    long residence application for indefinite leave to remain  on  8  April
    2016, which application was again varied to a family  life  application
    on 28 July 2016 and varied again to indefinite leave to  remain  on  22
    November  2016,  varied  on  7  March  2017  for  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) and  varied  yet  again  on  18  September  2017  to  an
    application for indefinite  leave  to  remain.   This  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 29 March 2018.  The Appellant appealed  and
    his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N  M  Paul  for
    hearing on 9 November 2018.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 20 November  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that he found that the Respondent was
    justified in refusing  the  application  with  reference  to  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules, on the basis of the evidence that  the
    Appellant had utilised a proxy test taker in respect of his test  taken
    at the London College of Media and Technology on 22 August 2012.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time on the basis of the following grounds: firstly that  the  judge
    had failed to engage with material evidence relating to the Appellant's
    education history and English language proficiency.  The Appellant  had
    set out a detailed explanation of  his  circumstances  in  his  witness
    statement.  He gave evidence in English and provided evidence of a high
    level of proficiency in English, which preceded the date of  the  TOEIC
    examination and had obtained an MSc from the University  of  Sunderland
    and previously achieved an above average score in  his  IELTS  academic
    test.

 4. Reference was made to the decision in SM and Qadir (ETS  -  Evidence  -
    Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) at [67] to [69] in  particular
    where the Upper Tribunal found:

         "We turn thus to address the legal burden.  We accept  Mr  Dunlop's
         submission thatin considering an allegation of dishonesty  in  this
         context the relevant factors to be weighed include (inexhaustively,
         we would add) what the  person  accused  has  to  gain  from  being
         dishonest; what he has to lose from being dishonest; what is  known
         about his character; and the culture or  environment  in  which  he
         operated.  Mr Dunlop  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  three
         further considerations namely how the  Appellants  performed  under
         cross-examination,  whether  the  Tribunals'  assessment  of  their
         English language  proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC
         scores and whether their academic achievements are such that it was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."

 5. It was asserted that the evidence demonstrated there is room for  error
    in ETS's processing and storing of digital voice files and the way they
    are linked to particular candidate's test results.  Computerised  voice
    files purporting to be those created in the Appellant's ETS  have  been
    produced and the Claimant has accepted that the voice contained therein
    was not his: see the R (on the application of Mohibullah) (TOEIC -  ETS
    - judicial review principles) [2016] UKUT 00561 (IAC) at [7]  and  Saha
    [2017] UKUT 00017 (IAC) at [14].  It  was  further  asserted  that  the
    judge made findings that were not supported by any evidence before  him
    in particular the finding the applicant had every motive  to  cheat  in
    order to  facilitate  further  application  for  leave  to  remain  was
    perverse given the level of his education and achievement in the UK.

 6. The second ground of appeal is no longer pursued in light of  the  fact
    that the Respondent did, in fact, raise in the refusal letter the point
    that the applicant had acted in collusion with the college to obtain  a
    fraudulent certificate.

 7. The third ground of appeal asserted that the judge had materially erred
    by failing to engage with the evidence in respect  of  the  Appellant's
    BNP membership and the circumstances relating to his family at [37].

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    in a decision dated 21 December 2018 in the following terms:

         "In relation to ground 1 it is arguable that in  assessing  whether
         the Appellant  had  met  the  evidential  burden  of  providing  an
         innocent explanation the judge failed to engage with those  factors
         that were set out in SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 at 69.

         In relation  to  ground  2  the  Respondent's  case  was  that  the
         Appellant  has  deliberately  cheated  in  his  language  test  and
         therefore it was always their position that the Appellant had acted
         in collusion with the college and this was the challenge he had  to
         respond to.  I therefore find no arguable merit in ground 2.

         In relation to ground 3 there is arguably no engagement  with  this
         claim at all other than one line in paragraph 37."

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Wilcox sought to  rely  on
    the grounds of appeal and  made  detailed  submissions  in  respect  of
    grounds 1 and 3.  He submitted the judge had failed to take account  of
    pertinent matters which were present in the  case  and  highlighted  as
    being typical cf. SM and Qadir (op cit) at  [69].   This  included  the
    fact the Appellant has an extensive educational background including an
    MSc from the University of Sunderland and a previous IELTS score  which
    is a more challenging test than the ETS test and had been undertaken by
    him at an earlier stage i.e. in  2007.   The  Appellant  is  a  man  of
    previous good character, he was  a  genuine  student.  Mr  Wilcox  also
    highlighted difficulties in Bangladesh owing to his  inability  to  pay
    back his parents.

10. Mr Wilcox submitted that the Appellant's witness statement  is  drafted
    in fluent English and the Appellant gave oral evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal, also in fluent English.  He has no motive for  cheating,
    given that his level of English  is  of  a  standard  that  would  have
    enabled him to pass the test relatively easily.  He  sets  out  in  his
    witness statement great detail as to the actual taking of the test.

11. Mr Wilcox submitted that many of the factors that should  have  counted
    in his favour were taken against him, absent any evidential  basis,  in
    particular at [29] that the  Appellant  obtained  copies  of  the  test
    files.  This is evidenced also by the e-mail  correspondence  with  the
    solicitors for the Secretary of State set out at pages 37 to 38 of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  Mr Wilcox submitted that this evidence should have
    at least been considered by the judge.  He further submitted  that  the
    judge's finding was unsafe in that it seems to have been assumed by the
    judge that the fact that the Appellant  sat  his  test  at  the  London
    College of Media and Technology automatically meant that the  test  was
    fraudulent.  However it has to be recognised that there is at  least  a
    vulnerability in the reliability of the evidence as is clear  from  the
    decision in MA [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC).  He submitted that it is  clear
    from [32] of the judge's decision that this is unsafe.

12. Mr Wilcox submitted that it was flawed for the judge's approach to  the
    fact that the Appellant is  working  part-time  in  Boots  the  Chemist
    indicates a flawed approach at [36] on the basis that the  judge  found
    this meant "that he was seeking to facilitate the means  for  remaining
    in the UK" which in itself was based on a submission by the  Presenting
    Officer at [22] which lacked any evidential  basis.   Thus  in  finding
    that the Appellant had not provided an innocent explanation, the  judge
    had failed  to  go  through  and  consider  the  material  factors,  in
    particular, the vulnerability of the ETS system  as  evidenced  by  the
    expert in MA (Nigeria) op cit; the detailed nature of  the  Appellant's
    account, the lack of motive the Appellant had in that he did  not  need
    to cheat and the Appellant's previous academic achievements.

13. In respect of the third ground of  appeal,  Mr  Wilcox  submitted  that
    whilst the judge may ultimately have not come down in  the  Appellant's
    favour on that point, he still needed to engage with the  issues  in  a
    reasoned manner and to show that  he  was  applying  the  test  he  was
    mandated to apply under the Rules and jurisprudence.

14. In his submissions, Mr Lindsay for the Secretary of State  stated  that
    although there  was  no  Rule  24  response  the  appeal  was  formally
    resisted.  He submitted that what the judge was required to do and  did
    do was to make a finding that it was more  likely  than  not  that  the
    fraud was so widespread at the specific test centre that the  Appellant
    would have been involved in this fraud.  The  Appellant  accepted  that
    the voice on the recording was not his voice.  He  submitted  that  the
    weight to be attached to the evidence it was open to the judge in terms
    of that how he assessed  the  evidence.  The  Appellant  had  given  an
    explanation but this had not been accepted by the judge.

15. In relation to SM and Qadir (op cit) Mr  Lindsay  submitted  there  was
    nothing to support the proposition that there is an exhaustive list  of
    factors, nor that all the factors have to be considered in  each  case.
    All the judge was required to do was to give clear reasons for each  of
    the points in the appeal.  He submitted that the factors to be  weighed
    included those in respect of dishonesty and that what is  important  is
    the judge gave clear and rational reasons for the points that he  found
    dispositive, which is precisely what he had done.

16. In respect of the alleged weaknesses in  the  ETS  system,  Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that it was not seriously in  doubt  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence was capable of showing  on  balance  of  probabilities
    that there has been fraud.   In  respect  of  the  assertion  that  the
    Appellant had no motive to cheat see [35] of the judge's  decision.  Mr
    Lindsay submitted that the Appellant clearly lacked respect for the  UK
    system of immigration control and the judge found he  had  applied  for
    leave to remain not because he is a  genuine  student,  but  simply  in
    order to remain in the UK and work.  Whilst not all judges  would  have
    reached such a finding on the evidence, the  reasons  provided  by  the
    judge were sustainable in  law:  see  [34]  and  [36]  of  the  judge's
    decision.

17. In relation to ground 3, Mr Lindsay submitted that  having  found  that
    the Appellant has been deliberately complicit with the fraud  conducted
    at the London School of Media and Technology, the Judge was entitled to
    find it was not credible.  The  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  the  BNP
    membership in Bangladesh was not credible: see [37].

18. In reply, Mr Wilcox submitted that the judge's  findings  at  [35]  and
    [37] could apply to anyone.  The issue is not that given  the  accepted
    weaknesses in the ETS evidence the judge is incapable of  finding  that
    an individual can be shown to  have  engaged  in  fraud  to  the  civil
    standard, but rather that it cannot be a default position arrived at in
    a prejudged manner without any proper  consideration  of  the  evidence
    which was precisely the point the Presidential Panel were making in  SM
    and Qadir (op cit).  He submitted the evidence required  to  show  that
    someone is engaged in fraud requires very careful  consideration.   The
    judge at [37] found that because the Appellant sat his ETS test at  the
    London  College  of  Media  and  Technology,  he  cannot   provide   an
    explanation innocently.  He submitted  there  was  clear  evidence  the
    judge is simply not  considered  material  factors  and  that  was  the
    essential problem with the judge's decision and reasons.

     Findings and Reasons

19. I have concluded that the Judge's decision does contain material errors
    of law in his findings and reasons. As the Judge found at [28] it was a
    striking feature of the case that the Appellant unusually had taken the
    trouble to obtain his test files with a view to proving his  case.  The
    Appellant provided in his witness statement as to how he  came  to  the
    take the test at the London College of Media and Technology and  as  to
    the procedure he underwent is also particularly detailed, running  from
    [15] to [24].

20. I set out the judge's material findings below:

         "30. It is important to stand back for a  moment  to  consider  the
         circumstances that the Appellant was facing in 2012.  In  my  view,
         the Appellant has not been frank with the Tribunal when it comes to
         state that his purpose was to achieve a  level  of  education  that
         would enable him to get a good job in Bangladesh.  I do not  accept
         as being credible his  assertion  that  his  parents  had  borrowed
         heavily to fund his studies and that they are  now  in  difficulty.
         On  any  view  by  2012  he  had,  as  he  agreed   the   necessary
         qualifications to obtain work in Bangladesh.  In my  view,  he  had
         already decided he wanted to stay in the UK and study will  be  the
         route to facilitate that...

         35.  It follows therefore  that  anybody  approaching  that  system
         would if willing be offered the opportunity for a fraudulent  test.
         It follows therefore that I am satisfied on the  evidence  that  in
         this case the Appellant was fully aware of what was  going  on  and
         agreed to the fraudulent  activity.   In  my  view  the  supporting
         evidence for that comes from the fact that the  Appellant  was  not
         genuinely committed to his studies in the sense that he was seeking
         to reach a level of qualification that would enable him  to  secure
         better employment.  He had already achieved that level, and  in  my
         view  all  of  this  continuing  education  was  with  a  view   to
         facilitating his remaining in the UK.  In  my  view  he  had  every
         motive to want to cheat at  that  stage  to  facilitate  a  further
         application for leave to remain.

         36.  I take into account his character and conduct,  in  particular
         that notwithstanding that with the level of education reached he is
         currently working as a Boots sales  operative.   In  my  view,  the
         Appellant at all stages was seeking to  facilitate  the  means  for
         remaining in the UK."

21. I find that the Judge, in making his  findings  at  [30]-[36]  did  not
    follow the guidance set out in SM & Qadir (op cit) in particular:

21.1.    there is no assessment of the  Appellant's  performance  in  cross-
    examination. Whilst at [30] he makes an adverse credibility finding, on
    the basis that the Appellant had, by 2012 achieved sufficient education
    so  as  to  be  able  to  obtain  employment  in  Bangladesh,  this  is
    speculative, in the absence of any evidence as to  what  qualifications
    would have been required to obtain employment and fails to take account
    of the fact that, whilst  the  Appellant  had  obtained  a  Diploma  in
    Business Administration in 2009 he then  attempted  to  study  an  ACCA
    course but struggled with this but then went on, having taken the TOEIC
    test, to obtain a post-graduate diploma in Banking and  Finance  and  a
    Master of Science in Tourism and Hospitality.  Thus  it  was  at  least
    arguable that the Appellant had a lot to lose by being dishonest;

21.2. there is no assessment of  the  Appellant's  proficiency  in  English,
    both at the hearing and  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    successfully passed the IELTS test prior to coming to the  UK  in  July
    2007 and had successfully obtained further post graduate qualifications
    once in the UK. These are clearly considerations relevant not  only  to
    assessing whether his proficiency is commensurate with his TOEIC  score
    and to the question of  whether  it  would  have  been  unnecessary  or
    illogical for him to have cheated.

21.3.    Whilst the fact that,  despite  his  education,  the  Appellant  is
    working as a sales operative in Boots is a factor to  which  the  Judge
    was entitled to attach weight, I do not  find  in  itself  that  it  is
    sufficient to make an adverse finding and that it does not reflect  the
    entirety of his character and conduct in light of the detailed  witness
    statement. Thus I find more in the way of  reasoning  was  required  in
    this respect.

21.4.    The primary focus of  the  Judge's  findings  was,  unsurprisingly,
    that widespread fraud had been perpetrated by  the  London  College  of
    Media and Technology:  [31]-[35]  refer.  Whilst  this  was  clearly  a
    finding open  to  him  on  the  evidence  before  him,  this  does  not
    necessarily mean that the Appellant was party to that fraud. I find, in
    light of the fact that the Appellant took the trouble to obtain  copies
    of the audio files of the test, which were not of his  voice,  nor,  he
    states at [32]-[35] of his  witness  statement  did  they  reflect  the
    content of the test he took and that the wrote back to ETS  asking  for
    them to provide him with detailed data  that  would  conclusively  show
    that the recordings were from his test and not someone else's but  they
    were unable to assist further, that the Judge  did  not  properly  take
    account of this evidence in making  his  adverse  finding  against  the
    Appellant.

22.  I do not find that Ground 3 of the grounds of appeal takes matters  any
    further, as it would not  have  been  possible  for  the  Appellant  to
    succeed in his appeal on this basis. However, for the reasons  set  out
    above, I find material errors of law in  the  decision  of  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul  on  the  primary  issue  of  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant utilised a proxy test taker in respect of his ETS test  taken
    on 22 and 24 August 2012.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back  to  the  First
tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

