

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08431/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st May 2019                                  |On 10th May 2019               |
|                                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  CHUSA [S]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Salfolani, Oaks solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. Mr [S]'s appeal against the refusal of his human  rights  claim
            was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach for reasons  set
            out in her decision promulgated on 29th January 2019. She found
            that the appellant,  who  had  been  sentenced  to  21  months'
            imprisonment for conspiracy to commit theft, had:
             a) Lived lawfully in the UK for most of his life;
             b) That he is socially and culturally integrated into the  UK;
                and
             c)  That  he  would  face  very   significant   obstacles   in
                reintegrating into Zambia.


         2. She did not accept that it would be unduly harsh for him to  be
            separated from his partner and child and nor would it be unduly
            harsh for the partner and child to leave the UK to be with  him
            in Zambia.


         3. The SSHD sought and was granted permission  to  appeal  on  the
            grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  assessment  of
            whether there were "very  significant  obstacles"  was  legally
            flawed.   In his Rule 24 response, Mr [S] defended the decision
            of the First-tier Tribunal judge but, if an error of  law  were
            found such that the decision as set aside to be remade,  sought
            to appeal the decision by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
            the separation of Mr [S] and his  partner  and  child  was  not
            unduly harsh.

         4. In reaching her decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  took
            into account the following factors:

             . Mr [S] is a Zambian citizen, born  February  1976.  He  first
               entered the UK aged 5, left aged 8, returned in  1988,  1990,
               1991 and remained  in  the  UK  thereafter.  He  was  granted
               indefinite leave to remain in February 1995, just before  his
               20th birthday.
             . There was some indication (although not  specified)  that  he
               had used a  false  ILR  document  in  2008  but  it  was  not
               disputed that he had been granted ILR when he was;  this  was
               not relied upon by the SSHD.
             . He has Zambian heritage;
             . He speaks English;
             . He has been educated and in employment in the UK;
             . He is financially independent;
             . Since his last arrival in the UK in 1991,  aged  15,  he  has
               not returned to Zambia;
             . He was at the date of hearing 42 years old; 41  on  the  date
               of the offence;
             . His father is dead; although he has siblings  and  a  mother,
               he has had no contact with them for 20 years;
             . His mother and a sister live in Zambia,  but  he  only  heard
               his sister had married through a friend who had seen this  on
               social media;
             . He has no real connection with Zambia;
             . His emotional connection with Zambia  is  negative  following
               the breakdown of the family unit and unhappy childhood;
             . He has no knowledge of Zambian Society;
             . He has never lived in Zambia as an adult;
             . He has no friends in Zambia;
             . He has no cultural connection with  Zambia  (his  partner  is
               not of Zambian heritage and so could not assist);
             . He has no health issues;
             . There is no financial assistance available to  him  from  his
               partner;
             . He has no support structure in Zambia which could assist;  he
               would  be  returning  there   with   no   accommodation,   no
               employment and at very real risk of being destitute.


         5. The SSHD in his grounds  seeking  permission  states  that  his
            partner may be able to send some sums of money for assistance -
            that is not the finding made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
            on the basis of the evidence before  her.  her  finding  was  a
            finding that was open to her on the  evidence  and  is  neither
            irrational, inadequately reasoned or perverse. The SSHD did not
            submit the First-tier Tribunal  findings  fell  into  any  such
            category.


         6. The SSHD in the grounds and in submissions referred to the very
            high threshold required to meet the test of  "very  significant
            obstacles"  and  sets  out  the  case  law  relied  upon   that
            establishes that test. There is no dispute but that the test is
            a high one. The First-tier Tribunal judge identifies  the  test
            (albeit not relying  on  the  same  caselaw)  and  directs  her
            assessment to the evidence as a whole. In submissions Mr Walker
            accepted  that  the  challenge  was  in  essence   a   "reasons
            challenge".

         7. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out the evidence  before  her
            and made findings  that  were  plainly  open  to  her  on  that
            evidence.  Whilst  some  judges  may  have  found  against  the
            appellant, the evidence was such that the decision reached  was
            within the reasonable decision-making parameters  open  to  the
            judge. She directed herself appropriately.

         8. There is no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge  such
            that the decision is set aside to be remade.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.










                                    Date 8th May 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
