
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08610/2018
                                                               HU/08626/2018
                                                             & HU/08622/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 April 2019                     |On 21 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            K K (first Appellant)
                           T K (second Appellant)
                            M K (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Martin, instructed by Indra Sebastian Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr  S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(25/01/19)
     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (17/04/19)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill promulgated  on  26  October  2018  dismissing
    their appeals against the decisions of the respondent to  refuse  their
    human rights claims.

 2. The first appellant is married  to  the  second  appellant;  the  third
    appellant is their child.  They were initially here with leave, in  the
    case of the first appellant, as a student and then as a Tier  1  (Post-
    Study) Migrant, a general migrant and finally again as a student.   The
    second appellant has been present here as  a  dependant  of  the  first
    appellant, the third appellant was given leave as a dependant also.

 3. Importantly in this case, the appellant's mother lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom and although she is only 54 has a  number  of  serious  medical
    conditions, which are set out  in  the  decision  and  in  the  medical
    evidence in the decision, particularly at paragraph 23(g).  She is also
    in receipt of a Personal Independence Payment in respect both of  daily
    living component and mobility component.  Essentially  the  appellants'
    case comes down to this: that is that there is a  family  life  between
    the first appellant at the and his mother if not also between  her  and
    the third appellant; and, that she requires  the  emotional  and  other
    presence of her son here to help  her  cope  with  her  illness,  which
    includes psychiatric problems and in day-to-day living.

 4. The judge heard evidence and concluded that removal was  proportionate,
    noting that the  applicants  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  concluding  first  at  [25]  that  the   first
    appellant's mother had not been found to be in need of direct care on a
    day-to-day basis, although she had been cared for at some point in  the
    past. He found  that  some  of  the  independent  psychological  report
    prepared was noteworthy but attached limited weight to  it  as  it  was
    based on a one-off review of the appellant and was  conducted  using  a
    single formal quantitative test; that there were  no  reasons  why  the
    appellants could not return to Sri Lanka; that  the  first  appellant's
    mother could chose to go there if she wanted to do so or to maintain  a
    direct face to  face relationship in that manner or  that  social  ties
    could be preserved and maintained by indirect means including visits to
    and from Sri Lanka; and, that little weight could be  attached  to  the
    private or family life of  individuals  which  is  accrued  during  the
    period of time they been here precariously. He concluded at  [35]  that
    there is nothing disproportionate or unduly harsh about the requirement
    for the appellants to be removed from the United Kingdom.

 5. The appellants appealed against the decision  making  what  I  consider
    five specific points:

        i) that the judge had failed properly to make  any  finding  as  to
           whether family life existed between the first appellant and  his
           mother;

       ii) that the judge had erred in his findings about the nature of the
           care necessary and the reasons why that has ceased

      iii) that the judge had failed to consider the best interest  of  the
           child in terms of the closeness to his grandmother;

       iv) that the judge had made  a  mistake  of  fact  in  that  he  had
           referred  to  the  appellant's  mother  being  able  to   obtain
           protection from her younger son; and

        v) that the judge had erred in not putting  proper  weight  on  the
           psychological report.

 6. Dealing with the first point I consider that the judge has, despite  Mr
    Kotas' submissions with regards to paragraph  [34],  not  answered  the
    question as to whether there is family life between the first appellant
    and his mother.  I accept that what is said at paragraph 34 is,  as  Mr
    Martin submitted, formulaic.  There is no indication that the judge had
    considered whether family life exists elsewhere  in  the  decision  and
    there is no clear finding.  Second, I consider that there is merit with
    regard to the second point in that the judge  appears  to  have  relied
    upon a Tribunal assessment in respect  of  the  mother  who  was  being
    assessed for a Personal Independence Payment, which of  its  nature  is
    formulaic.  It is correct, as is averred in the grounds  at  [6],  that
    there was no reference to direct support and supervision.  With regards
    to the third point, I accept that the judge did not make  any  findings
    with regards to the relationship between the third  appellant  and  his
    grandmother, but I do not considered that point is of any  materiality.



 7. I consider that at paragraph [23(m)] the judge appeared to suggest that
    the appellant's mother has the ability to obtain  protection  from  her
    younger son. The phrase is ambiguous.  It could be  read  that  she  is
    able to get protection from him, as in he  is  supporting  her,  or  it
    could be read that the first appellant's mother has the ability  to  be
    protected against him.  It is unclear which is meant, but my reading of
    it is the latter, in that  he  could  obtain  protection  against  her,
    although that is not reasoned either way.

 8. With regard to the psychiatric report, I agreed  that  there  are  some
    merits in the observations by the  judge  that  the  first  appellant's
    mother is not obtaining treatment for depression and that it  was  also
    based on a one-off appointment. But it needs to be borne in  mind  what
    the contents of the report are.  What the report does do is to  explain
    and set out the closeness that exists between the first  appellant  and
    his mother and gives some  importance  to  that  which  was  not  taken
    properly into account.

 9. I am satisfied for these reasons that the decision involved the  making
    on of an error of law  in  that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  make
    findings as to whether family life existed and also failing to  explain
    properly why he did not attach weight to the report of Dr Da Costa.

10. The question then arises as to whether these errors are  material.   Mr
    Kotas makes a serious point in stating that in order to succeed in this
    case there has to be shown to be undue harshness, that is the test  and
    that is what the judge directed himself properly to at the end  of  his
    decision.

11. As against that and bearing in mind what  was  said  in  Rajendran  the
    difficulty is in the nature of the  two  errors  made.   First,  as  to
    whether there is a e family life and more importantly what the  content
    of that family life was and, as Mr Martin submitted,  the  effect  that
    there would be on the mother, and I do not consider that  it  could  be
    said that it was inevitable that the judge would  have  concluded  that
    there was not undue harshness in this case and accordingly I set  aside
    the decision.  The decision clearly needs to be remade.

12. The appeal was then adjourned until 17 April 2019.

    Remaking the appeal

13. In remaking the appeal I heard evidence from the first  appellant,  his
    wife, and also from his mother.

14. The appellant adopted his witness statements  and  was  cross-examined.
    He said that his mother's condition had decreased or  had  deteriorated
    over time and that nobody else assisted with care.  He said that is why
    he and his wife look after her and that if they  return  to  Sri  Lanka
    there would be no care available  for  her  in  their  village  and  he
    accepted that he had not made inquiries as to what was  available.   He
    said that it would not be possible to get the  correct  level  of  care
    that she required, it was not possible to get  an  appointment  with  a
    consultant even in a private hospital.

15. In re-examination, the appellant said that there  would  be  outpatient
    treatment available but she would not get the level of  care  that  she
    requires in this country.

16. In response to my questions regarding what happens on  a  typical  day,
    the appellant said that he gets up about  6  o'clock.   His  wife  then
    makes tea for the mother and takes her to the bathroom, assists her  to
    change and then they have breakfast.  She  takes  sixteen  to  eighteen
    different tablets a day and these are prepared for her.  He  said  that
    her blood sugar has to be monitored and that three to four times a week
    he takes  a  blood  sample  from  her.   He  is  also  responsible  for
    administering insulin.

17. The appellants assert that his mother does not require oxygen 24  hours
    a day but does require it during a greater part of the  day.   He  said
    that she also requires the  use  of  a  wheelchair,  except  for  short
    distances.

18. The appellant said that his mother works weeks quite often  during  the
    night, at least twice, and has to be reassured.  He said that there had
    been assistance from Social Services in the past in that the carer came
    in but that his mother was not happy with this and  she  only  received
    half hour slots which was not enough and that this help was not offered
    at the level of compassion that could be offered by family.

19. I then heard evidence from  the  appellant's  mother  who  adopted  her
    witness statements.

20. In  cross-examination,  she  said  that  her  health  had  deteriorated
    recently, in that she was unable to walk, her lung condition is getting
    worse and she is unable to sleep properly.  She confirmed that she  had
    received help from Social Services in the past but this was limited  to
    one and a half hours per day but it had not been of the same quality as
    being provided by her son and daughter-in-law.  She said that her  life
    had been terrible in the past.  She said it was not that she  preferred
    her son and daughter-in-law to provide the care but that  she  requires
    full-time  care  and  that  she  needs  her  son,  daughter-in-law  and
    grandchild to be with her to give her happiness which she had  not  had
    in the past.

21. There was no re-examination.

22. In response to my questions the appellant's mother said that it is  her
    son who sorts out her medication for her.  She said that  she  was  not
    able to conduct the blood tests for her diabetes on her  own,  although
    she had been able to do this in the past, she no longer felt able.

23.  Mr  Tarlow  submitted,  relying  on  the  refusal  letter,  that   the
    appellant's mother was entitled to provision of assistance both by  the
    NHS and from Social Services.  He submitted that health visitors  would
    be available to assist with her medication and other needs, that it has
    not been shown that there was a family life here.  He submitted further
    that in any event, the  public  interest  in  immigration  control  was
    outweighed in this case and that the appellants could reintegrate  into
    their life in Sri Lanka for the reasons given in the refusal letter.

24. Mr Martin submitted that in this case there was a family  life  between
    the appellant and his mother given  both  the  physical  and  emotional
    dependence upon him that she has, as well as the difficulty of what she
    had suffered in the past.  He submitted that in this case  her  quality
    of life would not be the same even were her physical needs to be met by
    Social Services and/or the NHS.  There was  significant  evidence  that
    she felt hopeless and that there is little purpose to her life  without
    her son and his family around her.  He  submitted  that  although  this
    would not amount to a suicide risk, there was  a  real  risk  that  she
    would cease to take care of herself, her health  deteriorating  rapidly
    as a result.

25. Mr Martin submitted that in the  facts  of  this  case  that  the  care
    provided in terms of mental health  was  such  that  it  could  not  be
    provided by anyone other  than  her  family.   He  submitted  that  the
    incidents of depression was confirmed by the medical notes and also the
    most recent report by Dr  Decosta.   He  submitted  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect the family to live in  Sri  Lanka  separated
    from the mother and it would not be reasonable to expect her to go  and
    live there given the extent and nature of her medical conditions.

The Law

26. Section 117B of the 2002 Act

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
                speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

27. It is accepted that the appellants do not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.

28. Given the centrality of the appellant's mother to the factual matrix in
    this case, it is appropriate to  start  with  a  consideration  of  her
    current position.  The appellant's mother was married in 1981  but  her
    husband deserted her after she  became  pregnant  and  she  suffered  a
    significant degree of stigma from neighbours and family as  she  was  a
    single mother when he was  born.   She  decided  to  leave  Sri  Lanka,
    leaving her son with her mother and to live with her until she died; he
    was then looked after by his aunt.  The appellant's mother remarried in
    1989 and moved to the United Kingdom in 1991 where she  claimed  asylum
    and was recognised as a refugee.  She is now a  British  citizen.   She
    suffered a significant degree of abuse at the hands of her husband  who
    cut her and subjected her to significant domestic violence.  Her second
    child was born in the United Kingdom but he is now a  drug  addict,  an
    alcoholic and only comes to her home when he needs something  or  tries
    to take money from her or to sell something.

29. It was only after the first appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2010 to pursue a degree that he was reunited with his mother.

30. There was no challenge to this aspect of the claim  and  I  accept  the
    evidence as to this given that it is  internally  consistent,  detailed
    and supported by the various medical reports and psychiatric reports.

31. The appellant's mother and his wife, as well as their child, live  with
    the appellant's mother.  The house is subject to  a  mortgage  and  the
    appellant contributes towards the payments.

32. I am satisfied that the appellant's mother  has  a  number  of  serious
    medical complaints.    As set out in a letter from her GP:

         "She has a very  complex  medical  history.   She  suffers  from  a
         combination of the following illnesses, giving her a  poor  quality
         of life and limited mobility.  These include  diffuse  interstitial
         pulmonary   fibrosis   requiring   home   oxygen   treatment    and
         immunosuppressive   treatment,   diabetes   mellitus,    rheumatoid
         arthritis and hyperlipidaemia.  As you will see from  the  attached
         list, she is  on  extensive  medications,  including  micophenolate
         mofetil capsules and prednisolone. ... [I]n addition to  the  above
         problems, she also suffers from severe urinary  incontinence  which
         restricts her ability to go out.  She is currently under  the  care
         of urogynecologists at  Northwick  Park  Hospital  and  is  on  the
         waiting list for treatment.

         More recently she has been diagnosed with glaucoma and  is  waiting
         to be seen by the ophthalmologists.

         Mrs K is a vulnerable adult.  One of her sons is a  methadone  user
         and her other son who has been a protective factor and who has been
         helping her I understand has recently been refused leave to stay in
         the UK."

33. It is also of note that since then the medical notes  reveal  that  she
    has been diagnosed as suffering from severe  depression  and  has  been
    prescribed sertraline, an antidepressant.  As at 28 February  2019  she
    appears to be in receipt of 18 different medications, all to  be  taken
    daily, as well as insulin to be injected as directed.

34. It is evident from her statement, again unchallenged,  that  the  local
    Authority has provided her with an elevated and a special hospital bed,
    a bathroom commode, special chair, oxygen cylinder with a mask to  take
    outside when travelling, a help chain, special railings and  stand  and
    sanitary pads.

35. I accept also from the evidence both from Mrs K and her son that she is
    assisted to leave bed in the morning and is bathed by  the  appellant's
    wife.  She is  also  assisted  to  go  to  the  toilet  and  in  taking
    medication throughout the day.  I accept also that  she  is  unable  to
    cook for herself given her arthritis, difficulty in  standing  and  her
    use of oxygen.

36. I accept that in the past Social Services' care was provided  but  this
    was limited and that they were in a rush.

37. I accept also from Mrs K's evidence that her  son,  his  wife  and  the
    child has now given her new meaning in her life and given her a  reason
    for living.  I accept that she  has  bonded  with  her  grandson.   She
    spends a lot of time with him.

38. Turning next to the unchallenged evidence from the psychologist, Dr  Da
    Costa, that Mrs K has begun to have suicidal thoughts, feeling that  if
    her son were to leave she just wants to die, believing she has not long
    to live as a result of her physical  problems.   She  is  described  as
    suffering from hopelessness.  It is apparent  that  there  has  been  a
    deterioration in her mood between the two appointments.

39. I accept from this and the evidence put before me that there has been a
    deterioration  in  the  mental  health  characterised  in  part  by   a
    depressive illness.  I accept also that  Mrs  K's  unhappy  history  of
    abuse has contributed to  her  mental  ill  health  and  that  she  was
    separated from her son for an extended period.  It is in  this  context
    understandable that she does not wish to be  alone  and  lonely  again,
    having no relatives to turn to in the United Kingdom other than  a  son
    who is a drug addict and who turns up only to demand money from her.  I
    accept also that her mental condition has been exacerbated through,  as
    Dr Da Costa describes, the long-term effects of domestic  violence.   I
    accept also that the appellants are a huge protective  factor  for  her
    and that their removal  would,  as  Dr  Da  Costa  opines,  lead  to  a
    deterioration in mental and physical health.

40. Taking all of this evidence as a whole,  I  conclude  that,  unusually,
    there is  such  a  degree  of  dependence  in  this  case  between  the
    appellant's mother and the appellant  such  that  their  does  exist  a
    family life between them even though they are  both  adults.   That  is
    because   Mrs   K   is   significantly   dependent   emotionally    and
    psychologically on her son for a number of reasons, including her  past
    abuse, her lack of any other family to turn  to  and  her  feelings  of
    guilt at having been separated from him at a very young age.   She  has
    also, I accept, become dependant on  her  son  and  daughter-in-law  to
    provide her with care.

41. I accept also that there exist strong bonds between Mrs K, her daughter-
    in-law, and her only grandchild.  There does not, however, appear to be
    the necessary degree of emotional dependence here for a family life  to
    exist but that there is certainly  a  strong  bond  which  operates  in
    addition to the family life  that  clearly  exists  between  the  three
    appellants.  It is therefore necessary to consider  this  as  a  family
    unit, that is the appellants and Mrs K.

42. I accept also that the first appellant would be significantly  troubled
    were he to be separated from his mother, given  her  evident  emotional
    dependence on him and her physical and mental ill health  described  in
    significant detail in the medical evidence before me.  I bear  in  mind
    that Mrs K is a British citizen and is entitled to the help and support
    she receives in this country from the  NHS  and,  Social  Services  and
    other agencies.  I note  also  that  she  is  in  receipt  of  Personal
    Independence Payment, including the mobility allowance  at  the  higher
    level.

43. If this were just a case of physical illness, then I consider  that  it
    would be possible for carers to come in, to administer  medication,  to
    bathe and dress Mrs K and to ensure  that  she  eats  and  gets  proper
    exercise.  Arrangements could be put in place to ensure that  she  goes
    to medical appointments on time, that her blood is  checked  regularly,
    and that she is trained properly to administer her insulin.  This would
    be a significant degree of intervention for a large part of the day and
    it is unclear that such a level of support would be available from  the
    local Authority even taking into account what is available from  Social
    Services, the NHS and health visitors.

44. What this would not, however, provide is the therapeutic help that  the
    presence of the appellants in Mrs K's life provide her.  I am satisfied
    from the medical evidence and the oral testimony  that  their  presence
    with her is the reason that  she  wishes  to  stay  alive  despite  her
    depression and numerous medical complaints which make it difficult  for
    her to have any degree of mobility or  independence,  bearing  in  mind
    that absent the family she would require strangers to bathe her and  to
    deal with her incontinence.  I find that without this level of  day-to-
    day care and presence of family that her life  would  be  significantly
    worse and that her health, both  physical  and  mental,  is  likely  to
    deteriorate rapidly given her express will that she would  simply  want
    to die.  That is not to say that she would take any  active  steps  but
    equally failing to care for herself and  allowing  herself  to  neglect
    herself, as well as a possible return to her alcoholism, this may  well
    occur.

45. There is little evidence to show what would or would not  be  available
    for Mrs K in Sri Lanka.  She is from Sri Lanka; she speaks  Tamil;  she
    grew up there; and, she would have her  immediate  family  around  her.
    But I bear in mind that she is a British citizen.  She is  entitled  to
    the level of treatment which she currently receives.  I  consider  that
    with active management of a number of consultant physicians, as well as
    the GP all of this could only be replicated at a considerable cost  and
    I accept the evidence before me, which was  not  challenged,  that  the
    family would be unable to provide this were it even  available  in  Sri
    Lanka, given the complexity and number of her conditions.  I note  also
    that the only home she has in  the  United  Kingdom  is  subject  to  a
    mortgage.

46. Taking all of these factors into account I conclude,  bearing  in  mind
    the  practical  realities  of  the  situation  that  Mrs  K  could  not
    reasonably be expected to go to live in Sri Lanka away from the medical
    support she has received for a number of years.  Given  also  her  lung
    condition and dependence on oxygen, as well as her other illnesses,  it
    may be questionable whether she could in fact fly to Sri Lanka.

47. Accordingly, drawing these strands together, I conclude that  it  would
    be wholly unreasonable to expect Mrs K to relocate  to  Sri  Lanka  and
    that accordingly, the only place where the family life can continue  to
    exist is within the United Kingdom.

48. I bear in mind that it is only in very compelling circumstances  where,
    as here, the Immigration Rules are not met, that it  would  nonetheless
    be disproportionate bearing in mind the very strong public interest  in
    the maintenance of immigration control, someone should not be  removed.
    Such situation are the exception.

49. Given Mrs K's frail state of health, I consider that it would cause her
    a significant degree of anxiety, stress and ill health to  require  her
    to leave her situation in the United Kingdom where her physical  health
    needs are met and to travel to Sri Lanka.  I  consider  also  that  the
    effect of separating the family, requiring the appellants  to  relocate
    to Sri Lanka, would have a significant and serious effect on Mrs K.   I
    accept, for the reasons set out above this would  have  a  serious  and
    immediate effect on her mental health and consequently on  her  ability
    to care for herself and her physical health.   I  accept  the  evidence
    that she would lose her purpose  for  living.   She  is  understandably
    distressed by this and it is important to bear in mind that despite she
    is  only  55  yet  suffers  from  a  number  of  debilitating  ailments
    restricting her life to such an extent that  her  private  life  is  in
    effect coterminous with her family life, that is the  life  she  shares
    with the appellants.  She has little  or  no  interaction  with  anyone
    outside this, other than healthcare professionals.

50. I accept also that the  impact  on  the  appellants  would  be  severe,
    particularly on the first appellant.  Having lived with his mother  and
    cared for her, he and his wife would be acutely aware of the effects  a
    separation would have on her.  I accept given their evidence, that this
    would have a serious impact on the first appellant himself,  given  the
    degree of support and wellbeing he has derived  from  now  having  been
    reunited with his mother, having been separated in  the  past  and  the
    strong emotional bond that exists between them.

51. I accept from the evidence presented that the  first  appellant  speaks
    English.  I accept also that he has qualifications and that he and  his
    wife are not currently dependent on the  state.   He  is  employed.   I
    accept that their family life has come into existence here  when  their
    situation was precarious given they had not achieved settled status and
    little weight could be attached thereto.  Third, it is the family  life
    in this case which makes the difference.

52. I accept also that the second and third appellants  speak  English  and
    are accommodated in the first appellant's mother's home.

53. Taking all of these factors into account and viewing  the  evidence  in
    the  round,  I  am  satisfied  that  on  the  particular  and   unusual
    circumstances in which the  family  dependency  is  a  reason  and  the
    serious ill health of the mother that it would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with the family's right to respect for their  family  life
    to remove them to Sri Lanka.

54. Accordingly, for these reasons, I allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

1    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error of law and I set it aside.

2    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 29 May 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul








