
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08416/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2018                         |On 5 October 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AMADOU [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no legal representative (the claimant's partner
                    appeared on his behalf)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (SSHD) against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Devittie (the judge), promulgated on 26 January 2018, allowing  the
         appeal of Mr [K] (hereafter claimant) against the SSHD's  decision,
         dated 7 March 2016, refusing the claimant's human rights claim.



Background

      2. The claimant is a national of Gambia,  date  of  birth  10  October
         1969. He has had an 'on and off' relationship with [MG], a  British
         citizen, since 1993. He lawfully entered the UK on 2 June 1994  and
         was granted a further period of leave to remain, first as a working
         holidaymaker, then as  a  student,  until  31  March  1998.  On  30
         November 1996  the  claimant  received  a  caution  for  forging  a
         document and using a vehicle without a test certificate. In January
         1998 the claimant married [AKM] (wrongly identified by the judge as
         Kathleen) a British citizen and, on  23  March  1998,  applied  for
         leave to remain as her spouse. The claimant and  [AKM]  had  a  son
         born on 17 March 1996 and a daughter born on 19 February 1999.

      3. On 17 August 1998 the claimant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
         possessing a controlled Class A drug  with  intent  to  supply  and
         sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.

      4. [K], the son of the appellant and [MG] was born in  February  2000.
         He would have been conceived around May 1999. In October  2000  the
         claimant returned to Gambia.

      5. According to the Reasons For Refusal Letter the claimant then  made
         an application for leave to enter to join  his  spouse,  which  was
         refused on 6 December 2001 and an appeal dismissed on  3  September
         2004. The Reasons For Refusal Letter however also states  that  the
         claimant entered the UK on 12 February 2002 pursuant to a grant  of
         entry clearance on the basis  of  his  marriage  to  [AKM].  It  is
         unclear to me how this entry  clearance  was  granted  or  why  the
         claimant proceeded to appeal against the earlier refusal  to  grant
         entry clearance. In any event, the applicant applied for Indefinite
         Leave to Remain (ILR) on the basis of his relationship  with  [AKM]
         on 17 January 2003. [O], his daughter from  his  relationship  with
         [MG] was born in December  2002.  [O]  would  have  been  conceived
         around March 2002, soon after the claimant entered the UK  pursuant
         to his relationship with [AKM]. The claimant as granted ILR  on  20
         January 2003.

      6. On  27  February  2004  the  claimant  was  sentenced  to  3  years
         imprisonment for possessing a Class A drug (198 tablets of Ecstasy)
         with intent to supply.

      7. On 30 March 2005 the claimant was  notified  of  his  liability  to
         deportation and, on either 14 or 18 April 2005, he was notified  of
         a decision to make a deportation  order.  An  appeal  against  this
         decision was dismissed by Immigration Judge  Grant  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 19 July 2005. The appeal was based, inter  alia,  on
         the claimant's relationship with [MG] and their two  children  who,
         at that time, had no right to remain in the UK and who were seeking
         ILR  under  the  terms  of  a  Home  Office  amnesty.  Neither  the
         claimant's then wife, nor [MG] attended the appeal  hearing.  Judge
         Grant found  that  letters  from  [MG]  and  from  [AKM]  had  been
         fabricated  and  concluded  that  the  claimant  was   not   in   a
         relationship with either of them  or  with  their  children.  Judge
         Grant also found  that  the  claimant  attempted  to  downplay  his
         involvement in the 2004 conviction.

      8. On 16 September 2005 a  deportation  order  was  made  against  the
         claimant. He voluntarily left the UK on 2 March 2007.

      9. The claimant's marriage to his British citizen wife  was  dissolved
         on 15 April 2008. The  claimant  is  said  to  have  rekindled  his
         relationship with [MG] in 2008 and they got married in Gambia on  8
         April 2013.

     10. On 27 July 2015 representations were made on the claimant's  behalf
         to revoke the deportation order. In his decision refusing to revoke
         the deportation order, which was also treated as  a  refusal  of  a
         human rights claim, the respondent  considered  that  the  offences
         committed by the claimant were very serious  and  that  the  public
         interest required his continued exclusion. The respondent noted the
         passage of time and the assertion  that  the  claimant  was  now  a
         reformed person, his remorse and his wish to be reunited  with  his
         children. The respondent was however concerns that, if the claimant
         committed further offences, the consequences would be  serious  and
         referred to an absence of evidence that he  had  rehabilitated  and
         was now a low risk of offending. The respondent was  not  satisfied
         the claimant had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with his two children by [MG] and  found  that  he  could  maintain
         contact by remote forms of communication. The  respondent  did  not
         believe it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  either
         relocate to Gambia, or to be separated from the claimant.  Nor  was
         the respondent satisfied that the  claimant's  continued  exclusion
         from the UK  would  have  an  unduly  harsh  impact  on  [MG].  The
         respondent  concluded  that   there   were   no   very   compelling
         circumstances which rendered the refusal of the human rights  claim
         disproportionate under Art 8.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     11. The judge summarised the Reasons For Refusal Letter, and summarised
         the claimant's statement, in which he indicated  that  he  had  now
         been separated from his wife and children for  10  years  and  that
         this separation was  adversely  affecting  his  children,  and  his
         youngest son in particular, who was having difficulties in  school.
         The claimant stated that he had spent the previous 13 years of  his
         life rebuilding and rehabilitating himself  and  to  this  end  had
         established businesses in Gambia and had not committed any  offence
         since 2004. The judge summarised [MG]'s statement  and  heard  oral
         evidence from her and from their two children.  [MG]  stated  that,
         since the claimant left the UK, their family had  been  torn  apart
         and that she constantly struggled to raise her children without the
         support of their father. She visited the claimant on  a  number  of
         occasions with their children the last  time  being  in  2013.  The
         judge referred to several documents including  letters  written  to
         the claimant by  his  son  and  daughter  between  2015  and  2017,
         evidence  of  his  businesses   in   Gambia   including   invoices,
         registration  documents  and  insurance  documents,  and  character
         references. The judge set out the relevant provisions of  paragraph
         398 and 399 of the immigration rules, and noted that the  questions
         on which the appeal turned were whether the claimant had a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with his British children, and
         whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the
         UK without their father.

     12. At [9] the judge concluded that the claimant did have a genuine and
         subsisting relationship with his children, referring to the letters
         from the children and the evidence  from  them  and  their  mother.
         There has been no challenge to this aspect of the judge's decision.

     13. At [10] the judge stated,

             "In the letters they submitted with  the  application  and  at
             this hearing as well as in their oral evidence, both  children
             were eloquent in their plea to have their father join them  in
             the UK. His daughter could barely disguise her emotions in her
             oral evidence. She is aged 13. I have no reason to  doubt  the
             evidence of the mother that her son  in  particular  has  been
             badly affected by his father's absence. As I say both children
             gave evidence at this hearing and were cross-examined.  In  my
             opinion no question arises as to their evidence having been in
             any way contrived. The indications are that  his  daughter  is
             well focused and has a clear goal of what she seeks to achieve
             in life. Less so with his son. I find that the involvement  of
             their father in their lives even at this stage in the  growing
             up will go a long way in assuaging the pain they expressed  in
             having an absent father. The best interests  of  the  children
             therefore support the [claimant's] return. I accept that their
             mother has ably cared for them but I do not accept  that  they
             do not continue to suffer emotional distress because of  their
             father's absence."

     14. Then at [11] the judge stated,

             "There are strong public interest factors that  stand  against
             the revocation. The [claimant]  was  convicted  of  a  serious
             offence whose gravity is made plain in the sentencing  remarks
             of the trial court. I also recognise, that even if the risk of
             reoffending is low, that the  [claimant's]  deportation  meets
             the expectation of  the  public  that  foreign  criminals  who
             commit serious offences will face deportation. His deportation
             also serves to deter like-minded foreign persons."

     15.  The  judge  then  found  that  the  likelihood  of  the   claimant
         reoffending was low. In reaching this finding the judge referred to
         and relied on the claimant's voluntary departure from  the  UK  and
         the positive steps taken by  claimant  in  his  10-year  period  of
         absence from the UK. The judge found that the voluntary  nature  of
         the claimant's return was indicative of a  genuine  acceptance  and
         willingness to face up to the consequences of his action. The judge
         additionally indicated that he had closely examined the documentary
         evidence which showed that the claimant had engaged in lawful self-
         employment in Gambia during his tenure  absence.  The  judge  found
         that this demonstrated much initiative on the  claimant's  part  in
         taking rehabilitative action. The judge stated,

             "... this is an [claimant] who been [sic] endure the pain of a
             10-year separation from his children, with no small measure of
             self-discipline. It is not probable in my view that he  would,
             after such an experience, re-engage in criminal  activity  and
             place and risk the  best  interests  of  his  children  at  so
             critical a juncture in their lives."

     16. The judge consequently concluded that it would be unduly  harsh  to
         expect the children to remain in the UK and  exclude  their  father
         from the UK beyond the 10-year period. The appeal was allowed.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission and the parties' submissions

     17. The grounds contend that the  judge  failed  to  identify  anything
         exceptional about the family  situation  that  would  outweigh  the
         compelling public interest in the claimant's  continued  exclusion.
         The  grounds  contend  that  the  judge   went   against   relevant
         jurisprudence when stating that the best interests of his  children
         'required' the claimant's return. I pause to note  that  the  judge
         did not state that the best interests of  his  children  'required'
         his return but rather that  the  best  interests  of  his  children
         'supported' his return. The grounds contend that there was  nothing
         exceptional in this case and that there was no expert  evidence  of
         any difficulties suffered by the family that might  take  the  case
         out of the ordinary and no expert evidence to support  the  judge's
         finding that the claimant's likelihood of reoffending was low.  The
         grounds further contend that the  judge  did  not  appear  to  have
         undertaken any balancing exercise weighing up the best interests of
         the children with the  claimant's  criminal  background  or  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, and in  so  doing
         the judge failed to correctly apply  the  substantial  weight  that
         should be attached to the public interest.

     18. In granting permission judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin
         found it arguable that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  identify
         anything exceptional about the situation of the  claimant  and  his
         family that would outweigh the compelling public  interest  in  his
         continued exclusion and that he  had  not  correctly  assessed  the
         facts and law in respect of the best interests  of  the  claimant's
         children. It was  additionally  arguable  that  the  judge  made  a
         decision that there was a  low  risk  of  reoffending  without  any
         evidential basis and that the judge failed to balance correctly the
         facts against the public interest in the continued exclusion of the
         claimant.

     19. Ms Everett relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  grant  of
         permission and submitted that there was no adequate  assessment  of
         the public interest. She submitted that the judge's reliance on the
         evidence relating to the claimant's businesses in  Gambia  and  the
         other documents he provided were somewhat speculative and that  the
         judge did not adequately assess the seriousness of  the  claimant's
         criminality concluding that the impact on  the  children  would  be
         unduly harsh.

     20. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     21. In MM (Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 617 the Court of Appeal considered the approach  to
         determining  undue  harshness  in  the  context  of  s.117C(5)  and
         paragraph 399 of the immigration rules. The Court  found  that  the
         wider public interest factors had to be considered when determining
         the issue of undue harshness, including an applicant's  immigration
         and criminal history. The question of undue hardship  had  to  have
         regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in  the
         particular case. Laws LJ stated, at paragraph 24, "What is  due  or
         undue depends on all the circumstances, not merely  the  impact  on
         the child or partner in the given  case.  In  the  present  context
         relevant circumstances certainly include the criminal's immigration
         and criminal history." This approach was followed in MA  (Pakistan)
         & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber) & Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  albeit  with  some
         reluctance.

     22. The headnote of Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of deportation
         order) [2017] UKUT 00166(IAC) reads,

             "(i) In cases involving convictions for an offence  for  which
             the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less
             than 4 years, the Secretary of State's policy, as expressed in
             paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration Rules, is that the  public
             interest does not require continuation of a deportation  order
             after a period of ten years has elapsed.

             (ii) However, paragraph 391(a) allows the Secretary  of  State
             to consider on a case by  case  basis  whether  a  deportation
             order should be maintained. The mere fact of past  convictions
             is unlikely to be sufficient  to  maintain  an  order  if  the
             'prescribed period' has elapsed. Strong public policy  reasons
             would be  needed  to  justify  continuing  an  order  in  such
             circumstances.

             (iii)    Paragraph 391(a) will only be  engaged  in  a  'post-
             deportation' case if the person is applying for revocation  of
             the order from outside the UK. Nothing in the  strict  wording
             of the rule requires the ten-year period to be  spent  outside
             the UK. However, the main purpose of deportation is to exclude
             a person from the UK. Any breach of the deportation  order  is
             likely to be a strong public policy ground for maintaining the
             order even though a period of ten years has elapsed  since  it
             was made.

             (iv) In 'post-deportation' applications involving sentences of
             less than four years made  before  the  end  of  the  ten-year
             period,   and   'post-deportation'   applications    involving
             sentences of four years or more, appropriate weight should  be
             given to the Secretary of State's policy as expressed  in  the
             'Conventions  exception'   and   'sweep-up   exception'   with
             reference to paragraphs 398-399A and 390A of  the  Immigration
             Rules."

     23. Having considered the  aforementioned  decisions,  it  is  apparent
         that, when assessing the issue of undue  harshness,  a  judge  must
         take account of  relevant  public  interest  factors  including  an
         applicant's immigration and criminal history.  A  judge  must  also
         take  into  account  the  provisions  of  paragraph  391   of   the
         immigration rules.

     24. I can detect no error of law in the judge's assessment of the  best
         interests of  the  claimant's  two  children.  The  judge  did  not
         approach their best interests as a paramount consideration or as  a
         trump card. The judge heard oral evidence from  both  children  and
         explained,   with   reference   to   their   evidence   and   their
         circumstances, why it was in their best interests  to  be  reunited
         with their father. This is not a surprising conclusion.  The  judge
         was unarguably entitled to conclude, given in particular the  young
         age of the claimant's daughter and the length  of  separation,  and
         the difficulties the claimant's son  was  experiencing  at  school,
         that the children's best interests supported his return.

     25. Nor am I satisfied that the judge failed to take  full  account  of
         the public interest factors at play in his balancing exercise  when
         assessing the issue of undue hardship. The judge was clearly  aware
         of the claimant's criminal history as this was set out at [2],  and
         the judge again set out the public interest considerations  at  [6]
         as detailed in the Reasons For Refusal Letter.  Then  at  [11]  the
         judge directed himself to the strong public interest  factors  that
         stood against the revocation of the deportation order. Although the
         judge did  not  specifically  refer  to  paragraph  391(a)  of  the
         immigration rules it is apparent that the judge took  into  account
         the 10 years that elapsed from the making of the deportation  order
         and the fact that the claimant voluntarily left the UK and had  now
         been separated from his  family  for  over  10  years.  These  were
         relevant factors when assessing undue hardship.

     26. I do not accept the submission made on behalf of the SSHD that  the
         judge was not entitled to rely on the documentary evidence produced
         by the claimant, which related to his circumstances  in  Gambia  in
         the 10 years following his voluntary departure, in concluding  that
         the claimant was now at low risk  of  re-offending.  No  issue  was
         taken with the authenticity or reliability of the various documents
         either in the Reasons For Refusal Letter or at the  hearing  before
         the First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge  was  rationally  entitled  to
         conclude that the businesses established by the claimant  indicated
         initiative on his part in taking rehabilitative action and that  it
         was no small measure of self-discipline. The documents  included  a
         certificate  of  character  issued  by  the  Gambian  Police  Force
         indicating that the claimant had not been convicted of a felony  or
         misdemeanour in the country. The SSHD's contention that the judge's
         assessment of this  documentary  evidence  was  unduly  speculative
         amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with  factual  conclusions
         rationally open to the judge for the reasons he gave.

     27. I do not accept that the judge failed to identify matters that were
         'exceptional' or which took the case 'out  of  the  ordinary'  such
         that the impact on the children was unduly harsh. The  judge  heard
         evidence from the children and [MG] and was  entitled  to  conclude
         that the children suffered  emotional  distress  because  of  their
         father's absence, and the judge was  also  entitled  to  take  into
         account, when determining undue harshness, the claimant's voluntary
         return to Gambia and the passing of 10 years since  the  making  of
         the deportation order  and  the  passing  of  10  years  since  his
         departure  from  the  UK.  The  judge  approached   these   factors
         holistically, taking account of the seriousness of  the  claimant's
         offending but also taking account of his findings that the claimant
         was at low risk of committing further offences. I  find  the  judge
         was lawfully entitled to conclude  that  the  claimant's  continued
         exclusion from the UK was having an  unduly  harsh  impact  on  his
         children given his particular immigration history  and  history  of
         offending.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal judge did not erred  in  law.  The  SSHD  appeal  is
dismissed.


[pic]    1 October 2018

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

