
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08973/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 9 January 2019                            |On 18 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (SHEFO\460907)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hans of Henry Hyams & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Gumsley, promulgated on 20 March 2018, in which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  an
        Entry Clearance Officer to grant the appellant leave to  enter  the
        United Kingdom to join the sponsor, his father, who is present  and
        settled in the UK.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea born on 20 November 2000.  The
        Judge notes the appellant and respondent's cases before setting out
        the correct legal framework and relevant case law on the  issue  of
        sole responsibility. The  Judge  sets  out  an  assessment  of  the
        evidence between [10 - 22] and findings of fact at [23]  which,  in
        relation to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules,  was  that  the
        Judge was not satisfied the appellant's mother was  not  playing  a
        role in the  family  in  Guinea,  not  satisfied  she  had  totally
        abandoned her children as claimed, was not  satisfied  the  sponsor
        had established sole responsibility for the appellant, whilst being
        satisfied that significant roles were being  played  by  others  in
        Guinea  and  that  responsibility  for  the  appellant  was   being
        exercised by those who are there.
     3. The Judge considers article 8, this being a  human  rights  appeal,
        from  [24]  in  which  the  Judge  finds   the   decision   to   be
        proportionate.
     4. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by  a  judge  of  the
        Upper Tribunal on 5 November 2018.



Error of law


     5. The Judge expresses  a  number  of  concerns  in  the  decision  in
        relation to the evidence provided. Having had the benefit of seeing
        and hearing the sponsor give oral evidence the Judge found  him  to
        be an  unimpressive  witness  who  was  extremely  evasive  in  his
        answers, claiming to have forgotten a number of matters  which  the
        Judge finds are the type of thing a person  would  be  unlikely  to
        forget. The Judge refers for example to the sponsor not being  able
        to say when his wife had left him and the children in Guinea as  he
        alleged. The Judge noted the sponsor did not know  about  addresses
        where the children had previously lived [12]. The Judge also  found
        the sponsor inconsistent in a number of areas both  internally  and
        in relation to external evidence [13  -  15].  The  Judge  attached
        little weight to a document purportedly from the Court of Appeal in
        Guinea for reasons given at [16] and other documents referred to at
        [17].
     6. The Judge accepted some money transfers had been made but noted the
        funds were sent to the sponsor's sister and not the grandmother who
        it is claimed was looking after the appellant in Guinea. The  Judge
        notes the statement from the sponsor's sister suggesting the  money
        was sent for the whole family, including herself. The money  orders
        were of different amounts  rather  than  a  consistent  maintenance
        payment for the children and were not regular [18]. The Judge  also
        notes a response from the  sponsor  that  he  had  no  evidence  of
        correspondence, texts, cards or  other;  other  than  a  couple  of
        photographs taken when he was in Guinea,  any  photographs  of  the
        appellant and the children [21], and no idea of the  date  or  year
        when his wife was alleged to have left him despite giving  evidence
        that it made him so will he had to seek medical attention for blood
        pressure at that time. There was also no evidence of anything  done
        by the sponsor to try to trace his wife [22].
     7. The grounds seeking permission to appeal allege the Judge  had  not
        given clear reasons as to why the findings made  had  been  reached
        but such an assertion has no arguable merit.  The  finding  of  the
        Judge  is  that  the  appellant  had  not  proved   he   has   sole
        responsibility for the child or that any other element to paragraph
        297 could be met. The  Judge  gives  reasons  for  coming  to  this
        conclusion. The grounds assert the Judge states he is not satisfied
        the mother is not playing a role in the appellant's  life  but  has
        provided no reasoning behind this which is a  misrepresentation  of
        the findings which are that  the  sponsor  and  appellant  had  not
        established that the appellant's mother had abandoned her  children
        and that the it had not been established, on the evidence, that the
        claim the mother was not playing a role in the appellant's life was
        likely to be true. There were arguably adequate evidential  grounds
        for the Judge to find accordingly. The Judge is also criticised for
        not specifying who or what  role  others  in  Guinea  play  in  the
        appellant's life, but the Judge was not arguably required to do so.
        The allegation made was that the appellant could succeed under  the
        Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  the  sponsor   exercised   sole
        responsibility. This was  not  proved.  There  is  no  dispute  the
        appellant has been adequately cared for  in  Guinea  and  so  other
        family members, such as the appellant's mother or others,  must  be
        providing for the appellant. Even though the sponsor  claimed  that
        he had sole responsibility he did not  establish  this  before  the
        Judge.
     8. The finding relating to money is challenged but all the Judge  does
        with regard to this is record that remittances are made but not  of
        a frequent amount or payment date and that they  are  paid  to  the
        sponsor's sister who states that part of the monies is for her  and
        other family members. It may be that payments have to  be  made  to
        other than the appellant as he  is  a  minor,  but  this  does  not
        undermine the findings of the Judge in relation to  this  piece  of
        evidence.
     9. The Judge at [19] claims the sponsor had stated he  had  chosen  to
        bring the appellant,  his  eldest  child,  to  the  United  Kingdom
        leaving other children in Guinea so the child could work  and  help
        support  further  applications  for  the  child.  It  is  said  the
        sponsor's  position  was  that  the  cost   of   applications   was
        prohibitive and that the representative stated it would be down  to
        expense, and that one theory could be that the eldest  child  could
        work, and this would help the sponsor to make an application in the
        future. Although the Judge is criticised on the basis  the  sponsor
        was not asked about that in evidence and it was a matter raised  in
        submissions  made  by  the  appellant's  advocate.  The  Judge  was
        entitled to take it into account. It  is  not  made  out  it  is  a
        submission made without instruction or authority and is a plausible
        theory if the cost of applications for the other  children  are  in
        issue. There is nothing arguably irrational  in  the  Judge  taking
        note of the specific submission made.
    10. It is accepted that as he is not in Guinea the sponsor may not have
        been able to answer a number of the questions  but  that  does  not
        explain all of the hesitancy and lack of  knowledge  identified  in
        the decision under challenge. As noted above,  the  Judge  had  the
        opportunity of seeing and hearing the sponsor give  oral  evidence.
        The fact the sponsor was not asked about the  appellants  schooling
        or health is  not  the  fault  of  the  Judge.  The  appellant  was
        represented, and it was not made out there was any restriction upon
        his advocate asking him in evidence  in  chief  for  re-examination
        about such issues. The Judge made the decision on the basis of  the
        evidence made available.
    11. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the outcome and  seeks  a  more
        favourable conclusion, no arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision of the First-Tier Tribunal has been made out. The findings
        within the range of those available to the Judge on  the  evidence.
        The findings are adequately reasoned and the weight to be given  to
        the evidence was a  matter  for  the  Judge.  In  addition  to  the
        Immigration Rules the Judge  undertook  a  freestanding  assessment
        under article 8 ECHR adopting the structured approach  set  out  in
        Razgar. The Judge considered statutory provisions including section
        55 of the 2009 Act and the best interests of  the  appellant  as  a
        child. The Judge found there was family life recognised by  article
        8 between the sponsor and the appellant  at  [26]  but  found  such
        family life  as  there  is,  is  weak.  The  Judge  considered  the
        proportionality concluding that any  interference  in  such  family
        life is proportionate to the legitimate aim of the respondent. This
        has not been shown to be a conclusion not available to the judge on
        the evidence.
    12. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 January 2019












