
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08586/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2018                          | On 21 December 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                dEependra rai
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge S.H. Smith) dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  as  the  adult  dependant
    relative of a Gurkha veteran.  The Judge found that the  appellant  did
    not meet the criteria in Annex K for admission  under  the  Rules,  and
    that there was no family life between the appellant and his parents for
    the purposes of Article 8 ECHR, and  therefore  Article  8(1)  was  not
    engaged.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 1  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.  It is arguable that the Judge committed an error of  law  when
         he made findings in  relation  to  documentation  produced  on  the
         appellant's behalf having not raised this issue during  the  course
         of the hearing.


         3.  It is arguable that the appellant placed insufficient weight on
         the visits made by his parents to the appellant in Nepal."


Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth  is  29  June
    1989.  His father retired from the Gurkha Brigade on 21  October  1971,
    and in 2012 he applied for  settlement  in  the  UK  pursuant  to  2009
    discretionary policy, which was published in  May  2009  following  the
    outcome of R (Limbu & Others) -v-  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin).  The application  was  successful,
    and he and the appellant's mother entered the UK for  the  purposes  of
    settlement on 6 June 2012.  Due to  his  age,  the  appellant  was  not
    eligible for admission under the 2009 discretionary policy.

 4. On 5 January 2015 Annex K was published following a review of the  2009
    discretionary policy.  On 12 March 2017 the appellant applied for entry
    clearance under Annex K as the adult dependant  relative  of  a  Gurkha
    veteran.

 5. On 19 July 2017 an Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") gave his reasons for
    refusing the application.  His parents had been present and settled  in
    the UK for over 5 years at the time of his application, and so  he  had
    been living apart from them for more  than  2  years  on  the  date  of
    application.  This was as a direct result of his parents  migrating  to
    the UK rather than as the result of him being away from the family unit
    as a consequence of education or other requirements.  Accordingly,  his
    application fell to be refused under paragraph 9(8) of Annex K.

 6. He stated that he was dependent upon his parents.  But he had  provided
    no details regarding his financial commitments in Nepal, and he had not
    submitted evidence of financial and emotional support from his parents.
     Accordingly, he had not demonstrated that he  was  wholly  financially
    dependent upon his father.  The ECO was also not satisfied that he  was
    emotionally dependent upon his father.   Accordingly,  his  application
    also fell to be refused under paragraph 9(5) of Annex K.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Smith sitting at Hatton  Cross
    on 25 June 2018.  Mr Jaisri  of  Counsel  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant,  and  the  respondent  was  represented  by  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The appellant's father was called  as  a  witness,
    and he was cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.

 8. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his findings of  fact  at
    paragraphs [16] onwards.  He began by addressing the issue of  funding.
    At paragraph [19], he held that, although the sponsor had made a number
    of cash gifts to his son in person upon leaving the country and  during
    subsequent visits,  there  was  no  additional  evidence  of  financial
    support for the appellant.

 9. At paragraph [20], he accepted that the appellant resided in the  house
    owned by the sponsor, and to that extent there was a degree of material
    support.  But he held that this factor did not aid the appellant to any
    significant extent.   It  was  hardly  surprising  that  the  appellant
    remained in the family home during the absence of  his  parents.   This
    was a common arrangement in many locations,  from  the  UK  to  further
    afield, and it could not, without more, demonstrate a breadth and depth
    of dependency necessary to engage Article 8.

10. At paragraph  [21],  he  addressed  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  the
    appellant was unable to find work.  In cross-examination, when  pressed
    as to what steps his son had taken to find work, the sponsor was  -  in
    the Judge's view - light  on  detail.   The  Judge  said  that  he  was
    ascribing little weight to the evidence of the  sponsor  that,  despite
    the fact that there was a smallholding attached to the family home, the
    appellant was  simply  unable  to  work  the  land.   The  sponsor  was
    confident  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  have   more   job
    opportunities in the UK. If that was so, it followed that the appellant
    must be able to work the land in Nepal, "and  in  all  likelihood,  has
    been doing so in his parents' absence."

11. At paragraph [22], the Judge turned to address the issue  of  emotional
    support and dependence.  He accepted that the sponsor and his wife  had
    made a number of visits to  their  son  and  daughters  in  Nepal.   He
    accepted that the sponsor and his wife had stayed  in  their  own  home
    with the appellant during these visits: "Again, it is hardly surprising
    that the sponsor stays in the home that he has retained in  Nepal  upon
    making return visits.  This is a factor which goes towards establishing
    wider dependence necessary to engage Article 8, but cannot be so  taken
    in isolation."

12. At paragraph [23],  the  Judge  said  that  the  other  strand  of  the
    appellants' case was that his emotional dependence was  established  by
    the evidence of regular communication between him and his  parents.   A
    number of voucher top-up receipts were included  in  the  bundle.   The
    Judge did not consider that  the  receipts  established  regularity  of
    contact between the appellant and the sponsor and his wife.   Taken  at
    their highest, they simply established that the sponsor had purchased a
    number of credits, which could have been used to call anyone in  Nepal.
    He had three children in Nepal, and he  had  lived  there  until  2012;
    "There is any number of people he could have been in touch with."

13. At paragraph [24], he said that although  the  sponsor's  evidence  was
    that the communication with his son  was  conducted  using  his  mobile
    telephone, there was no evidence in the form of call  log  screen-shots
    in the sponsor's telephone, or even photographs  of  a  handset.   Such
    material would be very easy to provide to the Tribunal.  Yet, there was
    nothing of this sort.

14. The Judge reached the following conclusions at paragraph [25]:

         "In the light of this survey of the evidence, I make the  following
         findings.  There  is  a  degree  of  financial  dependency  of  the
         Appellant upon the Sponsor, but  I  am  only  satisfied  that  such
         support is modest.  It does not extend  to  regular  cash  payments
         claim to have been sent by the Sponsor, on the basis  that  I  have
         been unable to  ascribe  much  weight  to  the  financial  transfer
         documents, when considered in the light of the evidence in the case
         as a whole.  A number of visits have taken place, although I do not
         accept that the Sponsor and his  wife  spent  time  only  with  the
         Appellant during these times.  There is nothing to suggest that the
         visits were not of the sort expatriates  regularly  make  to  their
         countries  of  origin,  where  there  are  many  people  to  see  -
         including, in this case, grandchildren born to the Sponsor's  other
         children.  I do not accept that there has  been  regular  telephone
         contact with the Appellant to the extent claimed by the Sponsor, as
         the telephone receipts provided are not specific,  and  could  have
         been used to place calls to anywhere."

15. At paragraphs [26]-[29], the Judge reviewed the case law in respect  of
    Article 8 and adult relationships.   He  cited  various  passages  from
    Kugathas -v- SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  At  paragraph  [30],  the  Judge
    said:

         "Applying these authorities and the findings of fact  that  I  have
         made in the present matter,  it  is  clear  that  the  relationship
         between the Appellant and the Sponsor  remains  firmly  within  the
         territory of normal emotional bonds expected between adult children
         and  their  parents.   There  is  nothing  about   the   continuing
         arrangement between the Appellant and the  Sponsor  which  attracts
         the  labels  'real',  'committed'  or  'effective'.   There  is  no
         evidence of dependence on the sort that  would  engage  Article  8.
         The Appellant lives in the family home in Nepal,  and  is  able  to
         utilise the family farm.  He is a grown man of working age.   There
         are other adult family members in Nepal available to him."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Jaisri developed the grounds of appeal which  he  had  pleaded.
    In response, Ms  Kiss  submitted  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had directed himself appropriately, and that no error  of  law
    was made out.

Discussion

17. Grounds 1 and 3  have  a  common  theme,  which  is  that  of  asserted
    procedural unfairness.  Mr  Jaisri  pleads  that  the  the  Judge  made
    adverse findings of fact which were "unlawful" as he failed to give the
    appellant or his representative an opportunity to address his concerns.
     He cites AM (Fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 6656 (IAC).

18. The background to Ground 1 is  that  the  appellant's  bundle  included
    three letters to the sponsor from Pokhara Travel & Money  Transfer  Ltd
    ("the Bureau").  In a letter dated 9 May 2016, the Bureau  itemised  14
    money transfers which they said the sponsor had  made  to  his  son  in
    Nepal between 20 November 2013 and 3 May 2016.  In a  letter  dated  27
    February 2017, the Bureau itemised eight transfers which they said that
    the sponsor had made to his son in Nepal between  9  May  2016  and  30
    January 2017.  In a letter dated 7 June 2018, the  Bureau  itemised  11
    transfers which they said had been made by the sponsor to  his  son  in
    Nepal between 18 February 2017 and 4 May 2018.

19. At paragraph [17] of the decision, the Judge  said  that  he  had  some
    concerns surrounding the currency bureau documents at pages 48  and  49
    of the bundle.  This was a reference to the letters of 2017  and  2018.
    The Judge's concerns were that the use of English in the documents  was
    poor; the letters featured only a  mobile  telephone  number  which  he
    considered was unusual for a financial transaction;  they  denoted  the
    sending and receiving parties as father and son respectively; while the
    documents featured the amount in sterling, there were no details as  to
    the amount of transaction in Nepalese rupees,  nor  the  exchange  rate
    applied; the documents had features one would not expect to see, namely
    an email address given as a hotmail account; there were no  details  of
    the bank account into which the monies were paid in  Nepal,  which  was
    odd in his view, as the sponsor had said during cross-examination  that
    he sent money to his  son's  bank  account  in  Nepal;  there  were  no
    corresponding  bank  statement  entries  surrounding  the  transactions
    included in the documents; and one  of  the  transactions  (9  February
    2018) was said to have been made when the sponsor claimed to have  been
    visiting his son in Nepal.   The  Judge  continued:  "As  there  is  no
    suggestion that these payments are funded electronically by the sponsor
    ... the only plausible explanation is that  they  were  cash  payments.
    Yet at the time of one  of  the  transactions,  on  the  sponsor's  own
    evidence he was out of the country, and so could not  have  funded  the
    transfer in this way." The Judge further commented that there was not a
    single receipt for any of the individual money transfers.

20. I accept that some of the concerns raised by the Judge are mistaken  or
    tendentious.   The letters feature a landline and fax number as well as
    a mobile telephone number.  The Judge has not given an example  of  the
    poor English that he has in  mind,  and  in  any  event,  the  Managing
    Director of the Bureau is a Mr Gurung, which indicates that  he  is  of
    Nepali heritage and that English is not his first language.

21. However, I consider that  the  majority  of  the  concerns  raised  are
    sustainable. Of particular note is the apparent  inconsistency  between
    the sponsor's evidence in cross-examination that he paid  money  direct
    into the appellant's bank account in Nepal,  and  the  message  of  the
    currency bureau letters which is that  the  father  used  the  currency
    bureau to make cash payments to  the  appellant  in  Nepal,  which  the
    appellant collected in cash from a local bureau in Nepal.

22. I do not consider that there has been any procedural  unfairness.   The
    appellant was at all material times  legally  represented.   His  legal
    advisers knew that an issue in the appeal was whether the appellant was
    wholly financially dependent upon  his  father.   The  currency  bureau
    letters were produced in order to support this  proposition.   However,
    in cross-examination, the sponsor said that he sent money direct to his
    son's bank account.  It is apparent from the Judge's  typed  record  of
    proceedings that the Judge raised this issue with Mr  Jaisri  while  Mr
    Jaisri was making his closing submissions.  Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that
    the appellant had demonstrated remittances of money since 2013  by  the
    currency bureau letters at pages 48-51.  He added that  the  Judge  had
    heard evidence today that the father had "also" remitted money directly
    to the appellant's bank account.  The Judge asked him to  clarify  that
    his case was that there were money transfers via  the  Bureau  and  (my
    emphasis) payments direct to a bank, "albeit undocumented."  Mr  Jaisri
    answered in the affirmative.

23. The Judge was not bound to accept that it was credible that the  father
    had been sending money directly to  the  appellant's  bank  account  in
    Nepal as well as making the money transfers detailed  in  the  currency
    bureau letters.  It was open to the Judge to treat the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence as undermining the probative  value  of  the  currency  bureau
    letters. More broadly, it was open to the Judge to  find  that  in  the
    absence of money transfer receipts or identifiable transfers  of  money
    direct into the appellant's bank account in Nepal,  the  appellant  had
    not demonstrated that the extent of the financial support  provided  by
    his father went beyond that which the Judge accepted at paragraph  [17]
    of his decision.

24. Ground 3 relates  to  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs [22]-[24] on the topic of emotional support and  dependence.
    At paragraph [22], the Judge observed that what took place during those
    visits was no before the Tribunal.  At paragraph [23], the  Judge  said
    that the sponsor could have used the voucher top-up  receipts  to  call
    anyone in Nepal.

25. Mr Jaisri submits that this was procedurally unfair, as the  respondent
    had not challenged the sponsor's evidence that  he  and  his  wife  had
    travelled to Nepal to spend time with the appellant;  and  it  was  not
    suggested by any party that the telephone calls were to  persons  other
    than the appellant.

26. However, it is apparent from the Judge's  typed  record  of  proceeding
    that in her closing submissions the Presenting Officer  submitted  that
    the sponsor could have going back to see his daughters  in  Nepal.   In
    addition, in Mr Jaisri's closing  submissions,  the  Judge  put  to  Mr
    Jaisri that it was putting it "too high" to say that  the  sponsor  was
    seeing his son "in isolation."  Mr Jaisri submitted that  only  one  of
    his daughters was near to his son,  and  that  the  sponsor's  "primary
    explanation" was that the purpose of the visit was to see his son.

27. The thrust of the submissions made by the Presenting Officer were  that
    the evidence given by the sponsor and the appellant on  the  topics  of
    financial and emotional dependency should not be taken  at  their  face
    value. Accordingly, Mr Jaisri embarked on his  closing  submissions  in
    the full knowledge that nothing had been  conceded.  Additionally,  the
    interventions of the Judge  detailed  above  highlighted  some  of  the
    Judge's concerns about aspects of the case that Mr Jaisri  was  putting
    forward, and Mr  Jaisri  thus  had  the  opportunity  to  address  such
    concerns as best he could.

28. The findings made in paragraphs [22]-[24] were  properly  open  to  the
    Judge, and they do not disclose an error of law either on  the  grounds
    of inadequate reasoning or on the grounds of procedural unfairness.

29. Grounds 2 and 4 relate to the Judge's finding that Article 8(1) was not
    engaged.  Mr Jaisri submits that the Judge erred in law in  failing  to
    apply the test articulated in Rai  -v-  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (New
    Delhi) [2017] EWCA Civ 320; and that he "unlawfully" found at paragraph
    [20] that the appellant's continued residence in the house belonging to
    his father and mother did not aid him to a significant in  establishing
    that family life between him and his parents subsisted.

30. The facts of Rai were that the appellant was born in Nepal on 1 January
    1986, and his father entered the UK with ILR  on  26  June  2010.   His
    mother followed his father to the UK with ILR on 17 February 2012.   On
    2 October 2012 the appellant, then 26  years  old,  applied  for  entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as his father's dependant.

31. Giving the leading judgment of the Court, Lindblom LJ held at [39] that
    the real issue under Article 8(1) was, "whether, as a matter  of  fact,
    the appellant had demonstrated that he  had  a  family  life  with  his
    parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle  in
    the UK and had endured beyond it,  notwithstanding  their  having  left
    Nepal when they did." At paragraph [42], Lindblom  LJ  reiterated  that
    the critical question was whether family life between the appellant and
    his parents had subsisted at the time when they left Nepal to settle in
    the UK, "and was still subsisting at the time of the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision."

32. The Judge did not in  terms  ask  himself  whether  the  appellant  had
    enjoyed family life with his parents before they left Nepal in 2012  to
    settle in the UK.  I accept that arguably they did enjoy  family  life,
    simply by virtue of the fact that they were all living under  the  same
    roof.  However, family life in a literal sense clearly ended  with  the
    parents' departure, and the evidence of the sponsor was that he and his
    wife had not gone back to Nepal until 3 February 2015.   The  visit  on
    that occasion had lasted until 1 May 2015.  There  was  then  a  second
    visit from 5 February 2016 to 25 April 2016, and a third visit from  25
    January 2018 until 20 February 2018.

33. It was open to the Judge not to  treat  these  short  visits  as  being
    indicative of a continuation of family life, for the reasons  which  he
    gave, and also in the light of the Kugathas line of jurisprudence.

34. Kugathas -v- SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and ECO (Sierra Leone)  -v-  Kopoi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 are particularly pertinent to this discussion.  In
    Kugathas at paragraph [20] Arden LJ said:

         "... Most of us have close relations of whom we are extremely  fond
         and whom we visit, or who visit us from time to time; but  none  of
         us would say on those grounds alone that we  share  a  family  life
         with them in any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning  and
         purpose of Article 8."


35. The duration of the  family  visit  is  a  relevant  consideration,  as
    adumbrated by Sales LJ in Kopoi at [30] in the passage cited below. The
    context was a proposed visit to the UK, but the underlying principle is
    equally applicable to a return visit  to  see  family  members  in  the
    country of origin:

         "A three week visit would not involve a significant contribution to
         family life in the sense in which that term is used in  Article  8.
         Of course, it would often be nice for family members to meet up and
         visit in this way.  But a  short  visit  of  this  kind  would  not
         establish a relationship between any of the  individuals  concerned
         of support going beyond normal emotional ties ..."


36. The key question was whether the appellant had discharged the burden of
    proving that family life in the Kugathas sense had  endured  from  2012
    until the date of the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Judge
    gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant   was   not
    emotionally dependent on his parents, and hence that  family  life  had
    not endured.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that such a direction is warranted for  these  proceedings  in  the
Upper Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
