

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/08474/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                     |
|On 1 October 2018                        |On 5 October 2018               |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 TANVEER [A]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Bantleman, of Counsel, instructed by St Law
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 1 January  1961.  He
          challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  M  K
          Lawrence, promulgated on 25  June,  dismissing  his  human  rights
          appeal. He relies on his family life with  his  British  wife  and
          three British children. the respondent was not satisfied that  the
          marriage was genuine and subsisting due to a previous separation.




       2. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Saffer on 25 July 2018 on the  basis
          that the judge had arguably erred in failing to make any  findings
          on the (oral  and  written)  evidence  of  the  appellant's  three
          children as to the issue of the genuineness  of  the  relationship
          between their parents. The matter then came before me on 1 October
          2018.


       3. The Hearing


       4. I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  A  full  note  of  the
          submissions is set out  in  my  Record  of  Proceedings.  For  the
          appellant, Ms Bantleman drew my attention to  a  great  number  of
          errors in the determination;  the  judge's  failure  to  have  any
          regard to the oral and written evidence of the  appellant's  three
          children as to the relationship between their parents, his failure
          to consider the  supporting  evidence  from  family  friends,  the
          perverse and conflicting  findings  with  regard  to  the  adverse
          credibility findings in relation to both  the  appellant  and  his
          wife and his flawed approach to article 8: the application of  the
          wrong test, the failure to consider documentary evidence as to the
          appellant's involvement in family life  and  the  absence  of  any
          consideration of whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  four
          British nationals to relocate with the appellant to Pakistan.


       5. In response, Ms Everett very fairly and properly conceded that she
          could not resist the challenge.


       6. At the conclusion of the hearing, I  indicated  that  I  would  be
          setting aside the judge's decision and I now give my  reasons  for
          doing so.


       7. Discussion and Conclusions


       8. I would state at the  outset  that  the  determination  is  wholly
          inadequate and littered with factual errors, grammatical  mistakes
          and an absence of analysis of the oral and documentary evidence.


       9. The most glaring error is the judge's failure to make any findings
          at all on the oral and documentary  evidence  of  the  appellant's
          three children as to the relationship between their parents.  They
          were called specifically for this reason and  although  the  judge
          notes that they gave evidence at length,  the  only  reference  to
          that evidence is in respect of the  issue  of  dependency  between
          them and  the  appellant  which  is  contained  in  the  following
          sentence at the conclusion of paragraph 19: "I find in the present
          case there is, or ever was any (sic),  no  such  dependency".  Not
          only does the sentence itself make no grammatical sense but it  is
          completely unreasoned and contains no analysis whatsoever  of  the
          relevance of the evidence to the main issue;  the  genuineness  of
          the relationship between the appellant and his wife. On that basis
          alone, the decision is unsustainable.


      10. There are, however, more errors. The findings of the judge  as  to
          credibility of the appellant and his wife  are  contradictory.  At
          paragraph 13 the judge accepts the evidence of the wife  as  to  a
          previous issue of domestic violence. At paragraph 17 he appears to
          rely on the decision of a previous  Tribunal  that  the  wife  had
          never experienced domestic violence and concludes that she is  not
          a witness of truth.  At paragraph 13  the  judge  finds  that  the
          appellant had lied about not having ill-treated his wife, but this
          is perverse if the  wife's  claim  to  have  been  ill-treated  is
          accepted. Further it cannot be that both witnesses were  found  to
          have lied because one said there had  been  violence  and  another
          said there had not clearly. Clearly it cannot then be  found  that
          neither has told the truth.


      11. The judge has also failed to assess the supporting letters  as  to
          the relationship contained in the bundle.


      12. Further, when assessing article 8 the judge has applied the  wrong
          test and failed to appreciate that the burden  shifts  on  to  the
          respondent when family/private life is  established  (at  18).  He
          appears further to apply the test relevant to  asylum  cases  when
          assessing article 8 (at 25) and  in  finding  that  there  was  no
          evidence  that  the  appellant   had   undertaken   any   parental
          responsibilities, he failed entirely to consider the evidence from
          the children and the appellant's daughter's school.


      13. Finally, the judge failed to assess whether it would be reasonable
          to expect the appellant's wife and their three children, all being
          British citizens, to leave the UK and relocate  to  Pakistan  with
          the appellant.


      14. The errors contained in this determination  are  so  many  and  so
          serious that the  only  possible  outcome  is  to  set  aside  the
          decision in its entirety. It is wholly unsustainable.


      15. Decision


      16. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The  decision  is  set
          aside. It shall be remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal at a date to be arranged.








      17. Anonymity


      18. I have not been asked to make an anonymity order and see no reason
          to do so.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 October 2018


