
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08207/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2017                           |On 8 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             raja muhammad salim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  5  October  1965.   He
    appeals the determination of a First-tier Judge following a hearing  on
    24 November 2016 in which the judge dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State on  7  October  2015  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK.  The  appellant's
    application had been made on 25 June 2015.  He had applied for leave to
    remain on the grounds of family life with his British partner  whom  he
    had  married  on  11  April  2011  in   an   Islamic   ceremony.    The
    representatives asked the Secretary of State to note that the appellant
    had two stepdaughters who  were  over  the  age  of  18  and  who  were
    currently living with him and his wife.  They considered the  appellant
    as their own father.

2.   The  Secretary  of  State  noted  the  appellant  had  entered  the  UK
    illegally and had never obtained valid leave to remain  and  failed  to
    meet the eligibility requirements of paragraph  R-LTP.1.1(d)(ii).   The
    First-tier Judge summarised the remainder of the respondent's  decision
    as follows:

         "10. Consideration had been given as to whether EX.1 of Appendix FM
             applied to his application, and therefore whether he  met  the
             requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(iii) of  Appendix  FM.
             He was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
             British national partner.  However, the Secretary of State had
             not seen any evidence that there were insurmountable obstacles
             in accordance with paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM  which  meant
             that there would be very significant difficulties which  would
             be faced by him or his partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK in Pakistan, and which  could  not  be
             overcome or would entail very serious hardship for him or  his
             partner.  So he failed to meet the requirements of EX.1(b)  of
             Appendix FM.


         11.  With regard to Rule 276ADE, he claimed to have lived in the UK
             for twenty years and six months (at the time of  application),
             but he failed to provide any evidence prior to the  year  2011
             to demonstrate his residence in the UK.  It was  not  accepted
             that he has lived continuously in the UK for at  least  twenty
             years.  So there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to
             his integration into the country to which he would have to  go
             if he was required to leave the UK.  He had spent the majority
             of his life in Pakistan, including his  formative  years.   He
             spoke Urdu, and Urdu was a recognised  language  of  Pakistan.
             His mother and three brothers continued to reside in Pakistan.
              Thus he had maintained close cultural,  social  and  familial
             ties to his home country.


         12.   A  decision  had  also  been  made  on  whether  there   were
             exceptional circumstances.  His relationship with his  partner
             did not warrant a grant of leave.  It was open to his  partner
             to travel to Pakistan with him to continue their  family  life
             in Pakistan.  The relationship he claimed  to  have  with  the
             children of his partner also did not warrant a grant of leave.
              They were over the age of 18,  and  were  thus  adults.   His
             partner claimed to be in employment in the UK, and it was open
             to her to seek employment in Pakistan.  It was  further  noted
             that his partner was a Pakistani  national  by  birth,  before
             becoming a British citizen.  So her experience in  her  native
             country would aid her reintegration into life in Pakistan."

3.   The appellant gave oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Judge.   He
    claimed to have arrived in the UK in January  1995  and  wished  to  be
    considered under the long residence provisions - he had been in the  UK
    for over twenty years - in addition to his  claim  that  he  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a British citizen.  While  his
    wife's daughters were her dependants they  were  now  adults  and  were
    still part of the family and it was not safe in Pakistan for  his  wife
    or her daughters.  The judge records that the appellant said  that  his
    passport had been issued in 2013 or 2014 and was his first passport and
    that he had falsely informed the Pakistani Embassy  that  he  had  been
    previously issued with a passport in order to get  this  passport.   He
    called two witnesses, Mr Pervaiz Khan and  Mr  Nasser  Faryadmarni,  to
    support his claim to long residence in the UK.   The  appellant's  wife
    was called as a witness as was her daughter, Ikra.   Her  sister  Masha
    was not able to come to court as she was working  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing.  She and her sister provided most of the income to pay for the
    rent and  utility  bills  for  the  house  which  they  occupied.   The
    appellant had given them great support and they were really attached to
    him.

4.   Much of the argument had the appeal hearing focused  on  the  issue  of
    the length of the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  and  the
    judge made his findings on this aspect in the  following  extract  from
    his decision:

         "31. In order to qualify for leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
             twenty years' continuous unlawful residence, the appellant has
             to show that he had accrued twenty years' continuous residence
             by the date of his application in  June  2015.   He  has  been
             consistent in his assertion that he entered the United Kingdom
             illegally with the assistance of an  agent  in  January  1995.
             However, his general credibility as  a  witness  of  truth  is
             undermined by the fact that, by his own admission, he did  not
             tell the truth when he applied for a Pakistani passport in the
             UK.  Although he claims he was  ordinarily  resident  in  East
             Ham, London E6, he gave as his residential address an  address
             an address in Birmingham.  It is not  a  credible  explanation
             that he happened to have gone to stay with a  friend  at  this
             address for a period of one  month.   As  he  well  knew,  the
             embassy officials would have understood him to be providing  a
             permanent residential address, not an address at which he  was
             a temporary visitor.

         32.  The passport that was issued to the  appellant  also  contains
             the information that he had  previously  been  issued  with  a
             Pakistani passport, which he had  lost.   The  appellant  says
             this is not true, and he just made it up in order to obtain  a
             new passport.  If so, this shows a willingness to lie and also
             that the appellant must have entered on a false passport.   It
             is also reasonable to question whether the  embassy  officials
             would have simply taken the appellant's word for  it  that  he
             had previously  been  issued  with  a  passport,  rather  than
             checking the information given and finding it to  be  correct.
             This in  turn  introduces  the  distinct  possibility  of  the
             appellant having been issued with a valid passport in Pakistan
             which he used to come and go from the United  Kingdom  in  the
             past.

         33.  It is significant in my judgment that the  two  witnesses  who
             have come forward to testify as to the  appellant's  long  and
             continuous residence are not  people  who  have  provided  the
             appellant with either accommodation or  employment.   Both  of
             them have been relatively peripheral in the appellant's  life,
             seeing him from time to time.  Mr Faryadmarni  said  that  the
             appellant has never been a guest at his house.

         34.  I am prepared to accept that the appellant met Mr Khan in East
             Ham in the year 2000, but this does not avail the appellant in
             establishing a right of residence under  Rule  276ADE,  as  Mr
             Khan has not known him for twenty years.  Mr  Faryadmarni  did
             not present as a dishonest witness, but he was  understandably
             vague as to when he first met the  appellant,  mentioning  the
             dates of either late 1995 or late 1996.  It is  reasonable  to
             question whether he met him as far back as either of these two
             dates,  given  that  the  appellant  instructed  his  previous
             solicitors that he had made an asylum application in 1999.  If
             it is  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  made  his  asylum
             application soon after his arrival in the UK, and  this  would
             indicate that he did not arrive in  the  UK  until  1999.   Mr
             Khan's evidence was that he had  lived  in  East  Ham  for  40
             years, so Mr Khan first encountering the appellant in the year
             2000 would be  consistent  with  the  appellant  being  a  new
             arrival in East Ham in  the  year  2000.   But  even  if  some
             credence is given to the alternative  dates  proffered  by  Mr
             Faryadmarni,  they  do  not  establish  on  the   balance   of
             probabilities that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom
             before the end of June 1995, so as to mean that the  appellant
             had  accrued  twenty  years'  residence   by   the   date   of
             application.

         35.  Accordingly, I find  the  appellant  has  not  discharged  the
             burden of proving on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  he
             entered the United Kingdom as far back as the  first  part  of
             1995 so as to have accrued twenty years'  continuous  unlawful
             residence in the United Kingdom at the date of his application
             in June 2015."

5.   It was not argued that he qualified for  leave  to  remain  on  private
    life grounds on account of there being  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Pakistan.  The judge then turned to  consider  whether
    it was shown that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    between the appellant and his wife being carried on in  Pakistan.   The
    judge noted that although she had claimed asylum in or  about  2006  on
    the basis that she was fleeing domestic violence her appeal against the
    decision had ultimately been unsuccessful and while she had  sought  to
    resurrect this claim, as the judge puts it, "her general credibility is
    undermined by discrepancies in the evidence".  The judge found that her
    account of what had happened was not consistent and  not  supported  by
    her  daughters  whose  evidence  completely  undermined  the  case  she
    advanced.  The judge rejected the claim that there was any real risk to
    the appellant's wife and stepdaughters  suffering  harm  on  return  to
    Pakistan at the hands of his wife's ex-husband.  The judge  found  that
    the family would be left alone  and  be  able  to  live  peacefully  in
    Karachi "which for all of them is the home area in Pakistan from  which
    they originate, and with which the appellant and his wife have  a  high
    degree of  familiarity".   Accordingly  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and his wife  carrying  on  family  life  in
    Pakistan.  The potential  impact  on  other  family  members  of  their
    relocation to Pakistan was a matter that had  to  be  addressed  in  an
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules as was acknowledged by  Counsel  (see
    paragraph 43 of the determination).

6.   The determination concludes as follows:

         "44. Turning to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules, I accept that
             questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test must be answered  in  the
             appellant's favour with regard to establishment of family  and
             private life in the United Kingdom.  Questions 3 and 4 of  the
             Razgar test must be answered in favour of the respondent.   On
             the issue of proportionality, I must  take  into  account  the
             relevant public interest considerations arising under  Section
             117B of the 2002 Act.  Although the appellant probably  speaks
             and understands  some  English,  he  does  not  demonstrate  a
             fluency in English commensurate with a significant  degree  of
             integration into UK  society.   He  is  also  not  financially
             independent.  Although  his  wife  is  a  qualifying  partner,
             little weight can be attached to family life built up  with  a
             qualifying partner by a person whose status here is  unlawful.
             Mrs Abdullah embarked on a relationship with the appellant  in
             the knowledge that his status was  at  least  precarious,  and
             that there was no guarantee that she would be able to carry on
             family life with the appellant on a  permanent  basis  in  the
             United Kingdom, as opposed to having to carry on  family  life
             with him in Pakistan.

         45.  Mr Karim submits that the  appellant  has  established  family
             life with his stepdaughters, citing  Ghising  (family  life  -
             adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  This case is
             not the paradigm case envisaged in  Ghising  where  the  adult
             children have lived all their lives in the same  household  as
             their parents.  The appellant  only  joined  the  family  unit
             following his marriage to Mrs Abdullah in 2011.  By that  time
             Mashal Abdullah was over the age of 20, and Iqra Abdullah  ...
             was  15.   The  appellant  is  financially  dependent  on  his
             stepdaughters, and to a lesser extent on his wife, rather than
             the other way round.  Although I accept that his stepdaughters
             are devoted to him, I question whether  in  reality  the  ties
             between the grown up children and their parents go beyond  the
             normal emotional ties to be expected  between  adult  children
             and parents who live under the same roof.  But even if  it  is
             right to characterise  the  appellant  as  having  established
             family life with his stepdaughters as well as with  his  wife,
             this does not give rise to a right to remain under the  Rules,
             and there are not sufficiently  compelling  and  compassionate
             circumstances to justify the appellant being granted Article 8
             relief outside the Rules.  The members of the  family  face  a
             reasonable choice.  If preservation of the  integrity  of  the
             family unit is the priority, it is open to  Mrs  Abdullah  and
             her daughters to relocate  with  the  appellant  to  Pakistan.
             Another option is  for  Mrs  Abdullah  to  relocate  with  her
             husband to Pakistan, while her daughters remain here to pursue
             their own lives.  They  are  living  in  a  multicultural  and
             tolerant society where it is not essential  that  they  should
             conform to a cultural norm of their  home  country  of  living
             with their parents until they are married.

         46.  Another option is for the appellant to go back to Pakistan  on
             his own, with a view to regularising his status by  making  an
             application for entry clearance  from  abroad.   Applying  the
             Chikwamba jurisprudence, there is good reason to  require  the
             appellant to go back to Pakistan for this purpose, as  he  has
             an adverse immigration history and he  does  not  qualify  for
             leave to remain under Appendix FM.  By returning  to  Pakistan
             voluntarily, he would  become  eligible  to  apply  for  entry
             clearance as a spouse.

         47.  Accordingly, I find the decision appealed  against  strikes  a
             fair  balance  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  rights  and
             interests of the appellant, his wife  and  his  stepdaughters,
             and, on the other hand, the wider interests of society.  It is
             proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
             achieved,  namely  the  maintenance  of  firm  and   effective
             immigration controls."


7.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.  There was  an  application
    for permission to appeal.  This application was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The application was renewed and  it  was  found  to  be
    arguable that the judge had not made an adequately-reasoned finding  on
    the issue that by the date of hearing the appellant had resided in  the
    UK for twenty years which was a relevant matter to  take  into  account
    when considering Article 8.

8.   A response was filed on 27 September 2017.  It  was  pointed  out  that
    the appellant could not satisfy  the  Rules  as  at  the  date  of  the
    application as the Rules required.  The  Rules  could  not  be  applied
    selectively.

9.   Counsel relied on the issue  of  the  appellant's  long  residence  and
    referred to the evidence given by the witnesses at  the  hearing.   The
    appellant had intervened in  a  fight  between  an  Asian  man  and  Mr
    Faryadmarni "in late 1995 or late 1996".  The judge had made a positive
    credibility finding in respect to the witness.  It  was  relevant  that
    the appellant satisfied the requirements of the Rules as at the date of
    the hearing, even if not at the  date  of  application.   At  best  the
    findings were unclear.  The judge's findings in  paragraph  45  of  the
    decision that the ties between the adult children and their parents did
    not go beyond the normal emotional ties was irrational.   The  youngest
    child had been living with the appellant since the age of  15  and  the
    judge had recorded the evidence of her sister who paid  the  bills  and
    the rent.  Counsel referred to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising.
     The judge had not properly engaged with the written and oral evidence.
     This was not a near miss case - it was not argued on that basis.

10.  Ms Ahmad noted  that  the  witness  had  been  vague  and  the  judge's
    findings had been on an "even  if"  basis.   The  judge  had  correctly
    concluded in paragraph 35 that the appellant did not meet the  relevant
    requirements of the Rules.  She referred to Chau Le (Immigration  Rules
    - de minimis principle) [2016] UKUT 186 (IAC) which made it clear  that
    the "near miss" principle had no application  in  the  construction  or
    application of the Immigration Rules.

11.  In relation to the point  based  on  Kugathas  she  referred  to  Entry
    Clearance Officer, Sierra  Leone  v  Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1511  at
    paragraphs 19 to 22.  She highlighted the last sentence of paragraph 20
    in which it was said:

         "No doubt in the present case there are emotional ties felt on both
         sides, but there is nothing to indicate that these  go  beyond  the
         normal emotional ties experienced between family  members  in  very
         many families."


    It was open to the First-tier Judge to find as  he  had  done  on  this
    issue.  Ms Ahmad also referred  to  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    referring to paragraphs 54 to 58 dealing with the issue of "near  miss"
    cases.


12.  In reply  Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  clearly  found  in
    paragraph  34  that  the  witness  was  not  dishonest  and   did   not
    wholeheartedly reject the evidence.  What was said in the case of Kopoi
    should be seen in the context of that case - it was an entry  clearance
    case where an entry clearance had been refused in a visit  application.
    The circumstances in the instant appeal were different.  The  appellant
    was the stepfather of the children.  The  Court  of  Appeal  had  noted
    there was no relationship of dependency of any kind at all and only the
    older child had actually met the respondent -  on  a  visit  to  Sierra
    Leone aged about 2.  The appellant on the other hand had  resided  with
    the family since 2011.  The  judge  had  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    evidence and the appeal should be allowed.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the determination of  the  First-
    tier Judge if it was flawed in law.

14.  As I have observed the judge heard oral evidence and  he  records  that
    the appellant was extensively cross-examined in  paragraph  16  of  his
    determination.  The judge's findings about the credibility of both  the
    appellant and his wife are set out in  the  determination.   The  judge
    considered the serious issue of the appellant  not  telling  the  truth
    when he applied for a Pakistani passport in the UK  -  he  had  claimed
    that his old passport had been lost which was not true and he had  just
    made the story up.  The judge was fully  entitled  to  show  that  this
    demonstrated a willingness to lie and the appellant must  have  entered
    on a false passport.  The  judge  comments  that  this  introduced  the
    distinct possibility "of the appellant having been issued with a  valid
    passport in Pakistan which he used to  come  and  go  from  the  United
    Kingdom in the past".  In paragraph 33 of  the  determination  which  I
    have set out above the judge underlined  the  word  'continuous'.   The
    judge makes an unqualified finding that the appellant met  one  of  the
    witnesses in 2000  and  found  this  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    evidence.

15.  The judge found that the evidence of Mr Faryadmarni was  vague  and  in
    my view far too much is read into what the judge said in  paragraph  34
    about the witness not presenting as "dishonest".  The  judge's  comment
    that "even if" some credence was given to  the  alternative  dates  put
    forward by this witness cannot be read as meaning that he was satisfied
    that the appellant had come to the UK before  the  end  of  June  1995.
    What the judge found in paragraph 35 of his determination was that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proof "that he  entered  the
    United Kingdom as far back as the first part of  1995  so  as  to  have
    accrued twenty years'  continuous  unlawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the date of  his  application  in  June  2015."   I  am  not
    satisfied that the determination can be read in the  way  that  Counsel
    argued or that the determination lacks clarity.  There was no need  for
    the First-tier Judge to say anything more about the witness's evidence.

16.  In determining the appellant's human  rights  appeal  again  the  judge
    properly directed himself.  The determination cannot  be  read  on  the
    footing that the judge made a finding that  the  appellant  would  have
    satisfied the twenty year Rule at the date of the hearing.   The  judge
    accepts a meeting between Mr Khan and the appellant in the  year  2000.
    He notes this evidence was consistent with  the  appellant's  evidence.
    On top of that there is a problem of establishing continuous residence.



17.  Both husband and wife  gave  evidence  which  the  judge  found  to  be
    discredited.   The  behaviour  of  the  appellant  when  obtaining  his
    passport raised serious issues.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in his findings  or  in  not  making  express  reference  to  the
    appellant's residence in the United Kingdom when considering Article 8.
     However, in paragraph 44 of his determination it is implicit  that  he
    had regard to the appellant's residence when commenting  that  "he  did
    not demonstrate a fluency in English commensurate  with  a  significant
    degree of integration into UK society".  The relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife was embarked upon at a time when the appellant's
    status "was at least precarious".  I do not find that  the  judge  left
    out  of  account  any  relevant  or  material  matter  concerning   the
    appellant's residence when  considering  the  appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  It is argued that the judge's  assessment
    of family life between the appellant and his stepdaughters was arguably
    irrational as there was both emotional and financial  dependency.   The
    judge  expressly  refers  to  the  issue  of  financial  dependence  in
    paragraph 45.  While he accepted  that  the  appellant's  stepdaughters
    were devoted to him and while he questioned whether in reality the ties
    went beyond normal emotional ties he found that even if family life had
    been  established  there  were   not   "sufficiently   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances to  justify  the  appellant  being  granted
    Article 8 relief outside the Rules".

18.  The judge outlines the various possibilities in  paragraph  45  of  his
    decision and refers to the further alternative that the appellant could
    return to Pakistan and apply for an entry clearance  from  overseas  in
    paragraph 46.  I am not satisfied that it was incumbent on the judge to
    make any additional findings in respect of the stepdaughters.   In  the
    grounds it was  argued  that  the  judge  had  misdirected  himself  in
    referring  to  compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  in   this
    context.  In the  grounds  reference  was  made  to  SS  (Congo).   The
    argument was not developed at the hearing.  Ms Ahmad did refer  to  the
    case of SS (Congo).  In the context of near miss cases it is said  that
    the fact that "an applicant may be able to say that  their  case  is  a
    'near miss' in relation to satisfying the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    will by no means show that compelling circumstances exist requiring the
    grant of LTE outside the Rules...".  In  paragraph  56  it  is  stated,
    however, that the "near miss" argument is not wholly irrelevant to  the
    balancing exercise required under Article 8:

         "If an applicant can show that there are  individual  interests  at
         stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exist to  justify  the  grant  of  LTE
         outside the Rules, the fact that their case is also a  'near  miss'
         case may be a relevant consideration which tips the  balance  under
         Article 8 in their favour...".

19.  There is also a reference to "compelling  circumstances"  in  paragraph
    51 of the judgment.  As I have said, the point was not developed at the
    hearing and I detect no material error in the judge's assessment.

20.  In conclusion, in my  view  the  judge's  determination  was  full  and
    satisfactorily reasoned.  He made a careful factual  assessment  and  a
    proper and thorough analysis of the evidence before him.  I  detect  no
    material error of law in his approach to the case under and outside the
    Rules.  He made the necessary findings in respect of the  stepdaughters
    and directed himself appropriately when considering their position.  He
    was entitled to conclude that the decision was proportionate  and  fair
    as he did in paragraph 47.

21.  I am not satisfied that there was any material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Judge  and  accordingly  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

22.  The judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

Fee Award

23.  The judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 7 December 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
