
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08267/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th August 2017                        |On 5th September 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               mr nasar mirza
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  and  he  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 21st March 2016 to refuse his human  rights
    claim.  The appellant is subject to deportation because  of  persistent
    criminal behaviour.  The copy of his police national computer  printout
    reveals convictions on twelve occasions  for  25  offences,  the  first
    being on 24th February 1998 and the most recent being on 26th  November
    2015.  On 12th December 2008 the appellant pleaded  guilty  to  assault
    occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  was  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment  where  it  appears  he  attacked  a  neighbour   with   a
    screwdriver.

 2. The appellant was liable to automatic deportation and on 13th July 2010
    the respondent decided to revoke the appellant's  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, however his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  successful.
    The findings from the First-tier Tribunal decision in 2010 are set  out
    extensively at [13] and [14] in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler currently under challenge.

 3. The decision recorded that the appellant was released  on  licence  but
    was recalled to  prison  after  breaching  the  licence  terms.   There
    followed further offending and on 29th August 2012  the  appellant  was
    sentenced for offences of battery in  which  the  victim  had  on  both
    occasions been his wife and he  received  concurrent  terms  of  twelve
    weeks and eighteen weeks' imprisonment with a restraining  order  [16].
    A deportation order was signed on 21st  June  2013  and  the  appellant
    lodged an appeal and this appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds in  a
    determination promulgated on 22nd October 2013 [17].

 4. The determination of 2013, as recorded,  made  clear  that  deportation
    decisions had been made in respect of the appellant, his wife and their
    son, N, and the findings in that determination were set out  by  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  in  the  decision  under  challenge   at
    paragraphs 18 and 19, 20 and 21.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 6.  An application for permission to appeal was initially refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The grounds set out as follows:-

      i) The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  at  paragraph  56  that  the
         Tribunal who heard the appellant's appeal in 2013 made no  specific
         finding as to whether the appellant had any ties  to  Pakistan  and
         thereby dismissed that aspect of the submissions.  The argument was
         made that if a previous Tribunal had found the  appellant  had  "no
         ties" to Pakistan in 2013, which was part of the test at that time,
         it would be irrational to conclude four years later that there were
         "very significant obstacles to  integration"  which  would  include
         having ties to Pakistan.  The Tribunal in the determination of 2013
         made a specific finding at paragraph 37  (respondent's  bundle  H8)
         that:-

             "On a further and alternative basis where we have not referred
             to elements set forward in Mr Ansari's comprehensive  skeleton
             argument we allow the appeal of each Appellant  on  the  bases
             set forward by Mr Ansari in respect of each  element  advanced
             by him in his skeleton argument."

         In that skeleton argument it was clearly set out at  paragraphs  50
         and 51 why the appellant had no  ties  to  Pakistan.   By  ignoring
         this, First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler erred in law.  This  finding
         by the judge further infected his findings at paragraph 57 that the
         appellant would be able to access accommodation in Pakistan.   This
         matter was mentioned in the 2013 skeleton argument at paragraph  51
         where it stated:-

             "The First Appellant has not visited Pakistan since he married
             his wife and has no contact with  his  extended  family.   The
             First Appellant's in-laws live in very cramped and overcrowded
             conditions already ...  and  have  two  more  adults  and  two
             children move in would be oppressive  on  all  concerned,  not
             least all of the children."

         The judge also failed to give sufficient weight to the evidence  of
         the appellant's wife about the lack of accommodation which was  set
         out in her witness statement.

         Applying Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702  this should have  been  the
         starting point for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  consideration.
         It was not open for the judge to make a finding that the  appellant
         would be able to access accommodation in Pakistan.

     ii) The judge also erred in placing too much weight on the report of Dr
         Willemsen.  Earlier in the determination the judge  placed  limited
         weight on Dr Cohen's report and yet placed considerable  weight  on
         Dr  Willemsen's  report,  particularly  that  the  wife  had   been
         pressurised by the appellant's family.  Dr Willemsen had no contact
         with  the  appellant's  wife  or  his  other  family  members,  and
         similarly had no access to the documents that were available to the
         judge in the appeal.  Dr Willemsen states in his  report  the  only
         documents he had access to were  the  letter  of  instruction  from
         Social Services, Practice Directions, the Child  Protection  Review
         Conference Workers' Report and the Child and Family Assessment.  It
         was irrational for the judge to place limited weight on one  expert
         report for the same reasons  which  undermine  the  credibility  of
         another.

    iii) The judge had erred as he should have placed weight on the fact the
         appellant did not have a family solicitor that could  have  advised
         on the contents of the report and provided the appellant's  written
         feedback before it was finalised.

     iv) The judge finding at paragraph  40  that  the  appellant  would  be
         unwilling to co-operate with Social Services or attend  courses  in
         relation to anger management was irrational in these circumstances.
          The appellant was engaging with Dr Willemsen, a voluntary  action,
         and the attempts to engage with Social Services  were  hampered  by
         his lengthy detention under immigration powers.

         This error infected the judge's finding at  paragraph  53  that  it
         would not be unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant on the basis that potential  for  development
         of a relationship be one of  occasional  contact  appeared  remote.
         Deporting the appellant would destroy family life, whereas allowing
         him to remain and have contact with his  children  subject  to  the
         provisos he  engaged  with  Social  Services  would  enable  it  to
         recommence.

    (v)    The judge also erred in his finding at 64 that  the  appellant's
         wife was granted leave as  a  victim  of  domestic  violence.   The
         appellant's wife enjoyed discretionary leave to remain at the  time
         the application was made on her  behalf  by  Social  Services.   No
         evidence was provided  that  leave  was  granted,  and  indeed  the
         evidence showed that the wife was granted leave for  an  additional
         three year period on 17th March 2015 which was  suggested  she  was
         never granted another form of leave.

Grant of Permission

 7. In granting permission Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  noted  that  the
    grounds recognised that the Tribunal in 2017 had to consider  if  there
    were "very  significant  obstacles"  in  the  way  of  the  appellant's
    integration into society in Pakistan.  The tests were  not  so  similar
    that it was irrational to find that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles where there are 'no ties' but it was not clear  to  him  that
    the findings in 2017  about  the  appellant's  prospects  of  obtaining
    accommodation were based on new evidence, rather they  appeared  to  be
    based on fresh findings  on  old  evidence  without  acknowledging  the
    previous findings.  Further it was not clear if the  "very  significant
    obstacles" test  should  have  regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of
    offending.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins noted that the Tribunal in  2013  somewhat
    enigmatically allowed the appeal saying at paragraph 37:-

             "On a further and alternative basis where we have not referred
             to elements set forward in Mr Ansari's comprehensive  skeleton
             argument we allow the appeal of each appellant  on  the  bases
             set forward by Mr Ansari in respect of each  element  advanced
             by him in his skeleton argument".

 9. All grounds were considered arguable.

10. At the hearing before me Mr Bandegani  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had misdirected himself by concluding that there were no
    previous findings by a Tribunal that  the  appellant  had  no  ties  to
    Pakistan.  The tests  were  expressed  differently  but  they  required
    essentially the same or very similar factual  enquiries.   Those  tests
    demanded an assessment of all  relevant  facts  that  went  beyond  the
    simple question of whether there were ties.  There needed to be a broad
    evaluative finding which meant that it  could  not  be  said  that  the
    judge's failure to refer to previous fact-finding was not relevant.  Mr
    Bandegani referred me to paragraphs 123 to 125 of Ogundimu (Article 8 -
    new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC):-

         "123.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
                imports, we think, a concept involving something  more  than
                merely remote and abstract links to the country of  proposed
                deportation or removal. It involves there being a  continued
                connection to life in that country; something  that  ties  a
                claimant to his or her country of origin. If this  were  not
                the case then it would appear that a person's nationality of
                the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead  to
                a failure to meet the requirements of the rule.  This  would
                render the application of the rule, given the context within
                which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         124.     We recognise that the text under the rules is an  exacting
                one. Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to such
                country  must  involve  a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the
                relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to  'social,
                cultural and family'  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  we  are
                satisfied that the appellant has no ties with Nigeria. He is
                a stranger to the country, the people, and the way of  life.
                His father may have ties  but  they  are  not  ties  of  the
                appellant or any ties that could result in  support  to  the
                appellant in the event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly,
                given the length of the appellant's residence here,  all  of
                his ties are  with  the  United  Kingdom.  Consequently  the
                appellant has so little connection with  Nigeria  so  as  to
                mean that the consequences for him in  establishing  private
                life there at the age of 28, after 22 years residence in the
                United Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.

         125.     Whilst each case turns on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
                relevant to the assessment of whether a person has  ties  to
                the country to which they would have  to  go  if  they  were
                required to leave the United Kingdom must include,  but  are
                not limited to: the length of time a person has spent in the
                country to which he would have to go if he were required  to
                leave the United Kingdom, the age that the person left  that
                country, the exposure that person has had  to  the  cultural
                norms of  that  country,  whether  that  person  speaks  the
                language of the country,  the  extent  of  the   family  and
                friends that person has in the country to which he is  being
                deported or removed and the  quality  of  the  relationships
                that person has with those friends and family members."

11. It was argued that paragraph 37 of Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002
    Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT  00013  (IAC)  was
    relevant.  Mr Bandegani submitted that  the  tests  were  the  same  or
    demanded a similar approach.  Even  if  they  were  not  the  same  any
    previous finding in relation  to  the  appellant  having  no  ties  was
    capable of being influential in the assessment and this  was  therefore
    material.

12. I was referred to  paragraphs  50  and  51  of  the  skeleton  argument
    submitted before the First-tier Tribunal in 2013 and which should  have
    been factored into the account and were not.   Mr  Bandegani  submitted
    that the judge had simply said that there was no such finding.  It  was
    not sufficient to adopt the insensitive approach of  the  Secretary  of
    State by simply  assessing  nationality  and  in  2013  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had accepted the case advanced by the appellant in  preference
    to that of the Secretary of State.  The submission  accepted  that  the
    appellant was all but British save for his nationality should have been
    addressed.  The point of his nationality sat uneasily with the findings
    of fact made by the previous Tribunal in 2013 and the judge should have
    explained why it was not relevant.  The whole of her  analysis  was  at
    paragraphs 56 and 57.  The only finding  which  remained  relevant  was
    that the appellant was familiar with Urdu.

13. Mr Tufan stated that the judge had considered whether there  were  very
    significant obstacles noting  that  Ogundimu  was  out  of  date.   The
    current test was that set out in  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship
    with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC).

14. Essentially the appellant could not satisfy paragraph 399A(c)  and  the
    test was not the same.  There were flimsy findings of fact incorporated
    into the decision of 2013 and that  appeal  was  allowed  on  different
    grounds.  Treebhawon was not a deportation case,  rather  dealing  with
    Section 117, and Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 was a case which turned  on
    its own facts.  The appellant in this case had been to  Pakistan  on  a
    number of occasions and that is where  he  had  found  his  wife.   The
    appellant was familiar with Urdu.  There were no errors of law  in  the
    decision and it should stand.

15. Mr Bandegani submitted that Kamara was the leading authority.   It  was
    incorrect to  characterise  the  findings  of  the  judge  in  2013  as
    speculative.   The  previous  findings  of  the  Tribunal  included  an
    acceptance that the appellant had no  ties  and  were  relevant.   This
    appellant was essentially undistinguishable from a  person  of  British
    nationality and that was what was represented in the skeleton  argument
    of Mr Ansari.

Conclusions

16. It appeared to be accepted that the appellant had  lived  most  of  his
    life in the UK and the previous decision of 18th November 2010 relating
    to this appellant at paragraph 91 established:-

         "We deduce that there  may  well  be  a  wide  cultural  difference
         between the appellant who is indistinguishable from a  man  of  his
         age born and brought up here but of British origins from  his  wife
         who has not had that life-long experience".

17. This finding appeared to acknowledge  that  although  not  British  the
    appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for an extensive  period  and
    was indistinguishable from someone who was British.  In this  case  the
    respondent had accepted that the appellant was socially and  culturally
    integrated into  the  United  Kingdom.   He  still  however  remains  a
    Pakistan national and was classified  as  a  foreign  criminal  through
    being a persistent  offender.   The  Immigration  Rules,  as  presently
    drafted, however, set out a cumulative set of conditions

           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -


           (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
           his
           life; and
           (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
           into the country to which it is proposed he is deported

18. It was the issue in relation to  the  last  criterion,  that  'of  very
    significant obstacles' which  was  the  crux  of  the  challenge.   The
    Tribunal decision of 2013, most unfortunately, in its findings for  the
    appellant made reference to a document which was not  attached  to  the
    decision stating at paragraph 37:-

         "On a further and alternative basis where we have not  referred  to
         elements set forward in Mr Ansari's comprehensive skeleton argument
         we allow the appeal of each Appellant on the bases set  forward  by
         Mr Ansari in respect  of  each  element  advanced  by  him  in  his
         skeleton argument."

19. The skeleton argument of Mr Ansari which was produced to the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, set out at paragraphs 49 to 51, as follows:-

         "49.      The  first  appellant  falls  within  the  private   life
             exception contained in paragraph 399A of the Rules.

         50.      The  respondent  disputes  this  on  the  basis  that  she
             believes the first appellant has ties to Pakistan based on his
             having grown up in a Pakistani household and  therefore  being
             familiar with Pakistani culture, customs  and  lifestyle,  his
             having spent a few months there with his wife on less  than  a
             handful of occasions before she came to the UK, on  assumption
             that he speaks Urdu, and the presence of extended  family  and
             his wife in Pakistan.

         51.      The first appellant had grown up in  the  UK  and  despite
             living in a Pakistani household, 'for all  practical  purposes
             he is indistinguishable from a person of  British  nationality
             born and brought up here' as was determined by an  Immigration
             Judge in his original appeal in 2010 (respondent's bundle K2).
              The first appellant has not visited Pakistan since he married
             his wife and has no contact with  his  extended  family.   The
             first appellant's in-laws live in very cramped and overcrowded
             conditions already (appellant's bundle 23)  and  to  have  two
             more adults and two children move in would  be  oppressive  on
             all concerned, not least of all the children."

20. The test at the time and set out in the skeleton argument in  2013  was
    whether the appellant had 'any ties' to Pakistan.

21. Previously with respect to Paragraph 399A the Rules made reference to

           'has no ties (including social  cultural  or  family)  with  the
           country to which he would have to go'.

    Ogundimu  nonetheless found the test imported:-

           "a concept  involving  something  more  than  merely  remote  or
           abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed  deportation  or
           removal.  It involves there being a connection to life  in  that
           country.  Consideration of whether a person  has  'no  ties'  to
           such a country must involve a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the
           relevant circumstances and is not  to  be  limited  to  'social,
           cultural and family circumstances".

    However, the test has altered since the case  of  Ogundimu.   The  test
    with reference to  Paragraph  399A  (c),  and  which  corresponds  with
    Section 117C, now refers to an entirely different test from 'any  ties'
    as before and refers to

           'very significant obstacles to his integration into the  country
           which it is proposed he is deported'

22. It is now incumbent on an appellant to show that there would  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration into Pakistan.  As set out in
    Bossade the test has indeed changed and paragraph 399A no longer  looks
    at 'ties' per se but at the even more inclusive notion  of  integration
    and obstacles thereto specifically those in the UK in addition to those
    abroad.  Paragraph 5 of the head note of Bossade sheds light on the new
    test confirming that:

           "New paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules remains similar  to
           the old in considering the foreign criminal deportee's situation
           both in the UK and in the country of return. However, so far  as
           concerns focus on a person's situation in the UK, time in the UK
           is no longer relevant as such except in the  context  of  lawful
           residence  (399A(a))  and  paragraph  399A(b)   introduces   new
           criteria that relate to social and cultural integration  in  the
           UK.  So far as concerns focus on the situation in the country of
           return, paragraph 399A no longer  looks at 'ties' per se but  at
           the more inclusive notion of integration and obstacles  thereto.
           By requiring focus on integration both in relation to a person's
           circumstances in the UK as well as in the country of return, the
           new  Rules  achieve  a  much  more  holistic  assessment  of  an
           appellant's circumstances. Thereby they bring themselves  closer
           to Strasbourg jurisprudence on  Article  8  in  expulsion  cases
           which has  always  seen  consideration  of  both  dimensions  as
           requiring  a  wide-ranging  assessment:  see  e.g.  Jeunesse   v
           Netherlands (GC) App.No. 12738/10, 31 October  2014,  paragraphs
           106-109."

23. The court in Kamara confirmed  that  the  concept  of  integration  was
    considered 'a broad one' and not confined to the mere ability to find a
    job or to sustain life while living in the other country.  At paragraph
    14 the court found

          'The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative  judgment
          to be made as to whether the individual  will  be  enough  of  an
          insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in that
          other country is carried on and a capacity to participate in  it,
          so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted  there,  to
          be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society  and  to
          build  up  within  a  reasonable  time   a   variety   of   human
          relationships to give substance to the  individual's  private  or
          family life.

24. The assessment is fact specific and on the facts of  that  case,  which
    can be distinguished from the facts here, the court found it  was  open
    to the Upper Tribunal to find the appellant  could  not  be  integrated
    into the country to which he was to be deported.  The court  in  Kamara
    at paragraph 12, noting  the  burden  was  on  the  appellant  and  the
    threshold was high, considered that the important question was  whether
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles,   to  the   appellant's
    integration into a country which he had left at  the  age  of  4  years
    where he had no contact with his natural mother:-

         "For the purposes of this appeal, therefore, the important question
         was whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  Mr
         Kamara's integration into Sierra  Leone,  if  deported  there.  The
         Upper Tribunal found that there would be. It reasoned as follows:

         i) the burden was on Mr Kamara to demonstrate that there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to his integration there,  and  the
             use of the word 'very' showed that the threshold  was  a  high
             one ([66]);

         ii)      it had found that Mr Kamara had no family, familial  links
             or friends in Sierra Leone and Mr Kandola, who represented the
             Secretary  of  State  at  the  hearing,  accepted  that  these
             findings would be  evidence  to  show  that  there  were  very
             significant obstacles to his  integration,  and  'he  did  not
             advance any further submissions as  to  the  evidence  or  any
             other factors relevant to this requirement' ([67]: that is  to
             say, the entirety of the Secretary of  State's  case  on  this
             requirement turned on her submissions on the  factual  dispute
             which the Tribunal had to resolve as to whether Mr Kamara  did
             or did not have family ties in Sierra Leone);

         iii)     nonetheless, the Tribunal considered at  paras.  [68]-[70]
             whether, notwithstanding  the  lack  of  relatives  in  Sierra
             Leone, there might be other relevant factors such as social or
             cultural ties of a nature which would  provide  him  with  the
             basis for establishing a private life and thus integration  in
             that country; it reminded itself 'that there are many migrants
             who seek a new life in countries other than  their  own'.  The
             Tribunal found that  there  were  no  such  factors.  Although
             English is an officially recognised language in Sierra  Leone,
             it is primarily used only for business, government  and  media
             purposes, rather than normal day-to-day life.  Mr  Kamara  did
             not speak any of the local languages, of which there were  23,
             being languages of the many tribes who live  there.  Moreover,
             the  Tribunal  found  that   'Sierra   Leone   is   a   highly
             contextualised society, many things in the  language  are  not
             expressed, instead  interpreted  through  non-verbal  cues  or
             cultural  norms',  with  which  Mr  Kamara   would   have   no
             familiarity. The Tribunal found that  there  was  no  evidence
             that he would be able to integrate in Sierra Leone within that
             kind of cultural context.

         iv)      in addition, the Tribunal attached some weight to the fact
             that the evidence showed that there were continuing  hardships
             experienced by the population in Sierra Leone in  relation  to
             the country's fight against Ebola, which would make  it  still
             more difficult for  an  outsider  like  Mr  Kamara,  'with  no
             social, cultural or  familial  links  with  the  country',  to
             integrate there."

25. The approach to deportations is clearly set out in Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60:-

           "A proper understanding of the role of the appellate immigration
           authority, on an appeal from a decision to refuse leave  is,  as
           Lord Reed  has  pointed  out  (in  paras  42-43),  vital  to  an
           appreciation of how it is to perform its function. It is  not  a
           reviewing body. It is not inhibited by findings previously made.
           On the contrary, it is its duty to find  facts  for  itself  and
           these must include, where  relevant,  circumstances  which  have
           arisen since the original findings were made. For  this  reason,
           although the Upper Tribunal in the present  case  was  bound  to
           take account of the Secretary of State's reasons  for  making  a
           deportation order, that was only  because  these  were  relevant
           considerations to which appropriate weight should be given.  The
           fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  decided  to  make  a
           deportation order has no significance  for  the  Upper  Tribunal
           beyond that."

26. Hesham Ali [159] emphasises the need for  analysis  of  the  particular
    facts and circumstances of the case and a distinction was  to  be  made
    between migrants admitted temporarily to the United Kingdom and persons
    who hold permanent residence who have resided in  this  country  for  a
    substantial period of time, for example children who have lived in this
    country all or most of their lives - as indeed in this case.

27. As there is now a more broad and holistically evaluative  test,  it  is
    all the more important that a relevant fact should be included  and  as
    set out in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

28. Was the reference to 'no ties' a previous  finding  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision of 2013 and a starting point and was  it  a  relevant
    omitted fact?

29. I set out the guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702  paragraphs  39
    to 41
           39. In our view the second Adjudicator should treat matters in
        the following way.
           (1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always  be  the
           starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
           appellant's status at the time was  made.  In  principle  issues
           such as  whether  the  appellant  was  properly  represented  or
           whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.
           (2) Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's  determination
           can always be taken into account by the second  Adjudicator.  If
           those facts lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion  that,
           at the date of his determination and on the material before him,
           the appellant makes his case, so be it. The  previous  decision,
           on the material before the first Adjudicator and at  that  date,
           is not inconsistent.
           (3) Facts happening before the first Adjudicator's determination
           but having no relevance to the issues before him can  always  be
           taken  into  account  by  the  second  Adjudicator.  The   first
           Adjudicator will not have been concerned with  such  facts,  and
           his determination is not an assessment of them.
           40. We now pass to matters that could have been before the first
           Adjudicator but were not.
           (4) Facts personal to the appellant that were not brought to the
           attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were  relevant
           to the issues before  him,  should  be  treated  by  the  second
           Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection. An  appellant  who
           seeks, in a later appeal, to add to the available  facts  in  an
           effort to obtain a more favourable outcome is properly  regarded
           with suspicion from the point of view of credibility.  (Although
           considerations of credibility will  not  be  relevant  in  cases
           where the existence of the additional fact is  beyond  dispute).
           It must also be borne  in  mind  that  the  first  Adjudicator's
           determination was made at a time close to the events alleged and
           in terms of both fact-finding and general credibility assessment
           would tend to have the advantage. For this reason, the addiction
           of such facts should not usually lead to any reconsideration  of
           the conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.
           (5) Evidence of other facts - for example country  evidence  may
           not suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but  should
           be treated with caution. The reason is different  from  that  in
           (4). Evidence dating from before the determination of the  first
           Adjudicator might  well  have  been  relevant  if  it  had  been
           tendered to him: but it was not, and he made  his  determination
           without it. The situation in the appellant's own country at  the
           time of that determination is very unlikely to  be  relevant  in
           deciding whether the appellant's removal  at  the  time  of  the
           second  Adjudicator's  determination  would  breach  his   human
           rights. Those representing the appellant would be better advised
           to assemble up-to-date evidence than to rely on material that is
           (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.
           41. The final major category of  case  is  where  the  appellant
           claims that his removal would breach  Article  3  for  the  same
           reason that he claimed to be a refugee.
           (6) If before the second Adjudicator  the  appellant  relies  on
           facts are not materially different from those put to  the  first
           Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim is in essence the
           same evidence as that available to the appellant at  that  tine,
           the second Adjudicator should regard the issues  as  settled  by
           the first Adjudicator's determination and make his  findings  in
           line with that determination rather than allowing the matter  to
           be re-litigated. We draw  attention  to  the  phrase  'the  same
           evidence as that available to the appellant at the time  of  the
           first determination. We have chosen  this  phrase  not  only  in
           order to accommodate guidelines (4)  and  (5)  above,  but  also
           because, in respect  of  evidence  that  was  available  to  the
           appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices  about  hot
           it would be  presented.  An  appellant  cannot  be  expected  to
           present evidence of which he  has  no  knowledge:  but  if  (for
           example) he chooses not to  give  oral  evidence  in  his  first
           appeal, that does not mean that  the  issues  or  the  available
           evidence in the second appeal are rendered any different by  his
           proposal to give oral evidence  (of  the  same  facts)  on  this
           occasion."

30. It is clear that at paragraph 56 in the decision under  challenge,  the
    judge resisted the implication that  the  previous  Tribunal  agreed  a
    finding that the appellant did not have  'any  ties'  to  Pakistan  and
    ruled in his favour on this basis.  Indeed as Mr Tufan argued that case
    had been decided on different grounds. At  paragraph  56  Judge  Pooler
    noted that

           'Mr Ansari submitted that in 2013 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
           considered the test whether the  appellant  had  'any  ties'  to
           Pakistan and ruled in his favour. It is, with respect  difficult
           to see that this is the conclusion which the  Tribunal  reached.
           There appears to be no specific findings on  this  question.   I
           have set out above the Tribunal's findings which do not refer to
           the issue of ties in Pakistan'.

31. It is correct as recorded that the 2013 decision of  the  Tribunal  did
    not set out specifically reference to 'ties'.  There was reference to a
    skeleton argument but, in my view, the decision cannot be read with the
    extraneous document such that a definite finding is made by  way  of  a
    skeleton argument.  It is not as if a published  document  were  relied
    on.  It is not possible by way reading the decision of 2013  in  itself
    to establish definitively the Tribunal's view on ties.

32. Even if that is not accepted, it was open to the judge to  depart  from
    those findings and to view the material afresh  before  her.  Paragraph
    39(2) of Devaseelan identifies that facts  occurring  since  the  first
    Adjudicator's determination can always be taken  into  account  by  the
    second Adjudicator and they  may  have  the  effect  of  recasting  the
    evidence and findings.  To my  mind,  the  judge  did  not  ignore  the
    findings of the previous decision because of the use by  the  judge  of
    the phrase 'in any event' in paragraph 57.  Being aware of the previous
    judgment, the referenced skeleton argument and the argument  on  'ties'
    in Pakistan,  Judge Pooler proceeded at paragraph 57, nevertheless,  to
    consider the current evidence before him/her stating:-

         "57.     In any event, the issue for the Tribunal at  present  time
             is whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
             integration and must be decided on the evidence now before me.
              The appellant has members of his  extended  family  including
             his parents-in-law (who are his  aunt  and  uncle)  and  their
             children (his cousins) who live  in  a  house  which  is  also
             occupied by other relatives in the extended family.  There was
             no cogent evidence to indicate that  he  would  be  unable  to
             access accommodation in Pakistan.  The appellant  is  familiar
             with Urdu and although he cannot read or write the language, I
             heard nothing to indicate that this would  place  him  in  any
             difficulty in terms of  integration.   It  is  true  that  the
             appellant  has  spent  very  little  time  in   Pakistan   but
             nevertheless, viewing the various factors cumulatively,  I  am
             not persuaded that there would be very  significant  obstacles
             to his integration."

33. Thus even if, as it appears, the judge  accepted  the  finding  of  the
    previous Tribunal that there were 'no ties', the judge made, as  he/she
    was required to do a holistic assessment of the evidence in  line  with
    Bossade.

34. As set out in Kamara the burden of showing 'no  ties'  rests  with  the
    appellant and the threshold is high as indicated  by  the  use  of  the
    words 'very'.  The judge made their own assessment as  to  whether  the
    appellant retained ties and  concluded,  albeit  recognising  that  the
    appellant had spent very little time in Pakistan, there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his return. I would  add  that  being  someone
    indistinguishable from a British  citizen  albeit  that  they  are  not
    British does not mean that they cannot have ties to  Pakistan.   As  at
    the date of the hearing the judge did not just make fresh  findings  on
    old evidence without acknowledging the previous findings but  explained
    that there was 'no cogent evidence to indicate that he would be  unable
    to access accommodation in Pakistan'.  Unlike the appellant in  Kamara,
    the judge clearly found he had relatives in Pakistan

35. The grounds advanced  a  lack  of  reference  to  the  wife's  evidence
    regarding the cramped nature of the accommodation but the  position  on
    the accommodation had changed from the previous decision  as  the  wife
    and children had been granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom (rather than return to  Pakistan  with  the  appellant).
    Indeed the judge found that the best  interests  of  the  children,  as
    British citizens,  [61]  were  to  stay  living  with  the  mother  and
    grandmother in the UK and not in a family unit with the father  at  the
    present time [63] and indeed is obliged to consider the facts as at the
    date of the hearing. The judge proceeded to make separate  findings  in
    relation to the accommodation and as such  cannot  be  fixed  with  the
    observation that he/she failed to consider any ties.

36. The judge also recorded the concerns of social services that  the  wife
    had been placed under pressure in relation to her evidence and noted at
    [52] that the appellant had remained  away  from  his  children  for  a
    number of years either in detention because of  expressed  concerns  of
    Social Services. The judge viewed the factors cumulatively with regards
    integration,  as  she  was  bound  to  do,  taking  into  account   the
    appellant's long residence in the United Kingdom, but found there  were
    no very significant obstacles to his integration in Pakistan.   On  the
    cogent reasoning given by the judge that finding was open to him.

37. I consider there is no material error of law in relation to ground (i).

38. In relation to grounds (ii) to (iv) as set out above, there is no merit
    in the arguments regarding the weight to be attached to the reports  in
    respect of the relationship with the children. It is a matter  for  the
    judge as to the weight to be accorded to the  reports  and  which  were
    clearly taken into  account  and  sound  reasons  were  given  for  the
    findings.   The  judge  found  Dr  Willemsen  to   have   expressed   a
    professional opinion.

39. The judge  rejected  the  concept  of  the  appellant  co-operating  or
    attending courses in relation to anger management because the appellant
    expressed so little insight into  the  concerns  as  expressed  by  the
    professionals  [40]. The report of Dr Cohen was considered  dated  [28]
    as it was composed in 2011 'six years before the hearing before  me  in
    the context of the proposed removal of  the  appellant,  his  wife  and
    their children', whilst the report from Dr Willemsen was found to  date
    from early 2017.   As such the judge was entitled to prefer the  report
    of Dr Willemsen.

40. It was also open to the judge to reject the assertion that less  weight
    should be attached to Dr Willemsen's  report  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was not legally represented. Indeed, as recorded, it was  the
    appellant himself who had supplied the information  which  led  to  the
    contradictions in the report  [32].  Rather, credence was placed on the
    report  on  the  basis  that  Dr  Willemsen  was  well  accustomed  and
    experienced in undertaking psychological assessments [33].  Further,  a
    letter of a social worker dated 3rd April 2017 and cited by the  judge,
    echoed the concerns and opinions raised by Dr Willemsen (complete  lack
    of insight  of  the  appellant  and  acknowledgement  of  the  concerns
    [domestic abuse]).  It was those findings which led to the judge's view
    of the appellant's 'willingness to co-operate with Social  Services  or
    to attend courses in relation to anger  management'.   The  grounds  in
    this respect are effectively a mischaracterisation of the decision.

41. In relation to ground (v) the judge noted  that  the  appellant's  wife
    applied on 3rd July 2014, subsequent  to  the  previous  decision,  for
    leave to remain on the basis of domestic violence. Although  the  judge
    referred to her having been granted  leave  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence - in fact she was said  to  have  been  granted  discretionary
    leave - it was not argued that her application was  not  made  on  that
    basis or that it would not have been a  factor  even  if  discretionary
    leave only was granted.   It was the application for that  leave  which
    was relevant, rather than the grant  actually  given  of  discretionary
    leave, and the extensive involvement of social services.  There was  no
    error in this conclusion by the judge.

42. Overall the judge did consider the relevant  facts  and  circumstances,
    heeded the previous decisions but found that

           'there are significant factors which  weigh  in  favour  of  the
           respondent's position.  These include  the  appellant's  history
           over some seventeen years of persistent offending.  His offences
           have included serious violence leading   to a   prison  sentence
           of three years and convictions for domestic violence against his
           wife as a result of which she  applied  for  (and  was  granted)
           leave as a victim of domestic violence'.

43. As such I consider there is no material error of law in the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler and the decision shall stand.

44. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 4th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



