
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08903/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2020                   |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     VA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ferguson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She is 16  years  old  and  I
         have anonymised this decision given her age.  She  lives  with  her
         grandmother in Ghana.  Her father, a British citizen,  has  claimed
         that he has had sole responsibility for her and  she  has  made  an
         application under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
         application was refused by the respondent in  a  decision  dated  8
         April 2019.

      2. In a decision dated 2 January 2020, the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT')
         dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on   human   rights   grounds,
         concluding that the father and mother were  both  involved  in  her
         upbringing,  and  therefore  the   father   did   not   have   sole
         responsibility.

      3. The appellant now  appeals  against  that  decision  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal ('UT'), permission having been granted by FTT SPJ Buchanan
         in a decision dated 15 April 2020.

      4. The grounds of appeal allege inter alia  that  the  FTT  completely
         failed to address the evidence from the father and the  appellant's
         sister (who resides with him in the UK)  to  the  effect  that  the
         mother (who lives in Ghana) has played a very limited role  in  the
         appellant's life since remarrying some 10 years ago.   Both  father
         and sister gave oral evidence before the FTT as summarised at  [14-
         15] of the FTT's decision.  That evidence is significant  and  goes
         to the heart of the issue in dispute before the FTT.   In  summary,
         when the parents separated the sister went to live with the  father
         in the UK and the appellant remained with the mother in Ghana.  The
         latter relationship broke down when the mother remarried  some  ten
         years ago.  The appellant then lived with the maternal  grandmother
         in the holidays and attended boarding school in Ghana.  The  father
         made all important  decisions  regarding  the  appellant  including
         schooling and health.  Both witnesses stated that the mother had no
         or little contact with the appellant.

      5. In a rule 24 notice dated 3 July 2020 the respondent submitted that
         the FTT was entitled to reach the conclusions it  did,  relying  in
         particular upon the FTT's findings at [17-18].  In  particular  the
         FTT regarded there to be "no evidence" that  the  father  had  sole
         responsibility as the mother continued to share responsibility with
         him on the basis that: the  school  letter  is  silent  as  to  the
         father's claim that he is the primary contact; and the father  sent
         the money for school fees via the mother and not  directly  to  the
         school.  The FTT also rejected the claim that the  grandmother  was
         in poor health and as such the mother was given the task of passing
         the money from the father on to the appellant and could  no  longer
         care for her.

      6. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated my provisional view  to
         Mrs Aboni: The FTT's conclusions were reached  without  making  any
         findings as to the credibility of the father and the sister.   Both
         witnesses attended the FTT hearing and gave  evidence  relevant  to
         the ultimate conclusions reached.   Mrs  Aboni  immediately  agreed
         that the FTT decision contains a material error of law such that it
         should be set aside and remitted to the FTT.  I am  satisfied  that
         Mrs Aboni was entirely correct to concede the appeal.  As Mrs Aboni
         acknowledged the appellant's father and sister attended the hearing
         and provided important evidence - see [10] to [15].   In  addition,
         the appellant relied upon letters from herself, her sister and  her
         father to support her case that although she  lived  with  her  ill
         grandmother in Ghana her father  remained  solely  responsible  for
         her.  Although the appellant's case has been summarised by the  FTT
         in some detail, Mrs Aboni was  correct  to  concede  that  the  FTT
         completely failed to  engage  with,  making  findings  of  fact  in
         relation to  or  give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  oral
         evidence.

Disposal

      7. Entirely new findings of fact need to be made in  relation  to  the
         two important issues that appear to remain in dispute  -  paragraph
         297(i)(e) and alternatively (f), albeit the  FTT  appears  to  have
         accepted that the remaining requirements of paragraph 297 have been
         met, in  particular  the  father  is  a  British  citizen  and  has
         financially supported the appellant for a lengthy period.

      8. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the  FTT.   It  will  be  a
         matter for the FTT to make arrangements for the hearing but on  the
         information available to me the matter could proceed  fairly  as  a
         remote hearing.  No witness  requires  an  interpreter  and  cross-
         examination is unlikely to be lengthy.

Decision

      9. The FTT decision contains an error of law and I set it aside.

     10. The decision is remitted to the FTT, where it shall be re-made by a
         judge other than Judge Somal.

Other matters

     11. Ms Ferguson asked me to make arrangements to  return  the  father's
         evidence (copies were not made) so that the relevant evidence could
         be placed within a consolidated bundle for the FTT, and I have done
         so.

     12. It would be helpful if  the  respondent  could  file  and  serve  a
         position statement within 14 days of  the  date  this  decision  is
         sent, confirming that the disputed issues only relate to  paragraph
         297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules.



Signed: UTJ Plimmer                          Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     6 November 2020
