
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08514/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2018                   |On 23 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on  13  July  2017
    which resulted in my finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ("FtJ")
    erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. The error of law decision, described as a Decision and  Directions,  is
    included as an Annex to this decision and reference should be  made  to
    it for the full background to the appeal, and my  reasons  for  finding
    that the FtJ erred in law.

 3. The resumed hearing before me was for the re-making of the decision. An
    outline of aspects of the background to the appeal is as  follows.  The
    respondent refused the application for leave to  remain  on  the  basis
    that the appellant did not meet the  suitability  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules because he had used deception in obtaining an English
    language test certificate.  This meant that he could not  benefit  from
    section EX.1. of Appendix FM in terms of  his  relationships  with  his
    wife and child in the UK, and the public interest made  it  undesirable
    to allow him to remain in the UK.

 4. In my error of law decision I concluded that the FtJ did not err in her
    conclusion that the appellant had used  deception  and  the  conclusion
    that the respondent had correctly applied the suitability  requirements
    of the Rules to the appellant's human rights claim.  I found that other
    aspects of the grounds were not made out.

 5. I did however, conclude that the FtJ had erred in law  in  terms  of  a
    failure  to  apply  the  respondent's  guidance   on   the   issue   of
    reasonableness of expecting a British citizen child to leave the UK, as
    explained from [46] of the error of  law  decision.   The  guidance  to
    which I referred was not drawn to the FtJ's attention by  either  party
    at the hearing before her.

 6. For the resumed hearing,  there  was  a  further  bundle  of  documents
    submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  consisting  of  53  pages  (the
    pagination in the  index  to  the  bundle  not  reflecting  the  actual
    contents of the bundle in terms of the pages).   I  was  also  provided
    with a complete copy of the guidance entitled  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private life:  10-Year  Routes,  dated  August
    2015 ("the IDI's").

 7. At the start of the hearing, Mr Jarvis was able  to  clarify  a  matter
    upon  which  I  had  sought  clarification,  namely  the  date  of  the
    appellant's application for leave  to  remain  which  resulted  in  the
    challenged decision.  It was agreed between the parties that that  date
    was 6 October 2015, the application being  dated  2  October  2015  but
    being stamped as received on 6 October 2015.  The date  of  14  January
    2016 in the respondent's decision was accepted as being in error.

 8. Mr Davison raised an  issue  in  relation  to  the  lawfulness  of  any
    disclosure to the Tribunal in relation to Family Court documents.  This
    issue was resolved by agreement between the parties  and  nothing  more
    need be said about it.

 9. Mr Jarvis having indicated that if the appellant were to be  called  to
    give evidence he would have no questions for him, he was not called  to
    give evidence and his latest witness statement was  relied  on  on  his
    behalf.  Mr Jarvis also indicated that he would not take any  issue  in
    relation to the appellant not having been called to give  evidence,  in
    the light of the fact that he had indicated that he would have  had  no
    questions for him.

    Submissions

10. There was some ebb and  flow  in  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    parties, but what follows is a summary of those submissions.

11. Mr Jarvis submitted that the FtJ had properly found that the  appellant
    had failed to meet the suitability  requirements  of  the  Rules,  thus
    meaning that he was excluded from the rest of  Appendix  FM,  including
    EX.1.  He also referred to GEN.3.2 of the Rules  which  was  introduced
    via HC 290 on 10 August  2017  (and  about  which  Mr  Jarvis  provided
    further detail and brief submissions post-hearing,  with  my  agreement
    and with the consent of Mr Davison).

12. Mr Jarvis confirmed that it was not the respondent's position that  the
    appellant's child or stepchild could be expected to leave the  UK  with
    him.  He made it clear that this was a 'separation case'.  Thus, it was
    submitted that s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") did not apply  because  the  respondent  did  not
    "expect" any of the children to leave  the  UK.   The  public  interest
    considerations, it was submitted, were such as to justify the appellant
    being removed and separated from his family.  The  appellant  had  used
    deception, the FtJ had commented on the  appellant's  lack  of  English
    language ability, and the appellant's family life  was  established  in
    precarious circumstances in terms of his status in the UK.   Separation
    would be proportionate, it was submitted.  The appellant had been  part
    of an overall flagrant disregard for immigration control.

13. Mr Jarvis submitted that this was not a Chikwamba case, given  that  it
    was not simply a question of the respondent requiring the appellant  to
    leave the UK to make an application for entry  clearance,  although  he
    could make such an application in due course.

14. Furthermore, if, in that context, in relation to a putative application
    for entry clearance, one had  to  look  at  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant met the financial requirements of the  Rules,  it  was  clear
    that he could not do so, with reference to Appendix FM-SE.

15. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that  the  children's  best
    interests were to remain with their parents, and that the children were
    not to blame for the appellant's actions.  However,  it  was  submitted
    that the public interest in this case  was  strong  enough  to  justify
    overriding  their  best  interests,  likewise  in   relation   to   the
    appellant's relationship with his spouse, a relationship established in
    precarious immigration circumstances.

16. Mr Davison referred to the IDI's at section  5  which  deals  with  the
    suitability requirements of  the  Rules,  whereby  it  states  that  in
    addressing suitability criteria under Appendix FM decision makers  must
    refer to the Criminality Guidance, and web  links  are  given  for  the
    Criminality Guidance, both internal (to the Home Office) and  external.
    However, he said that that guidance could not be accessed and therefore
    the basis upon which the suitability criteria are applied is  not  able
    to be established.

17. Thus, it was argued that although the  respondent  suggested  that  the
    appellant could not have 'access' to paragraph  EX.1,  the  basis  upon
    which the suitability criteria are applied could  not  be  established.
    In that context I was also referred to page 56  of  the  IDI's.   Where
    that refers to criminality, it was submitted that it did not  apply  in
    the appellant's case because there had been no criminal conviction  and
    furthermore, the standard of proof required in order to establish  that
    he failed to meet the suitability requirements of the Rules was not the
    criminal standard.  It was however, accepted that whether  under  EX.1,
    or under the newly-introduced GEN 3.2, or in an  Article  8  assessment
    outside the Rules, the same considerations would apply.

18. In relation to  s.117B(6),  it  was  submitted  that  the  respondent's
    interpretation of that section was incorrect.  Once it is accepted that
    it would not be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK, and there
    is a genuine and subsisting relationship with a parent, that  indicates
    where the public interest lies in Article 8 terms.

19. In terms of the extent to which the appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    financial requirements of the Rules, I was referred  to  the  financial
    information which, it was submitted,  indicated  that  the  appellant's
    spouse earned about �20,000 per annum.  It was accepted  however,  that
    the  specified  evidence  required  by  Appendix  FM-SE  had  not  been
    provided.  On the other hand, the entry  clearance  point  was  not  of
    particular relevance, it was submitted.

20. After the hearing I was provided on behalf of  the  respondent  with  a
    copy of the amended Rules under  GEN.3.2,  relating  to  the  issue  of
    "Exceptional  circumstances"  indicating  a  breach  of  Article  8  in
    circumstances where the individual does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules.  It was initially suggested on behalf of the  respondent  in
    those post-hearing submissions that GEN.3.2 does not apply because  the
    decision was made before that aspect of the Rules was introduced, on 10
    August 2017.  Subsequently however, it was stated that the respondent's
    "policy line" is that the Tribunal is able to consider and  apply  that
    newly-introduced aspect of  the  Rules,  but  that  in  any  event  the
    analysis would be the same whether under GEN.3.2, or outside the  Rules
    under Article 8 proper.

    Assessment

21. Mr Jarvis in submissions emphasised that it was  not  the  respondent's
    case that either the appellant's biological child  FI,  or  indeed  his
    wife's child from her former relationship, AA,  could  be  expected  to
    leave the UK.  It was agreed between the parties that  the  information
    now provided does reveal that AA does  have  contact  with  her  father
    under a Child Arrangements Order.  I would add  that  that  contact  is
    significant in terms of its frequency and duration.

22. In fairness, it must be said that the respondent's position in relation
    to the appellant's removal, and the question of the children  remaining
    in the UK, has in fact been consistent.  The decision letter makes  the
    respondent's view clear that this was a case where it was in the public
    interest for the appellant to be separated from the children  and  from
    his spouse.  Furthermore, although the FtJ concluded that it  would  be
    reasonable to expect both children, who are qualifying children  within
    the meaning of s.117D of the 2002 Act, to  leave  the  UK,  it  is  not
    apparent that such was argued on behalf of the respondent before her.

23. The 'rule 24' response to the grounds of appeal  also  makes  it  clear
    that there is no decision by the respondent for the appellant's wife or
    the children to leave the UK.  I should say that at the hearing  before
    me on 13 July 2017 the respondent's position was not so  clear,  and  I
    did not at that hearing seek clarification.  Nevertheless,  as  I  have
    indicated, the respondent's position is to the effect that there is  no
    expectation of the children leaving  the  UK.   It  is  that  issue  of
    'expectation' which was  the  lynchpin  of  the  respondent's  argument
    before me at the resumed hearing.

24. Before coming on  to  consider  the  application  of  s.117B(6)  it  is
    necessary to deal with the question raised by Mr Davison  in  terms  of
    the extent to which the respondent had established that the suitability
    requirements of the Rules applied, thus excluding  the  appellant  from
    having access to section EX.1 of the Rules, and indeed  GEN.3.2(2),  if
    it applies.

25. Mr Jarvis was understandably concerned about the fact that the argument
    about  establishing  the  respondent's  criteria   for   applying   the
    suitability requirements of the Rules had not previously been raised in
    terms of the lack of accessibility of the applicable guidance to  which
    I was referred.  I make no criticism here of  Mr  Davison  who,  having
    come to the case rather late, very properly felt that he was  bound  to
    advance an argument which he considered had arguable merit, even though
    it had not been raised before.

26. Given that it was agreed on all sides that whether under the  Rules  or
    outside the Rules the assessment of the children's  position  would  be
    the same,  the  argument  about  the  application  of  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules is, in a sense, academic.   However,  as  was
    indicated to the parties at the hearing, and indeed flagged  up  by  Mr
    Jarvis, I had said in my error of law decision that there was no  error
    in the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the  extent  to  which  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules applied.  That is so.  At [41]  I  said  that
    the FtJ was entitled to find that the respondent correctly applied  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules to the appellant's  human  rights
    claim.  The argument sought to  be  advanced  by  Mr  Davison  was  not
    previously advanced and I do not consider that it would be  appropriate
    for me now to resile from the decision on the issue that I have already
    made.

27. I do not consider it necessary to examine in detail the application  of
    GEN.3.2(2), although I note that the respondent's policy, as  explained
    very briefly in written submissions post-hearing, is to the effect that
    notwithstanding the implementation date of  that  provision,  it  would
    apply to this appellant notwithstanding  that  the  decision  was  made
    prior to 10 August 2017.  For  completeness  however,  I  set  out  the
    relevant provisions as follows:

         "GEN.3.2.

         (1)  Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application  for  entry
             clearance  or  leave  to  enter  or  remain  made  under  this
             Appendix, or an application for  leave  to  remain  which  has
             otherwise  been  considered  under  this  Appendix,  does  not
             otherwise meet the requirements of this Appendix or Part 9  of
             the  Rules,  the  decision-maker  must  consider  whether  the
             circumstances in sub-paragraph (2) apply.

         (2)  Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
             consider, on the basis of  the  information  provided  by  the
             applicant, whether there are exceptional  circumstances  which
             would render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter  or
             remain, a breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
             Human  Rights,  because   such   refusal   would   result   in
             unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  applicant,  their
             partner, a relevant  child  or  another  family  member  whose
             Article 8 rights it is evident from that information would  be
             affected by a decision to refuse the application."

28. It is clear from that newly-introduced aspect of the Rules that access,
    as it were, to Article 8 is accepted on behalf  of  the  respondent  in
    certain cases, where there  are  exceptional  circumstances,  a  phrase
    which has been considered in other cases.

29. This is a case in which it is agreed by  the  parties  that  Article  8
    outside the Rules does need to be considered.  With that in mind, I set
    out s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which was the focus  for  the  arguments
    before me.  It states as follows:

         "117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases:

         ...

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

30. Mr Jarvis referred to the decision in MA (Pakistan) & Ors  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   He  suggested
    that strictly, the Secretary of State is not actually required to apply
    s.117B, although he also pointed out that in MA (Pakistan) it was  said
    that the Secretary of State should have regard to it.  I  think  it  is
    worthwhile to set out in full what the Court of  Appeal  said  in  that
    context at [15]:

         "Section 117A states in terms that section 117B applies  to  courts
         and tribunals. Curiously the Secretary of State  is  not  in  terms
         bound by these rules but it would be bizarre for her to depart from
         Parliament's view of  the  public  interest  as  reflected  in  the
         legislation, and if she were to do so in a  manner  prejudicial  to
         the individual, it would simply invite appeals."

31. It is also important however, to refer  to  other  paragraphs  of  that
    decision which are significant. Thus, the Court said as follows:

         "(17)    Subsection (6) falls into a different category  again.  It
             does not simply identify factors which bear  upon  the  public
             interest question. It resolves that question in the context of
             article  8  applications  which  satisfy  the  conditions   in
             paragraphs (a) and (b). It does so by  stipulating  that  once
             those conditions are satisfied, the public interest  will  not
             require the applicant's removal. Since the  interference  with
             the right to private or family life  under  article  8(1)  can
             only  be  justified  where  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong
             countervailing public interest falling within article 8(2), if
             the public interest does not  require  removal,  there  is  no
             other basis on which removal could be justified.  It  follows,
             in my judgment, that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  section
             117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in  the
             sense that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions
             specified  in  the  sub-section  are  satisfied,  the   public
             interest will not justify removal. It  is  not  legitimate  to
             have regard to public interest considerations unless  that  is
             permitted, either explicitly or implicitly, by the  subsection
             itself.

         (18) Ms Giovannetti QC, counsel for the Secretary of State,  argued
             otherwise. She contended that there may be circumstances where
             even though the provisions  of  paragraphs  (a)  and  (b)  are
             satisfied and the applicant is not liable for deportation, the
             Secretary of State may nonetheless refuse leave to  remain  on
             wider public interest grounds. But as she had to accept,  that
             analysis requires adding words to subsection (6) to the effect
             that where the conditions are satisfied, the  public  interest
             will not normally require removal, because  on  her  approach,
             sometimes it  will.  I  see  no  warrant  for  distorting  the
             unambiguous language of the section in that way.

         (19) In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
             tribunals need to ask when applying section  117B(6)  are  the
             following:

             (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation?  If  so,  section
                  117B is inapplicable and instead the  relevant  code  will
                  usually be found in section 117C.

             (2)  Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with the child?

             (3)  Is the child a qualifying child  as  defined  in  section
                  117D?

             (4)  Is it unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom?

         (20) If the answer to the first question is no, and  to  the  other
             three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article  8
             is infringed. "

32. On behalf of the respondent it was accepted that if s.117B(6)  applied,
    then leave would have to be granted.  But Mr  Jarvis  alighted  on  the
    word "expect" in subparagraph (b) to suggest that if the  Secretary  of
    State does not expect the child to leave the  UK  then  that  provision
    does not bite.

33. It could be said, perhaps,  that  the  argument  has  some  superficial
    attraction.  However, I have no hesitation in rejecting it.  There  are
    some immediately obvious reasons for  doing  so.   To  'hive  off'  the
    phrase "to expect" from s.117B(6)(b) is to corrupt the meaning of  that
    sub-section.  It deprives it of what  I  consider  to  be  the  obvious
    intention of requiring an objective assessment of the reasonableness of
    a child leaving  the  UK.   It  is  either  reasonable  or  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect a child to leave.  There is a wrong  and  a  right
    answer. If the Secretary of State's argument  were  to  hold  good,  it
    would mean that in a case where  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child where someone  is  not  liable  to
    deportation, the Secretary of State could simply bypass the  import  of
    s.117B(6) by stating that she does not expect  a  qualifying  child  to
    leave.

34. In addition, if the respondent's position is that she does  not  expect
    the children in this case to leave, one only needs to ask the  question
    'why not?' to see that the respondent's argument is circular.   It  can
    only be the case that the respondent does not expect  the  children  to
    leave because it would not be  reasonable  to  have  that  expectation.
    That being the case, the appellant is pulled back within the regime  of
    s.117B(6).

35. In MA (Pakistan) at [19], it was stated that if the  appellant  is  not
    liable  to  deportation,  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it is not reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK, the conclusion must be that the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights are infringed by his removal.  As was stated at  [17],
    where the conditions specified in the sub-section  are  satisfied,  the
    public interest will not justify removal.  There is no other basis upon
    which removal could be justified.

36. Applying that reasoning  to  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal,  the
    appellant is not  liable  to  deportation,  does  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with qualifying children and it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK.   In  those
    circumstances, his removal would amount to a breach of  his  Article  8
    rights.

37. On the assumption then, that the appeal needs to be determined  outside
    the Rules under Article 8 proper, his appeal must be allowed.

    Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set  aside,  I  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/03/18



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this decision involves minors, unless and until a Tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/03/18

                                    ANNEX

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 14 January 2016 he applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.
     His application was refused in a decision dated 30  March  2016.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant  ("the  FtJ")  on  27  March  2017,
    resulting in the appeal being dismissed.  The further background to the
    appeal is best illustrated with reference to the FtJ's decision.

    The decision of the FtJ

 2. The FtJ referred to the background to the appellant's claim,  including
    that following his leave as a student, he was granted leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur), from 3 October 2012 to 3 October 2015.  She
    also referred to the appellant being married to a British citizen,  NH,
    and that they have a child FI, who at the time of the  hearing  was  18
    months old.  The appellant's wife also has a  child,  AA,  aged  seven,
    from another relationship.

 3. Referring to the basis of the  appellant's  claim  to  be  entitled  to
    remain in the UK, amongst other things she referred to the  appellant's
    contention that he did not use deception in taking an English  language
    test, as asserted by the  respondent.   The  appellant  relied  on  his
    relationships in the community, the fact that his wife has never  lived
    in Pakistan and nor have the children, and that he is  settled  in  the
    UK.  She referred to the studies that he had undertaken here.

 4. The FtJ also summarised the evidence given  by  the  appellant's  wife.
    She said in evidence that all her friends and relatives are in  the  UK
    and that she has never lived in Pakistan.  She had visited Pakistan  on
    family visits.  The evidence in relation to the  contact  that  AA  has
    with her father was to the effect that she does not see him much, maybe
    twice a month, and that he sometimes contributes towards  the  cost  of
    her upkeep.  She said that  she  and  the  appellant  had  been  living
    together since 2013.

 5. The FtJ summarised the respondent's case, including  in  terms  of  the
    detail of the allegation of deception in the obtaining  of  an  English
    language  certificate,  setting  out  verbatim  the  details  from  the
    decision letter.  She noted that  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not meet the suitability requirements of  the  Article  8
    Rules.

 6. In her findings she referred at  [17]  to  a  respondent's  bundle  and
    supplementary bundle containing various items of evidence  in  relation
    to the allegation of deception in the English language test.

 7. At [18] she found that having heard the appellant give evidence, it was
    fair to say that he  could  communicate  in  English  but  his  English
    language skills were poor and she had to ask him to repeat his  answers
    many times during the hearing because  she  could  not  understand  his
    English.  She said that the respondent's evidence and  the  appellant's
    "demonstrably poor English language ability" at the hearing, led her to
    conclude that the respondent had discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in
    showing that the appellant  had  obtained  the  English  language  test
    result fraudulently.  Thus, she concluded that the  appellant  did  not
    meet the suitability requirements of the Rules and could not therefore,
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM, or paragraph 276ADE.

 8. She concluded that the appellant  and  his  wife  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  and  that  family  life  exists  between  the
    appellant, the sponsor and the two children.

 9. She said at [21] that the respondent's decision was  justified  in  the
    interests of the prevention of crime and disorder, the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control and the wider requirement that immigrants
    should not use false documents to  obtain  status  in  the  UK  thereby
    breaching the UK's immigration laws.  She determined that the only real
    issue to be resolved was whether it was proportionate for the appellant
    to be returned to Pakistan.

10. She referred  to  the  various  factors  contained  in  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"),  finding
    that the appellant could speak some English,  but  that  there  was  no
    evidence  that  he  was  financially  independent.   In   relation   to
    s.117B(4), she concluded that little weight should be attached  to  the
    appellant's private life or his relationship with his wife, formed at a
    time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully. In this she  referred
    to his visa having expired several months  before  he  made  his  human
    rights application, at a  time  when  he  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully.
    Furthermore, she found that the appellant  knew  he  had  obtained  his
    status by fraud, having used a proxy to take the English language test,
    thus rendering the grant of the visa in October 2012 vitiated by fraud.
     She  concluded  that  even  if  the  respondent  was  unaware  of  the
    appellant's dishonest conduct at that stage,  the  appellant  certainly
    knew when he entered into the  relationship  with  his  wife  that  his
    status in the UK was unlawful.  Similarly, his private  life  attracted
    little weight on the basis that his immigration status was  precarious.



11. The FtJ went on however, to refer to s.117B(6) in terms of  the  public
    interest not requiring the appellant's removal where he has  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and where it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The  appellant,
    she accepted, has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  two
    qualifying children.   Thus,  she  identified  the  question  as  being
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.



12. Ultimately, she concluded that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect
    either of the children to leave the UK, citing a number of  factors  in
    her assessment, including the best  interests  of  the  children.   She
    concluded that there was a paucity of information about the child  AA's
    relationship with her  father,  referring  to  the  appellant's  wife's
    witness statement.  At [30] she concluded that there was "no  evidence"
    before her that the eldest child's father  has  any  contact  with  his
    child, or as to his whereabouts, or whether he objects to his  daughter
    going to live in Pakistan.

13. In the following  paragraph  she  said  that  there  was  no  "credible
    evidence" that that child has contact with  her  natural  father.   She
    referred to the fact that he did  not  give  any  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, and stated that the appellant's wife was hesitant when giving
    evidence as to her eldest child's natural father's involvement  in  her
    life.  She noted that  that  was  something  about  which  her  witness
    statement was "entirely silent", as was the appellant's.

14. She referred to the appellant's  wife's  background  in  the  Pakistani
    community and the contact  she  has  with  the  appellant's  family  in
    Pakistan through Skype, also referring to her being able to speak Urdu.



15. She concluded that the eldest child is  young  enough  to  adapt  to  a
    change of school and continue her education in Pakistan,  finding  that
    there was no evidence that it would not be in  her  best  interests  to
    change schools at her young age. She concluded that  the  family  as  a
    whole could relocate as an intact family unit.

16. In coming to that view she said that she took  into  account  that  the
    eldest child is 7 years old, but in the absence of any  evidence  about
    her (and there was none in the appellant's bundle, she said) it was not
    unreasonable for her to remain with her mother, stepfather and  younger
    half-sibling in Pakistan.

17. Referring to the proportionality balancing exercise, she said  that  it
    was relevant that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, either on suitability grounds, or with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE, for the reasons set out in the refusal letter, with  which  she
    agreed.  It was also the case that it was not claimed that  the  family
    met the financial requirements of  the  Rules.   She  referred  to  the
    financial evidence that was before her.

18. There was no evidence that the appellant's wife was in employment,  but
    the appellant was almost a fully qualified accountant and would be able
    to complete the remaining modules online.  She referred to his previous
    work in an accountancy role in Pakistan.  She concluded that he had the
    skills and ability to support his family on return to Pakistan.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

19. The appellant's grounds contend that the FtJ  had  failed  to  consider
    that the appellant had  remained  lawfully  in  the  UK,  and  had  not
    remained beyond the period of his permitted leave.

20. In relation to the English language deception issue,  it  is  contended
    that the FtJ made a subjective assessment of  the  appellant's  English
    language  ability,  failing  to  take  into  account  that  the  issues
    surrounding his appeal  and  the  stress  of  the  hearing  might  have
    affected his ability to express himself.   Furthermore,  it  is  argued
    that the English language test result in spoken English that was relied
    on in terms of the allegation of fraud, actually only indicated a score
    of 120/200, or level 5, which it is said was at  a  level  which  means
    that numerous errors were likely.  It is suggested that the appellant's
    ability in English at the hearing was a wholly unreliable guide to  the
    level of English language ability in 2012.

21. Further, the FtJ had not identified  what  she  assessed  as  "credible
    evidence" in the respondent's bundle in terms of the fraud used in  the
    English language test.

22. In addition, it is asserted that the  FtJ  made  no  reference  to  the
    evidence put forward by the appellant about the taking of the  test  or
    about his ability in English.  Thus, it was  unclear  whether  she  had
    taken that evidence into account at all, or if she had, whether she had
    rejected it.  If she had rejected it, she had  failed  to  explain  her
    reasons for so doing.

23. The further  contention  is  that  the  FtJ  had  erred  in  apparently
    accepting that deception in a prior application was more  serious,  and
    justified a mandatory refusal  under  the  suitability  requirement  S-
    LTR1.6.

24. In relation to the weight to be given to the appellant's  family  life,
    it is asserted that the FtJ failed to  consider  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife began in 2013, and their child was  born  in
    September 2015, throughout which time he had leave to stay in  the  UK.
    Even if the FtJ was right to conclude that the appellant's  stay  could
    be regarded as having been unlawful, there was no suggestion  that  his
    wife was aware of any defect in his last period of leave.

25. It is further contended that the FtJ failed to  attach  weight  to  the
    fact  that  the  children  concerned  are  British  citizens,  and  the
    importance of citizenship.  Furthermore, she failed  to  consider  that
    both children are female and she was being invited by the respondent to
    find that it was reasonable for them to go to live in a  country  where
    their gender would make them members of a particular social group under
    the Refugee Convention.

26. In submissions on behalf of the appellant before me  it  was  suggested
    that there was no proper consideration given to the situation for  each
    of the children separately.  Further, the conclusion at [30] that there
    was no evidence that the eldest child's father had any contact with his
    child, or that he objected to her going to  live  in  Pakistan,  was  a
    significant finding made without any evidence to support  it.   It  was
    suggested that the FtJ could have asked questions  about  this  at  the
    hearing, but did not do so.

27. A further, new, point was  advanced  in  terms  of  s.1  of  the  Child
    Abduction Act 1984 to the effect that it would be  a  criminal  offence
    for the appellant to take AA out of the UK.

28. It was further submitted that the FtJ had failed to take  into  account
    the British citizenship of the children, and there had been no analysis
    of the children's best interests.  No  information  had  been  obtained
    from the school for example, in relation to the older child.

29. The same arguments as advanced  in  the  grounds  in  relation  to  the
    allegation of deception in the English language test were advanced.  It
    was said that there was no consideration by the FtJ of the  appellant's
    evidence, although the argument seems only to be  in  relation  to  the
    oral evidence that he gave.

30. The decision in SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania  [2017]
    UKUT 00120 (IAC) was relied on, although the argument in  that  respect
    was not fully developed.

31. Mr Singh relied on the 'rule 24' response.  he submitted that at  [30]-
    [31] the FtJ had made  findings  in  relation  to  the  eldest  child's
    contact with her father.  The FtJ referred to the appellant's  wife  as
    having been hesitant when giving evidence  as  to  her  eldest  child's
    natural father's involvement in her life.  There was no evidence of any
    objection by him to his daughter going to Pakistan.

32. In relation to the appellant's English language  ability,  consistently
    with the decision in Majumder & Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, the FtJ  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the appellant's English language ability, as it appeared to her
    at the hearing.  Furthermore, it is clear from [18] that she considered
    the respondent's evidence in the supplementary bundle  in  relation  to
    the allegation of the fraudulent obtaining of the English language test
    certificate.

33. In relation to SF and others, the issue  raised  is  not  one  that  is
    apparent from the grounds of appeal.  In any event, it can be seen from
    [21] of her decision that the FtJ made her decision in  line  with  the
    guidance.

    Conclusions

34. In submissions, Mr Cogan sought to persuade me that the  FtJ  erred  in
    law by failing to have regard to s.1 of the Child Abduction  Act  1984.
    The basis of the argument is, in effect, that it would  be  a  criminal
    offence for the appellant to take his stepdaughter, AA, out of the  UK.



35. Aside from the fact that that it is not a matter upon which  permission
    to appeal was sought or was granted, I do not consider  that  there  is
    any merit in the argument.  In the first place, it is doubtful  whether
    the appellant comes within the definition of a person "connected with a
    child" within the meaning of s.1.   Within  the  definition,  to  be  a
    guardian he would need to come within  the  definition  of  a  guardian
    under the Children Act 1989.  Likewise, he is not a person who would be
    treated as having custody of the  child  within  the  meaning  of  that
    section.  Furthermore, I cannot see that the term "appropriate consent"
    applies in connection with AA's natural father, having  regard  to  the
    definitions   of   "appropriate   consent"   within   s.1(3).     Under
    s.1(3)(a)(ii) the child's father could not, on the facts, be  described
    as someone who has parental responsibility for the child.

36. So far as the written grounds are concerned, I am  not  satisfied  that
    there is any error of law in the FtJ's  conclusions  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's use of deception in  obtaining  an  English  language  test
    certificate.  It is said in the grounds that the FtJ failed to  explain
    what evidence she relied on in terms of evidence  in  the  respondent's
    bundle as to the use of deception.   However,  at  [17]  and  [18]  she
    referred to  a  supplementary  bundle  of  documents  provided  by  the
    respondent which included witness statements and  an  expert's  report.
    At [14] she set out verbatim the respondent's decision letter in  terms
    of the detail of the test taken.

37. The matters advanced in the grounds in relation to the stress that  the
    appellant might have been under in expressing himself at a hearing, and
    the relatively low level 'spoken test' score, are all  just  points  of
    disagreement with the FtJ's decision.  Although it is said that because
    the test score was low the appellant would have been unlikely  to  have
    used a proxy test taker, there may be a number of reasons why  a  proxy
    test taker obtained a low score.  It may be that a proxy test taker was
    in fact not as proficient in English as may have  been  represented  to
    the person who wanted someone else to take the test for him.  It may be
    that a relatively low score might simply  be  part  of  the  deception.
    There are a number of possibilities.

38. Although the grounds suggest that the FtJ  made  no  reference  to  the
    evidence put forward by the appellant about the taking of the test,  or
    about his ability in English, the appellant's case in this  respect  is
    set out from [3]  of  the  FtJ's  decision.   The  appellant's  witness
    statement, in effect, amounts to a denial of deception,  and  not  much
    else.  There is nothing to indicate that the FtJ failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence on the issue.

39. It was not just the appellant's poor English language  ability  at  the
    hearing that the FtJ  took  into  account,  but  the  evidence  in  the
    respondent's bundle.  She expressly said as  much  at  [18]  where  she
    referred to the respondent's evidence "coupled with  the  appellant['s]
    demonstrably poor English language ability at the Tribunal hearing".

40. The FtJ was entitled to find that the respondent correctly applied  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules to the appellant's  human  rights
    claim.

41. Similarly, I do not consider that there is any merit in the  contention
    that the FtJ failed to take into account the British citizenship of the
    children.  It is plain that she did, for example at [19], and  at  [26]
    referring to them as "qualifying children".   It  is  self-evidently  a
    feature of s.117B of the 2002 Act that the issue of 'reasonableness' in
    terms of a child having to leave the UK only applies where the child is
    a qualifying child. In this case that  qualifying  status  was  on  the
    basis that they are British citizens.

42. Furthermore, the contention in the grounds that the FtJ failed to  take
    into account that the British citizen children  being  girls  would  be
    returning to a country, Pakistan, where they would constitute a  member
    of a particular social group takes the challenge to the FtJ's  decision
    no further.  It does not appear that  any  particular  disadvantage  to
    them as females in Pakistan was advanced in argument  before  the  FtJ.
    Certainly no background material is evident in the appellant's  bundle,
    and there is nothing to indicate that any submissions in  that  respect
    were put before the FtJ.

43. I do not consider that the FtJ erred in law in her  assessment  of  the
    extent to which AA's father has any contact with her.  It is true  that
    the appellant's wife said that AA's father does not see her  much,  but
    maybe twice a month and sometimes contributes towards the costs of  her
    upkeep [11].  At  [31]  the  FtJ  said  that  there  was  "no  credible
    evidence" that the eldest child has contact with her natural father and
    that no evidence had been adduced as to his  whereabouts.   There,  she
    was not stating that there was no evidence of  his  contact  with  her,
    only that the evidence was not credible.   The  FtJ  stated  that  AA's
    father did not give evidence before the Tribunal  and  the  appellant's
    wife was hesitant when giving evidence as to her eldest child's natural
    father's involvement in her life.  She also remarked on the  fact  that
    this was an issue about which there  was  nothing  in  the  appellant's
    wife's witness statement, and that of the appellant.   She  quoted  the
    witness statement of the appellant's wife at [29].

44. Although at [30] the FtJ said that there was "no  evidence  before  her
    that AA's father has any contact with her",  that  conclusion  must  be
    seen in the context of  her  conclusion  that  there  was  no  credible
    evidence of his involvement.  She was further entitled to conclude that
    there was no evidence as  to  his  whereabouts  or  as  to  whether  he
    objected to his daughter going to live in Pakistan.   This  was  not  a
    matter that needed specifically to be put to the appellant or his wife.
     The FtJ was entitled to conclude that if he had any objection  to  her
    going to Pakistan, there would have been some evidence about it.

45. There is however, a matter which I do consider to  be  of  significance
    and which has caused me to conclude that the FtJ's decision must be set
    aside for error of  law.   That  relates  to  the  application  of  the
    respondent's guidance in terms of the  reasonableness  of  expecting  a
    British citizen child to leave the UK.  Its  significance  is  apparent
    from  the  decision  in  SF  and  others.   The  guidance  is  entitled
    Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM,
    Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10
    year Routes".  It is set out at [7] of SF and others as follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

         .    criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

         .    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.  If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."

46. It was rightly pointed out on behalf of the respondent before  me  that
    this is not an issue upon  which  permission  was  sought  or  granted.
    However, it seems to me that the situation is here different from  that
    in relation to  the  new  argument  advanced  in  terms  of  the  Child
    Abduction Act 1984, apart from the fact that  the  point  actually  has
    some merit, unlike that in relation to the Child Abduction Act.

47. In SF and others the guidance was  similarly  not  a  matter  that  was
    apparently relied on on behalf of the appellant in  argument.   It  was
    drawn to the Tribunal's attention by the Presenting Officer.  The  Vice
    President plainly considered it a matter of importance because  it  was
    the Secretary of State's policy and needed to be taken into account  in
    terms of the issue of the reasonableness of expecting a child who is  a
    British citizen to leave the UK.

48. This guidance was not drawn to the FtJ's attention by either  party  in
    the case of the appeal before me.  Unsurprisingly  therefore,  she  did
    not hear argument in relation to it and evidently did not take it  into
    account.  Furthermore, it  is  not  referred  to  in  the  respondent's
    decision.

49. Whereas in the past a decision by the respondent which failed  to  take
    into account an applicable policy could  have  resulted  in  an  appeal
    being allowed on the basis that that the respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law, that is no longer a permissible  ground  of
    appeal.  What SF and others decides however, is that the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance should be taken into account by a tribunal,  where  it
    applies.  At [12] of that decision the following was said:

         "12. On occasion, perhaps where it has more  information  than  the
             Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a case
             is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason  for  departing
             from such guidance. But where there is  clear  guidance  which
             covers a case where an assessment has to be  made,  and  where
             the guidance clearly demonstrates  what  the  outcome  of  the
             assessment would have been made by the Secretary of State,  it
             would, we think, be the normal practice for  the  Tribunal  to
             take such guidance into account and to apply it  in  assessing
             the same consideration in a case that came before it."

50. What is clear therefore, is that not only is the British citizen status
    of a child of great importance, the conduct  of  a  parent  or  primary
    carer is also to be taken into account  in  the  way  set  out  in  the
    guidance.  The difficulty in relation to the  FtJ's  decision  is  that
    whilst at [21] she quite rightly referred to the unacceptability of the
    use of false documents, she did not, because it was not  drawn  to  her
    attention, apply those considerations to the respondent's guidance, and
    thus did not determine whether the extent of  the  appellant's  conduct
    was such as to mean either his separation from the children (his  child
    in particular) and his spouse, or whether it was  appropriate  for  the
    British citizen children to leave the UK.

51. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ  did  err  in  law,
    albeit that she was entitled to have had drawn  to  her  attention  the
    guidance to which I have referred.  That error of law  is  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.  This is not a case in which,  on
    the basis of the submissions and evidence presently before  me,  it  is
    possible to re-make the decision without a  further  hearing.   At  the
    very least, it will be necessary to hear further submissions  from  the
    parties in terms of the impact of  the  respondent's  guidance  on  the
    outcome of the appeal.  Accordingly, there will need to  be  a  further
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

52. At that further hearing, the parties should also be in  a  position  to
    clarify when in fact it was that the appellant made his application for
    leave to remain, which resulted in the decision under appeal.  The  FtJ
    at [2] stated that it was on 6 October 2015.  The respondent's decision
    however, states that it was 14  January  2016.   The  application  form
    itself has a date stamp of 6 October 2015.  Given that it appears  that
    the appellant's leave expired on 3 October  2015,  the  date  of  this
    application is of some significance.  The FtJ stated at [24]  that  the
    appellant's last visa expired several months before he made  his  human
    rights application, at a time when he was in the UK unlawfully.  If the
    application was made on 6 October 2015, and his leave had expired on  3
    October 2015, this would appear not to be correct.  It is a matter that
    the parties need to clarify at the next hearing.

53. The parties are to have careful regard to the directions set out  below
    in relation to the resumed hearing.

    DIRECTIONS

      a) In relation to any further evidence relied on on behalf  of  either
         party, this must  be  contained  within  a  further  supplementary,
         paginated and indexed bundle.

      b) In relation to any person whom it is proposed to call to give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief, such that there  is  no  need
         for any further examination-in-chief.

      c) Where I have concluded that there is no error of law in  the  FtJ's
         decision, those matters  will  not  be  revisited  at  the  resumed
         hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because these proceedings involve children, unless and until a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            13/10/17
