
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08723/2018
                                                               HU/08730/2018
                                                               HU/08732/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2019                          |On 15th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Nileshkumar [M]
                                 Stella [M]
                                  Smit [M]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondents:   Mr B Hawkin (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie, promulgated on 29th November 2018, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 1st November 2018.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the   Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.  I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The First Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 25th
    August 1970.  He has two dependants.  The Second and  Third  Appellants
    are his dependent wife and son and they were born on 19th  August  1968
    and 23rd July 1998 respectively.

The First Appellant's Claim

 3. The First Appellant arrived in the UK initially on a student visa on 21
    February 2007, and was thereafter granted various extensions  of  leave
    to remain, which  took  him  to  14th  July  2009.   He  then  made  an
    application for further leave as a Tier 1 (Highly  Skilled  Post-Study)
    Migrant, and was granted further leave until 29th July  2010.   Another
    application as a Tier 2 (Skilled Worker) was  then  refused,  with  the
    right of appeal on 1st December 2010.  He applied for further leave  on
    20th September 2011 as a Tier 2 (Skilled) Migrant and was granted leave
    until 16th October 2014.  His leave was finally curtailed on 21st April
    2014, so as to end on 22nd April 2014.  He applied for leave to  remain
    under the family and private life provisions on 24th May 2014 and  that
    application was refused with a right of appeal on 23rd July  2014.   It
    was on 29th January 2016  that  he  then  submitted  a  long  residence
    application.  This was refused on  29th  June  2016.   He  submitted  a
    family and private life application on  1st  July  2016.   It  was  the
    refusal of that application that led to this appeal.

 4. The Respondent's decision was that the First Appellant had lived in the
    UK for nine years and four months, and had not demonstrated that he met
    the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE,  or  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration upon return to India.

 5. The First Appellant's claim is based upon the fact that his son,  under
    the age of 18, had resided in the UK for more  than  seven  years,  and
    that an application was pending with the Respondent, in  this  respect.
    His son had come to the UK on 27th May 2009 with entry clearance as his
    dependant.  He had come when he was 10 years of age.   He  was  now  19
    years of age.  When his son made the application he was 17 years of age
    and had lived in the UK for over seven years.   The  position  now  was
    that he had been in the UK in excess  of  ten  years.   He  had  gained
    qualifications in management.  He was of good  character.   There  were
    exceptional circumstances.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge observed  that  it  was  not  contested  that  the  principal
    Appellant and the Second Appellant, his wife, could  not  rely  on  any
    grounds under Appendix FM in their applications for  leave  to  remain.
    The  appeals,  therefore,  turned  largely,  if  not  wholly   on   the
    application of the Third Appellant, whose application  properly  failed
    to be considered under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  There had
    been an earlier decision by an Immigration Judge who had:-

         "dismissed the 3rd Appellant's application, but it is not contested
         that the First Immigration Judge  did  not  and  was  not  able  to
         consider it under the Immigration Rules for the reason that at  the
         date of the application that is the subject  of  that  appeal,  the
         Appellant had not spent 7 years in the United  Kingdom"  (paragraph
         14).

 7. What the judge had in the instant  case  before  him,  however,  was  a
    psychiatric report.  This made it clear that:-

         "[~]'s health may deteriorate further if he is faced with having to
         return to India after spending his childhood and adolescence in the
         UK.  Adolescent years are the years where a young person forms  and
         develops the identity and interacts with their social  world.   [~]
         is rooted in this country after developing his identity as a  young
         man living in the United Kingdom.  He will be going into a  country
         with systems that he is unfamiliar  with  and  does  not  have  the
         language skills to negotiate his way through the system  ..."  (see
         paragraph 19 of the determination).

 8. The judge went on  to  recite  the  psychiatrist's  report  in  detail,
    observing that:-

         "[~] is vulnerable due to risk factors of family history of suicide
         and history of self-harm.  The  instability  and  change  of  being
         forced to move back to India could become another significant  risk
         factor which may lead to the deterioration  of  his  mental  health
         ..." (see paragraph 19).

    The judge went on to note that the conclusion of the  psychiatrist  was
    that:-

         "In my professional opinion [~]'s  mental  health  problems  are  a
         result of his environmental circumstances and once changes are made
         at immigration level, this will in turn impact  positively  on  his
         mental health by giving him control and options" (paragraph 19).

 9. Against this background, the judge had regard to whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the First Appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    The  judge  observed  that  there  were  no  compelling  public  policy
    considerations  to  do  with  the  immigration  history  of  the  First
    Appellant's parents.  He noted that:-

         "It is true that they do  not  have  immigration  status  and  have
         remained in the United Kingdom, and engaged in employment in breach
         of the Immigration Rules.  They  have,  however,  at  all  material
         times, sought to regularise their stay by making a serious of  bona
         fide immigration applications.  Furthermore, there is  a  limit  to
         which the immigration history of his parents can  be  visited  upon
         this Appellant" (paragraph 22).

10. The judge decided to allow the appeal because:-

         "The psychiatrist's report points to  the  3rd  Appellant's  mental
         frailty, and I think it is fair to say that the  continued  support
         of his parents, having regard to his symptoms would  be  absolutely
         essential for the improvement in his mental health" (paragraph 25).

11. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  allowing  the
    appeal because he failed to take as a starting point  the  findings  of
    the Tribunal decision made earlier in December 2017.  There had been no
    change in the circumstances of family members since that decision.  All
    that existed now was fresh evidence in the form of  a  new  psychiatric
    report in relation to  the  Third  Appellant,  the  son  of  the  First
    Appellant, but this did not suggest that his health  had  deteriorated,
    or that it would continue to deteriorate in the  event  of  removal  to
    India.  The new evidence also fell considerably short of  showing  that
    the Article 3 threshold would be met if the Third Appellant were to  be
    removed, given what had been set out in GS (India).  Finally, there was
    no "family life" appeal in this case because the entire family stood to
    be removed together.

13. On 19th December 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 4th February 2019, Mr Tufan,  appearing  on
    behalf of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  made  the  following
    submissions.  He stated that all three Appellants  in  this  case  were
    adults.   There  was  also  an  earlier  decision  by  Judge  Eldridge,
    promulgated on 2nd January 2018, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on
    3rd November 2017, which should have been the starting point  for  this
    hearing before Judge Devittie.

15. In that case, Judge Eldridge had  dismissed  any  suggestion  that  the
    Third Appellant did not speak the  Gujarati  language,  which  was  his
    native tongue, observing that:-

         "The Third Appellant lived in India, with his mother, until he  was
         almost 11, I do not accept  the  evidence  that  he  speaks  little
         Gujerati and find it is much more likely that he is fluent in  this
         language" (see paragraph 23).

16. But most importantly,  even  if  the  expert  report  provided  by  the
    clinical partners Wimpole Street clinic, under the hand of  Dr  Hasanen
    Al-Taiar, was to be taken at face value, there was no reason why any of
    the conditions that were being referred to by the expert  psychiatrist,
    were not treatable  in  India,  bearing  in  mind  the  high  threshold
    established by the European Court in  N  v  UK.   In  fact,  the  Third
    Appellant  did  not  appear  to  be  under  any  medication  as   such.
    Accordingly, the judge was wrong to have allowed this appeal.

17. For his part, Mr Hawkin submitted that the  reference  to  the  earlier
    decision of Judge Eldridge was a red-herring.  This is because  at  the
    time that the decision by Judge Eldridge was made, the First  Appellant
    had not been in this country for seven years, so as  to  bring  himself
    within the Immigration Rules, and that appeal before Judge Eldridge was
    entirely based upon freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence, so as to fall
    outside the Immigration Rules.

18. That being so, the essential question,  which  fell  to  be  considered
    under the  Immigration  Rules,  as  to  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    "reasonable" to expect the Third Appellant to return to India, had  not
    even been considered by Judge Eldridge, because it was not  a  relevant
    consideration to take into account.

19. This is why, the judge in this instant case, had made  it  quite  clear
    that:-

         "It is true that the first Immigration Judge  dismissed  the  Third
         Appellant's application, but it is not  contested  that  the  first
         Immigration Judge did not and was not able to consider it under the
         Immigration Rules" (paragraph 14)

    because the Third Appellant had not spent seven years in this  country.
    Mr Hawkin drew attention to how Mr Tufan had been critical  of  why  an
    appeal so quickly after the last application had  been  dismissed,  was
    being made now.

20. However, the reason was quite simply, as  Judge  Devittie  made  clear,
    that the application was made on 1st July 2016:-

         "and as at that date, the 3rd Appellant had spent 7  years  in  the
         United Kingdom, and was under the age of 18  at  the  date  of  the
         application.  It is the case that as at the date  of  decision,  on
         3rd April 2018, and indeed as at the date of this hearing, the  3rd
         Appellant had become an adult" (paragraph 15).

    None of this  was  contentious,  submitted  Mr  Hawkin.   What  was  in
    contention was the treatment given by the judge to the Third  Appellant
    in his decision.

21. The position of the Third Appellant, however, was that he had now lived
    in the UK for over seven years.  He had spent the most  formative  part
    of his seven year period, namely the latter four years of his time,  in
    this country, and this complied with  the  strictures  of  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 00197.  The judge properly took this into account.  It  was
    also consistent with the concerns raised by the  psychiatrist  when  he
    referred to the level of disruption that the Third Appellant would have
    to face.

22. Mr Hawkin went on to say that the reference to  N  v  UK  was  entirely
    irrelevant, because the Third Appellant's case was not the availability
    or otherwise of medical treatment in India.  His case was that  he  had
    lived in the UK for over seven years and the question then was  whether
    it would be "reasonable" to expect the Third Appellant to relocate, his
    having spent the crucial parts of his life in this country from the age
    of 11 to 19.  This was in fact a very strong case on the material facts
    in this case.  The existence of the psychiatrist's  report  was  simply
    "the icing on the cake" and was not essential for the  Third  Appellant
    to succeed in the manner that he did.

23. The particular question that had to be answered  with  specificity  was
    whether it would be "reasonable" to expect him to return to India after
    having spent  his  developmental  years  in  this  country.   What  the
    psychiatrist did do was to draw attention to:-

      a) the family history of bereavement;

      b) the suicide; and

      c)  the history of self-harm.

    The grounds by the Secretary of State challenging the decision of Judge
    Devittie were misconceived because they get off on a  completely  wrong
    footing.  Neither Devaseelan nor N v UK were actually  relevant.   What
    was in issue was the "reasonableness" of the Third Appellant having  to
    return to India after more than seven years in this country.   In  this
    regard, the judge had given sufficient reasons for his decision.

24. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that the Third Appellant was an adult  and
    that the Section 117B consideration in favour  of  immigration  control
    could not be overlooked, and that the latest Supreme Court decision  in
    KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53,  makes  it  clear  that  whereas   the
    immigration history of the parents is not  directly  relevant,  it  can
    become relevant when regard is had to what will happen to the  parents,
    because "the natural expectation" (see  paragraph  51  of  the  Supreme
    Court's decision) would be that the child would go with the parents  to
    the country of removal.  In this case, the Third Appellant was in  fact
    an adult.

No Error of Law

25. I am not satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

26. First, at the time of the previous decision by Judge Eldridge  on  23rd
    December 2017, the Third Appellant  did  not  qualify  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  He had not lived  continuously
    in the UK for seven years.   The  wording  of  the  Rule  is  that  the
    requirements set  down  by  the  law  must  be  met  "at  the  date  of
    application".  This being so, at the date  of  application,  the  Third
    Appellant was a minor under the age of 18 years.

27. Second, by the date of the hearing before  Judge  Devittie,  the  Third
    Appellant had lived continuously in the UK for over seven years and was
    under the age of 18 (see paragraph 15 of  the  judge's  determination).
    These were highly material considerations for  the  judge  hearing  the
    appeal.

28. Third, the judge did consider (from paragraphs 17 onwards) whether  the
    requirement of the Immigration Rules in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  could
    be met and that the Third Appellant could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    leave the UK.   The  judge  set  out  several  very  good  factors  (at
    paragraph 18) and then went on to refer to the psychiatrist's report of
    12th October 2018 (at paragraph 19).  He was  entitled  to  state  that
    this was a "significant consideration", bearing in  mind  the  report's
    conclusions (which  were  set  out  at  paragraphs  19  to  20  of  the
    determination and which the judge set out in full).

29. Fourth, it is of course, for the judge to ultimately  make  a  finding,
    and not for the expert, but in this case, the judge was impressed  with
    "the detailed reasons and the quality" of the report (see paragraph  21
    of the determination),  such  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the  best
    interests of the Third Appellant would lie in him remaining in  the  UK
    with the support of his parents, so as to enable  him  to  recover  and
    avoid the very real risk of serious deterioration in his mental health,
    and the judge was clear that the report had spoken of this in "emphatic
    and persuasive terms".

30. I note that the expert's report records that "Mr Sigfrid shows features
    of severe depressive episode F33.2.  This is triggered  by  his  social
    stressors such as and worries about his immigration status and the lack
    of progress in his life" (paragraph 8.1).   The  expert  also  observed
    that "It is likely that these conditions will worsen should Mr  Sigfrid
    return to India as this would expose  him  to  similar  stressors  ..."
    (paragraph 8.2).  The expert went on to look at  the  "risks"  in  this
    regard and observed that "current clinical risks to self  are  moderate
    (risk of impulsive suicide) and low to others" (paragraph 9.1).

31. Fifth, however, as against the medical assessment, the judge  also,  in
    looking at the "reasonableness" of relocation, had regard to  the  fact
    that the  principal  Appellant  in  this  case  had  always  sought  to
    regularise his stay, and the judge concluded that there was a limit  to
    which the  history  could  be  visited  on  the  Third  Appellant  (see
    paragraph 22).

32. Sixth, it was open to the judge  to  have  regard  to  the  expert  (at
    paragraph 23) that there would be "serious consequences for the  mental
    health of the [Third Appellant] were he compelled to leave the UK", and
    that it would therefore "not be reasonable" (paragraph  24)  to  expect
    him to leave.

33. Finally, the judge considered the appeals of  the  principal  Appellant
    and his wife (at paragraphs 25 to 26) under  Article  8  and  concluded
    that their continued support would be essential for the improvement  of
    the Third Appellant's mental health, and that removing him from the  UK
    and separating them from  their  son  would  have  potentially  serious
    consequences that "outweigh the imperatives  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration controls".

34. If the complaint against the decision of the judge is that he failed to
    provide  adequate  reasons,  this  is  manifestly  not  the  case  (see
    paragraphs 19 to 21).  The judge did consider whether, with  the  Third
    Appellant having lived in this country from the ages of 11  to  18,  it
    would be "reasonable" to expect him to leave this country, and  it  was
    entirely open to the judge to conclude as he did.

35. It is not the case, as the Secretary of State maintains that the  judge
    has to show that there were "compelling circumstances" as this was  not
    a requirement of the Rules.   Another  judge  may  well  have  taken  a
    different view, but  this  was  a  decision  that  was  open  to  Judge
    Devittie, and he has given ample reasons for  coming  to  the  decision
    that he did.  The decision will stand.

Notice of Decision

36. The decision of the judge does not contain a  material  error  of  law.
    The decision will stand.

37. No anonymity direction is made.

38. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019
