
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08690/2015
     HU/08698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd August 2017                       |On 14th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                agnes arthur
                             jeslord k o appiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Judge Barber of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 6th September 2016.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana born  26th  March  1969  and  18th
    November 1997 respectively.  They are mother and son  and  applied  for
    entry clearance to join Augustine  Appiah  (the  Sponsor)  who  is  the
    husband of the first Appellant and the father of the second  Appellant,
    in the UK.

 3. The applications were refused on 14th September 2015.

 4. With reference to the first Appellant the application  was  refused  as
    the Respondent was not satisfied that her relationship with the Sponsor
    is genuine and subsisting, and it was not accepted that  they  intended
    to live together permanently in the UK.  Reliance was therefore  placed
    upon E-ECP2.6 and 2.10 of Appendix FM in refusing entry clearance.  The
    application of the second Appellant was refused because the application
    of his mother had been refused.

 5. The Appellants appealed, and the FtT heard the appeal on 23rd  November
    2006.  The FtT heard evidence from the  Sponsor,  and  found  that  the
    first Appellant and Sponsor have a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 6. The FtT went on to consider Article 8 finding  that  refusal  of  entry
    clearance would deny the Appellants family life with the Sponsor in the
    UK.  The FtT then made a finding that it  would  be  possible  for  the
    family to enjoy family life in Ghana.  The FtT found that  the  appeals
    must be dismissed pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention
    on Human Rights, commenting in conclusion at paragraph 10 that if  "Mrs
    Arthur and any members of her family wish to come to the UK  they  will
    need to re-apply ensuring  that  they  meet  the  required  Immigration
    Rules".

 7. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    It was  contended  that  the  only  reason  given  for  refusing  entry
    clearance, was that it was not accepted that there was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  The FtT had found that there is a genuine and
    subsisting relationship.  It was  contended  that  as  the  Immigration
    Rules were satisfied, the FtT had not explained why the appeal must  be
    dismissed, and it was contended that the FtT  had  not  understood  the
    "current legal position in relation to Article 8".

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge O'Garro, and directions  were
    issued that there should be a hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error of law such  that
    it should be set aside.  Following the grant of  permission  to  appeal
    the Respondent did not lodge a response pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

 9. Mr Sharif relied upon the grounds submitted with  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was asked to find that the FtT had adopted the
    wrong approach when considering Article 8, and reliance was placed upon
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  It was
    submitted that the Appellants satisfied the Immigration Rules,  as  the
    only reason for refusal related to the genuineness of the relationship,
    which the FtT had found to be  genuine.   The  FtT  had  therefore  not
    explained adequately or at all why the appeal was dismissed.

10. Mrs Aboni submitted that there was no material error of law in the  FtT
    decision.  I was asked to find that the FtT had made findings  open  to
    it on the evidence, and properly considered proportionality.

11. I found an error of law in the  FtT  decision.   In  my  view  the  FtT
    adopted an incorrect  approach  when  considering  Article  8.   It  is
    appropriate to take into account the guidance in Mostafa in that in the
    case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance,  when  the
    appeals are based upon Article 8, the  ability  of  the  Appellants  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules is not the question to be  determined  by
    the  Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a  weighty,   though   not
    determinative factor when deciding whether refusal of  entry  clearance
    is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
    control.

12. I found it difficult to understand paragraph 10 of the FtT decision  in
    which it was suggested that there should be a further application  made
    by the Appellants, to ensure that they meet  the  required  Immigration
    Rules.  The FtT had in fact found that  the  Appellants  satisfied  the
    Immigration Rules.

13. Having found that the relevant Immigration Rules  were  satisfied,  the
    FtT  should  have  gone  on  to  consider  the  public   interest   and
    proportionality.  The FtT failed to explain  why  the  public  interest
    required the appeal to be dismissed.  The FtT comments in  paragraph  9
    that removal, having explained in paragraph  7  that  this  also  means
    refusal of  entry  clearance,  was  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    necessary in the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  country.
    No explanation was given as to why refusal of entry  clearance  was  in
    the interests of the economic wellbeing of the country.  There  was  no
    suggestion that adequate financial support was not in place.  There was
    no refusal on financial grounds.  The FtT found that  any  interference
    with family life was proportionate to a legitimate public end, but  did
    not explain that finding.

14. Having set aside the decision of the FtT, I indicated that it would  be
    appropriate for the decision to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  Both
    representatives agreed, and had no further  submissions  to  make,  and
    requested that the decision be re-made on the evidence before the FtT.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The finding by the FtT that the first Appellant and Sponsor  are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship has  not  been  challenged  and  is
    preserved.  I find that their intention is  to  live  permanently  with
    each other.

16. The Respondent  was  satisfied  that  all  other  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were satisfied in this case.

17. I follow the guidance in Mostafa, and  I  am  therefore  faced  with  a
    position whereby the  Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to  this  entry
    clearance application are satisfied.  This is therefore a  weighty  but
    not a determinative factor.  I find that Article  8  is  engaged.   The
    first Appellant and Sponsor have family life as spouses, and the second
    Appellant is their son.

18. The Respondent's decision is a refusal of a human rights claim.  I have
    to decide whether the decision is contrary to section 6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.  In considering Article 8 I adopt  the  balance  sheet
    approach recommended by Lord Thomas  at  paragraph  83  of  Hesham  Ali
    [2016] UKSC 60, and in so doing have regard to the guidance as  to  the
    functions of this Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

19. The burden of proof is on the Appellants to establish that Article 8 is
    engaged,   and   why   the   Respondent's   decision   will   interfere
    disproportionately in their family life.  It is for the  Respondent  to
    establish the public interest factors weighing against the  Appellants.
    The standard of proof is a balance of probabilities throughout.  Having
    found that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are  satisfied,  I
    move on to consider section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  I have regard to the considerations therein.  Section
    117B confirms that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest.

20. It is in the public interest that persons seeking to  enter  can  speak
    English.  The Respondent did not refuse entry clearance  on  the  basis
    that  the  Appellants  could  not  speak  English,  and  therefore  the
    Respondent must  have  been  satisfied  with  their  ability  to  speak
    English.

21. It is in the public interest that persons seeking to enter the  UK  are
    financially independent.  The Respondent accepted  that  the  financial
    requirements  set  out  in  Appendix  FM,  and  Appendix  FM-SE,   were
    satisfied.  It is therefore not the case that the Appellants  would  be
    seeking to rely upon public funds.

22. I do not find that sub-sections (4), (5), and (6) of section 117B,  are
    relevant to this appeal.

23. It is not suggested that the Sponsor or  the  Appellants  have  a  poor
    immigration history.  There is no suggestion of criminality.

24. I place weight upon the fact that the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules are satisfied.  I do not find that the public  interest  requires
    the Appellants to be refused entry  clearance.   I  therefore  conclude
    that refusal of entry clearance is disproportionate  under  Article  8,
    and therefore unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998.
    The appeals are allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeals of the Appellants are allowed.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal.  I see no need to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date: 4th August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are allowed and I have therefore considered whether  to  make  a
fee award.  I do not make a  fee  award.   The  appeals  have  been  allowed
because of evidence supplied to the Tribunal after the  decision  to  refuse
entry clearance.


Signed                              Date: 4th August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

