
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                 Shaida [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah of Messrs Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Pacey who in a determination promulgated on  25
    April 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi made on 3 July 2017  to  refuse  the
    appellant entry clearance to come to Britain as the  dependant  of  her
    mother, [TC].

2.   The appellant was born on 28 November 2001.  Her mother's evidence  was
    that her relationship with her first husband,  the  appellant's  father
    had broken down in 2003 and that they had been  divorced  in  2007  and
    since that time she has not had anything  to  do  with  him.   She  had
    remarried in 2008. She joined her present  husband  who  is  a  British
    national in Britain  in  2011.    Since  that  time  she  has  had  two
    children,  as  well  as  the  third  child  whom  she  lost  due  to  a
    miscarriage.

3.   When the appellant's mother came to Britain she left the appellant  and
    her son who also remains in Bangladesh with family members but she  was
    not able to make an application on behalf of the  appellant  until  she
    had indefinite leave to remain in 2013, but after that, having had  two
    children here and then a miscarriage in 2015 she had suffered from ill-
    health and therefore she had delayed in making the application for  the
    appellant.

4.    It  was  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  she  had  always   had   sole
    responsibility for her daughter, speaking to her both on the phone  and
    also visiting her in 2014.  She claimed that the appellant's father had
    never been involved in her upbringing.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the sponsor about the  difficulties  with
    those with whom she had left the  appellant,  but  having  referred  to
    relevant case law found in paragraphs  34  onwards  that  she  did  not
    accept that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant.

6.   In paragraph 36 she wrote:-

         "Although I have a number of money transfer receipts showing  money
         transferred to either [TM] or to [PC] there is nothing from  either
         of them to confirm their identity or that they received  the  money
         for the purpose of handing it over to the appellant or to Ms [K] or
         indeed to anyone else for the appellant's benefit".

7.   She also wrote:

         "38.     Her oral evidence as  to  the  identity  of  Mr  [TM]  was
             confused and evasive.  She first said he was a  neighbour  and
             then that he was her uncle, then that he was not related.  She
             appeared not to be able to  answer  a  simple  question  asked
             three times by Mr Holt.  This casts doubt on  her  credibility
             since it is reasonable to suppose that if Mr [TM] is  involved
             with  the  appellant  for  whom  she  claimed  to  have   sole
             responsibility  and  hence  to  determine  which  adults   are
             involved in her life as she claims, she  would  be  absolutely
             clear as to who he is".

8.   In the following paragraph she went on to state:

             "Doubt is cast on the sponsor's credibility by  the  fact  she
             did not appear to be certain whether she possessed a  copy  of
             her daughter's school report, saying she "might" have  one  at
             home.  This is her daughter for whom she claimed to have  sole
             responsibility.  If this is indeed so it is highly unlikely in
             my view that she would be  so  relaxed  about  her  daughter's
             education, for which she pays, as not to be sure  whether  she
             had her report."

9.   The judge went on to say that there was a lack  of  evidence  regarding
    the medical condition of Ms [K], who it was  claimed  could  no  longer
    look after the appellant and further that there was  no  evidence  that
    had been provided that either the appellant's uncle or his  wife  could
    not escort the appellant to school and back.

10.  The judge added that the separation of the appellant  from  her  mother
    was by the mother's choice and the refusal simply maintained the status
    quo.  She concluded that the appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proof and therefore dismissed the appeal.

11.   The  grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the  judge  had  ignored   the
    supplementary bundle of evidence which contained evidence  relating  to
    those who were looking after the appellant,  evidence  of  money  being
    sent for the appellant's benefit and evidence relating to other members
    of the family and their involvement with the appellant.  It  is  argued
    moreover  the  judge  had  not  properly   considered   the   sponsor's
    involvement with  the  appellant,  not  having  properly  assessed  the
    written statements of the sponsor and her husband.

12.  Permission was granted on the basis that the judge had  made  incorrect
    findings of fact that there was nothing from [TM]  or  [PC]  confirming
    they had received money for the purpose  of  handing  it  over  to  the
    appellant and having made an incorrect finding as to the maternal uncle
    of being actively involved with the appellant or having  responsibility
    for the appellant.

13.  At the hearing before me Mr Shah relied on  written  submissions  which
    took me to the relevant pages of the supplementary bundle of  documents
    which set out full details of both [TM] and [PC], as well as  a  letter
    from the high school attended by the  appellant  which  said  that  the
    mother was registered as the guardian, and evidence  that  the  sponsor
    had visited Bangladesh in 2014.

14.  Mr Shah asked me to find that on the basis of  the  evidence  that  was
    now before me I should not only set aside the decision of the judge in
    the First-tier Tribunal but remake the decision and allow the appeal.

15.  Mr Bramble accepted that there were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge, in that the judge had  not  considered  the
    evidence in the supplementary bundle  regarding  the  persons  involved
    with the upbringing of the appellant in  Bangladesh,  as  well  as  the
    school letter and the  detailed  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  her
    statement.  He asked, however, that when I set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge, I  should  remit  the  appeal  so  the  sponsor's
    evidence could be properly tested at a hearing.

16.  I consider that for the reasons identified by Mr Shah  and  Mr  Bramble
    there are material errors of law in the determination of the  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  She clearly ignored all the evidence  in  the
    second bundle.  It is possible that the supplementary  bundle  was  not
    before the judge although I note that it  is  stamped  as  having  been
    received on the date of hearing and according to the judge's notes  she
    was referred to  bundles.   Be  that  as  it  may,  however  there  was
    substantial evidence which was not considered by the judge.  That is  a
    material error of law and I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the
    judge.

17.  I have given consideration as to whether or not  I  should  remake  the
    decision without a further hearing.   I  have,  however,  come  to  the
    conclusion that the evidence of the sponsor should be tested by  cross-
    examination and  therefore  it  is  appropriate  that  this  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier for a further hearing.

Directions

18.  The appeal will proceed to a fresh hearing before a judge in the First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham.

19.  A Bengali interpreter, Sylheti dialect, is required. Time two hours.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 26 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
