
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/08341/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2018                   |      On 1 October 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                            mr Abdulwasiu Adeyemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  QC  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on  19  February  2018  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal on 4 March 2016 to refuse him leave to
    remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  26  February  1982.   He
    first entered the UK on 13 September 2001 on a valid visit  visa  valid
    until 13 December 2001.  He made a further application on  13  February
    2002 for leave to remain as a visitor.  That leave was granted until  1
    July 2002 notwithstanding that he had made  an  application  whilst  an
    illegal overstayer.

3.   The appellant must have left the UK at some time, because  on  2  March
    2004 he made an application in Lagos for leave to enter  the  UK  as  a
    visitor.  He was granted a visa valid  until  2  September  2004.   The
    judge says that by the appellant's  own  admission  he  has  been  here
    illegally since 3 September 2004.  On 15  April  2010  he  applied  for
    leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  human  rights.   The
    application was refused and it carried no right of appeal.  On 10  June
    2011 the appellant made a further application for leave to remain again
    based on human rights.  The application was rejected.  Further  similar
    applications made by the appellant were rejected.

4.   On  14  July  2015  the  appellant  failed  to  report  to  immigration
    officials as he was required to  do.   On  15  September  2015  he  was
    detained  pending  removal  to  Nigeria.   On  24  September  2015  the
    appellant submitted further representations which were rejected by  the
    respondent.  On 29 September 2015 he lodged an application for judicial
    review which was refused on 5 November 2015.

5.   On 19 November 2015 the appellant made a further application for  leave
    to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules.  On 20 November 2015
    he was granted bail and released from detention.

6.   The November 2015 application was determined on 4 March 2016  when  the
    appellant's application was refused.  It is from that refusal that  the
    appellant brought his appeal.

7.   Mr Pipi who appeared below on  behalf  of  the  appellant  stated  that
    evidence relating to the appellant's mental health was relevant to  his
    claim to have protected private life in the UK, whether under paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and/or Article 8 ECHR.

8.   The judge noted at paragraph 14 that the appellant attended the  appeal
    hearing but did not  give  evidence  notwithstanding  that  his  appeal
    bundle contained a witness statement from him, dated 5  February  2018.
    The witness statement contained  one  paragraph  which  said  that  his
    aunt's witness statement was accurate and he wanted to adopt it as  his
    own.

9.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant's aunt, Mrs Oyefesobi,  who
    adopted the content of her witness statement dated 5 February  2018  as
    her evidence-in-chief, with one correction being made in paragraph 7 so
    that the date "2011" was replaced by the date "2001".  The judge  noted
    that the thrust of her evidence was that  the  appellant  suffers  from
    mental  health  problems  and   that   he   was   currently   receiving
    psychotherapy treatment.  She said the appellant  had  lived  with  her
    since 2001 and she has supported him.  She claimed that he  has  nobody
    in Nigeria, with whom he could reside or have family contact.

10.  The appellant's aunt said that she is a  psychiatric  nurse,  currently
    working on a supply basis.  She said  she  provides  both  financially,
    morally and professionally for the appellant.   In  oral  evidence  she
    said that she is the appellant's cousin on his  maternal  side  of  the
    family.

11.  The appellant's aunt/cousin claimed that the appellant does nothing  in
    the UK  and  cannot  work.   When  cross-examined  she  said  that  the
    appellant is not registered with a general practitioner but did consult
    an undisclosed general  practitioner  in  connection  with  his  mental
    health about  one  month  ago.   She  claimed  that  the  appellant  is
    presently on medication prescribed  by  a  general  practitioner  being
    "hannopradol",  5mg,  once  daily.   The  judge  said  that  when   the
    cousin/aunt was asked whether the appellant was taking  any  medication
    she delayed answering and then gave her answer very hesitantly,  as  if
    she was considering what she should say in answer to the question.

12.  The next witness to give evidence was Mr Oboho, who  described  himself
    as a "Consultant Practitioner and Forensic Psychologist".  He  was  not
    aware of any pharmacological therapy provided to the appellant and  had
    not heard of "hannoprodol".

13.  The judge said that when the appellant's aunt/cousin was asked why  the
    appellant had failed to provide any general practitioner's records, she
    said that it was  because  he  was  not  presently  under  any  general
    practitioner.   She  went  on  to  say  that  the  appellant   received
    psychotherapy treatment from Mr Oboho but was  extremely  hesitant  and
    vague about the number of sessions of psychotherapy that the  appellant
    has undertaken, with what regularity he undertakes any such therapy and
    how much such sessions cost.  The judge said it was surprising that she
    should be unaware of the cost of such sessions given that  she  claimed
    that she was the one who provided the money to pay for them.

14.  Mr Oboho adopted his two reports, respectively dated 12  November  2015
    and 20 July 2017 as  his  evidence-in-chief.   He  said  the  appellant
    undertakes "talking therapy".  When he was questioned about the  regime
    of such therapy he  said  that  the  appellant  has  not  attended  any
    sessions over the last six months, but only  three  sessions  over  the
    last twelve months or thereabouts.  Mr  Oboho  said  the  sessions  are
    designed to examine the appellant's disposition and  discuss  with  him
    issues relating to it.  Mr Oboho went on to say that his reports do not
    deal with any issue relating to the appellant's mental capacity for the
    purposes of the Mental Capacity Act 2005.

15.  The thrust of Mr Oboho's report from November 2015  was  that,  at  the
    time,  the  appellant  was  experiencing  "psychological  difficulties"
    because of the threat of imminent deportation.  He was of  the  opinion
    that the ongoing threat to the appellant, of having to leave the United
    Kingdom, would cause him moderate/severe somatic  symptoms,  depression
    and  "possibly"  a  mild  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.   He   also
    described it as giving rise to a kind of separation anxiety due to  the
    appellant's attachment to the country in which he had chosen to  remain
    illegally since 2004.  He expressed  the  opinion  that  the  appellant
    risked becoming mentally ill if he could not remain attached to the  UK
    "due to his vulnerability".

16.  Mr Oboho also indicated that he  was  uncertain  about  the  extent  to
    which, if any, any kind of psychotherapy treatment would  be  available
    to the appellant in Nigeria.  His follow-up  report  of  20  July  2017
    stated that the appellant's condition remained much the  same,  but  it
    might be improved if he attended psychotherapy sessions which it seems,
    he has not done.

17.  The judge did not consider Mrs Oyefesobi to be  a  candid  or  reliable
    witness.  He said when she gave evidence she was very plainly concerned
    that she should say only things that might assist the  appellant.   She
    was  not  confidently  or  quickly  able  to  identify  what,  if  any,
    medication the appellant presently takes and identified  a  drug  which
    she claimed was called "hannoprodol" which the judge was satisfied  did
    not exist.  The judge said she even seemed  very  uncertain  about  the
    dose of any such medication, but finally alighted upon 5mg once  daily.
    The judge said Mrs Oyefesobi was less than candid when dealing with the
    extent  to  which,  if  any,  the  appellant  undertakes  psychotherapy
    sessions, quite plainly because she did not want to disclose  that  the
    appellant had not attended any sessions throughout the last  six  month
    period.

18.  The judge made findings of fact at paragraph  25.   He  held  that  the
    appellant does not suffer from any diagnosed  mental  health  disorder.
    The psychological problems that the appellant  might  have  experienced
    are directly related to his anxiety about being required to depart  the
    UK.  The judge said that was understandable given the lengths  that  he
    has gone to in an attempt to prevent that happening.  The  judge  found
    that although the appellant might possibly benefit  from  psychotherapy
    sessions, he has chosen  not  to  attend  any  during  the  immediately
    preceding six-month period and has chosen to attend only three sessions
    throughout the last twelve month period.  That demonstrates a  complete
    lack of commitment to any such therapy, and in his judgment, undermines
    the claim that the appellant suffers from any particular  psychological
    deficit which is unrelated to his anxiety about having to leave the UK.
     The appellant has chosen to remain illegally  in  this  country  since
    2004.  He has resided with his aunt/cousin who has  been  complicit  in
    his decision to remain illegally in this  country  and  has  aided  and
    abetted him therein.  The judge placed  no  weight  upon  the  one-line
    witness statement provided by the appellant.   He  placed  no  reliance
    upon the aunt/cousin's assertion that the appellant has no relatives in
    Nigeria.  Given the paucity of the evidence the judge made  no  further
    finding in connection therewith, suffice  to  say  that  the  appellant
    himself has not proved that he does not  have  any  family  network  in
    Nigeria.

19.  The judge then turned  to  consider  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge said he had to consider  whether  the  appellant  has
    established that it is more probable than not that there would be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into  life  in  Nigeria.   The
    judge declined to find that the appellant would  be  faced  with  "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration in Nigeria because there  was
    simply no evidence which would justify such a finding being made.   The
    judge said at 26 that the appellant has chosen to give no evidence  and
    his witness  statement  was  worthless.   His  aunt/cousin  was  not  a
    sufficiently candid, reliable or credible witness and therefore he  was
    not prepared to place any significant weight upon her claims about  the
    appellant's lack of family in Nigeria.  The judge held  that  the  mere
    fact that somebody has been absent from his native country for thirteen
    years does not, of itself, prove that he would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration upon return to that country.

20.  The judge held that  the  appellant  has  put  forward  no  special  or
    unusual circumstances which would  justify  a  consideration  of  human
    rights under Article 8, when he has failed under paragraph 276ADE.

21.  The judge said that if he was wrong in that regard, then  it  would  be
    appropriate for him to undertake an Article 8  assessment.   First,  he
    found that the appellant, being an adult,  has  developed  his  private
    life in this country, but  very  substantially  during  his  period  of
    illegal stay in this country.  Accordingly, as required by statute,  he
    afforded it very little significance.   Secondly,  he  found  that  the
    appellant's family life with his aunt/cousin was established to a  very
    modest extent, in that he accepted that he resided with her and  had  a
    degree of financial dependence upon her.  The appellant has been unable
    to work as he is here illegally, but there was no evidence  before  him
    to indicate that he would be unable successfully to  enter  the  labour
    market in Nigeria and provide for himself.  The judge made no  findings
    about accommodation, employment  or  other  facets  of  daily  life  in
    Nigeria for the appellant because  no  evidence  was  adduced  relevant
    thereto.

22.   The  judge  concluded  that  it   could   not   and   would   not   be
    disproportionate for the UK to require the appellant who has overstayed
    in the UK to depart.  The UK is  entitled  to  enforce  firm  and  fair
    immigration control and that must be particularly so when  directed  at
    those who choose to flout  and  abuse  the  immigration  laws  of  this
    country.  Given that  Mr  Oboho  attributes  much  of  the  appellant's
    anxiety to the prospect of having to leave the UK, then  once  that  is
    over and done with the appellant will be better able to settle  into  a
    pattern of life in Nigeria where the supposed course  of  any  supposed
    anxiety will no longer exist.

23.  Mr Pipi relied on  his  grounds  of  appeal  which  he  said  are  very
    detailed.  He said central to the appellant's case are the two  reports
    by Mr Oboho dated 12 November 2015 and  20  July  2017.   In  the  2017
    report Mr Oboho said that his diagnosis in 2015 remains relevant,  that
    is the appellant fits the classifications for personality disorder with
    dependent personality traits.  Mr Oboho  talks  about  the  effects  of
    removal to Nigeria of the appellant who has spent a significant part of
    his life in the United Kingdom.  In Mr Oboho's  opinion  the  appellant
    suffers with mental health problems of the types outlined at  paragraph
    4.2 (9 to 16).  These seem to be sufficiently severe to warrant  urgent
    attention.  It was pertinent to note that he  might  have  developed  a
    pattern of relating to others in a  retiring,  listless,  and  dejected
    manner.  Enlisting the aid of close friends and focusing on  short-term
    techniques might be useful in maximising  compliance  and  achieving  a
    measure of progress.  It is likely that Mr Adeyemi's difficulties could
    be managed with either brief or extended therapeutic methods.

24.  Mr Pipi said that at paragraph 30 the judge relied on  the  report  and
    yet at 25 appears not to accept it.  The judge should have  made  clear
    whether or not this report is accepted or not.  The report  would  have
    an impact on Mr Adeyemi's ability to reintegrate into life in  Nigeria.
    Mr Pipi questioned how the appellant was  required  to  reintegrate  in
    Nigeria when he has no family there.  He said the appellant has been in
    the UK for 17 years and has poor mental health.

25.  Mr Pipi  said  the  rest  of  the  grounds  deal  with  how  the  judge
    approached credibility and formed  the  dim  view  of  the  appellant's
    credibility because the judge took the  view  that  the  appellant  had
    chosen to give no evidence.  Mr Pipi said the appellant  did  not  give
    evidence deliberately.  It was  Mr  Oboho's  opinion  that,  given  his
    current medical condition, he would be unable  to  give  evidence.   Mr
    Pipi questioned what weight the judge gave to the fact that due to  the
    appellant's mental health he could not give oral evidence.

26.  Mr Pipi submitted that the judge rejected  the  aunt/cousin's  evidence
    because of her demeanour.  The judge said she was hesitant, and  vague.
    He said that was not a fair way to gauge credibility.

27.  Mr Jarvis submitted that Mr Oboho, the author of  the  medical  reports
    dated 2015  and  2017,  gave  oral  evidence  as  did  the  appellant's
    aunt/cousin.  The judge did not materially  err  in  finding  that  the
    evidence of the aunt was hesitant and difficult to comprehend.  He said
    the judge was not obliged to accept or reject the reports.  The judge's
    findings on the  medical  reports  at  25(ii)  and  paragraph  30  were
    nuanced.  The reports  said  the  appellant  was  anxious  about  being
    removed from the UK.  That was at the core of the medical reports.   Mr
    Jarvis said the judge had difficulties with the aunt/cousin's evidence.
     She is a psychiatric nurse and was not able to recall  the  medication
    the appellant was taking which the judge found  does  not  exist.   The
    aunt/cousin was  hesitant  in  explaining  what  kind  of  therapy  the
    appellant was having.  In her witness statement she  was  speaking  for
    the appellant for whom she says she has had direct care  for  seventeen
    years.  She was unable to say with any  immediacy  what  treatment  the
    appellant was having.  Mr Jarvis said the judge was doing his best with
    poor evidence.

28.  Mr Jarvis said  the  judge  made  perfectly  sound  findings  that  the
    appellant has not made out that he has no family in Nigeria.

29.  He said the challenge to the judge's finding at  29  that  he  afforded
    very little  significance  to  the  appellant's  private  life  is  not
    materially flawed because there is no legal difference  between  little
    significance or little weight.

30.  In reply Mr Pipi submitted that the judge was  not  entitled  to  reach
    his conclusion that he has  no  family  in  Nigeria  if  I  accept  his
    objections to the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the  cousin/aunt's
    evidence.

31.  Having  considered  all  the  evidence  and  submissions  made  by  the
    parties, I find that the judge did not err in law and give  my  reasons
    below.

32.  I note that Mr Oboho said in his 2017 report that the  appellant  would
    be unable to give  evidence  in  court  because  his  mental  condition
    identified in his report of 2015 had hardly changed.  In the  light  of
    this evidence, I  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant chose not to give evidence. I find that  this  error  is  not
    material.  The appellant had submitted a witness  statement  containing
    one paragraph in which he  adopted  his  aunt/cousin's  statement.   In
    addition to her witness statement, the aunt/cousin gave  oral  evidence
    on his behalf.  I find that the judge properly considered her evidence.
     I find that the judge's rejection of her evidence had  nothing  to  do
    with her demeanour. The judge did not materially err  in  finding  that
    her evidence was hesitant and vague  and  that  she  was  very  plainly
    concerned that she  should  say  only  things  that  might  assist  the
    appellant. In the light of this  finding  the  judge  did  not  err  in
    rejecting her evidence that the appellant has no family in Nigeria  and
    as a consequence would have difficulty  reintegrating  in  to  life  in
    Nigeria.

33.  I find that the judge was not obliged  to  accept  or  reject  the  two
    medical reports  by  Mr  Oboho.   I  do  not  however  find  that  this
    materially affected the judge's decision.  The judge  at  paragraph  22
    considered that the thrust of Mr Oboho's report from November 2015  was
    that  at  that  time  the  appellant  was  experiencing  "psychological
    difficulties" because of the threat of imminent deportation.  Mr  Oboho
    was of the opinion that the ongoing threat to the appellant  of  having
    to leave the United Kingdom, would cause  him  moderate/severe  somatic
    symptoms,  depression  and  possibly  a  mild   post-traumatic   stress
    disorder. In the light of this evidence, I find that the judge did  not
    err in concluding that  the  appellant's  psychological  problems  were
    directly related to his anxiety about being required to depart the  UK.



34.  Mr. Pipi submitted that in Mr. Oboho's opinion  the  appellant  suffers
    with mental health problems that seem  to  be  sufficiently  severe  to
    warrant urgent attention.  Yet, I find, as noted  by  the  judge,  that
    although  the  appellant  might  possibly  benefit  from  psychotherapy
    sessions he has  chosen  not  to  attend  any  during  the  immediately
    preceding six-month period and has chosen to  attend  only  three  such
    sessions throughout the  last  twelve-month  period.  He  is  not  even
    registered with a GP.  I find that the appellant has himself not  given
    serious attention to his claimed mental health problems. I  agree  with
    the  judge's  finding  that  this  demonstrates  a  complete  lack   of
    commitment to any such  therapy  and  undermines  the  claim  that  the
    appellant suffers from any particular psychological  deficit  which  is
    unrelated to his anxiety about having to leave the United Kingdom.

35.  I also note that Mr Oboho was not aware of any pharmacological  therapy
    provided to the appellant.  In the  light  of  the  evidence  that  was
    before the judge I find that the  judge  did  not  err  in  finding  at
    paragraph  30  that  given  that  Mr  Oboho  attributes  much  of   the
    appellant's anxiety to the prospect of having to  leave  the  UK,  that
    once that was over and done with the appellant would be better able  to
    settle into a pattern of life in his native country where the  supposed
    course of any supposed anxiety will no longer exist.

36.  I reject the argument in the grounds that the judge erred  in  that  he
    gave no reason why he concluded that the appellant has lived in the  UK
    for thirteen years.  Although the respondent alleged that the appellant
    made an application in Lagos on 2 March 2004,  she  failed  to  produce
    evidence of  this  upon  which  the  judge  could  have  rationally  or
    reasonably concluded that the appellant was in Lagos in 2004.   I  find
    that as the appellant did not give evidence, there was no evidence from
    him to deny or confirm the respondent's assertions about his entry into
    the United Kingdom.  In any event the fact is that  the  appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom for less than  twenty  years  and  therefore
    does not satisfy the residential requirement of the Immigration  Rules.



37.  The argument in the grounds that the judge applied a  completely  wrong
    consideration when he said that he afforded little significance to  the
    appellant's private life does not amount to a material  error  of  law.
    Whilst  the  statute,  namely  Section  117B(4)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, requires "little weight" to  be  given
    to private life established during unlawful stay, the judge's  approach
    to the proportionality balancing exercise is not flawed for  not  using
    the right words.  The fact is that since 2004 the  appellant  has  been
    staying in the UK illegally.

38.  In conclusion I find that the judge's  decision  does  not  disclose  a
    material error of law.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's
    appeal shall stand.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date:  25 September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

