
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08798/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 January 2018                         |On 01 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               mr Manjit Singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Iqbal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Naith, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born on 1 April 1977.   He
    appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant him leave to  remain
    on the basis of his family and private life here dated 13 March 2016.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal  was  dismissed
    by Judge Courtney (the judge) in a decision promulgated  on  18  August
    2017.

 3. The grounds claim the judge arguably erred in  her  assessment  of  the
    weight to be attached to a child living in the United Kingdom for seven
    years.  The grounds argued that both policy and case law dictates  that
    "significant weight" must be given to the fact that a child had resided
    here for more than seven  years.   There  is  no  sliding  scale.   The
    observation of the judge to the effect at [28]  that  people  who  come
    here on a temporary basis and are not British can be expected to leave,
    cannot be true of a child because the purpose underlying the seven year
    Rule is that such reasoning ought not to be adopted.  That  is  because
    the child cannot be blamed for the parents overstaying  illegally  such
    that  the  starting  point  is  that  the  child's  status  should   be
    legitimised unless there is good reason not  to  do  so.   The  grounds
    claim that the judge lost sight of that starting point.  Further,  that
    the maintenance of immigration control cannot be a "good reason" not to
    legitimise  the  child's  status  because  all   such   cases   involve
    applications from those with unsettled status.

 4. Further, the grounds claim the judge failed to give  consideration  and
    weight to the third appellant's total integration into UK society  such
    that it was incumbent upon her to identify what would be appropriate to
    disrupt such integration.  The compelling  reason  must  be  above  and
    beyond the fact that none of the appellants have lawful status here.

 5. At [29] the judge acknowledged that it  would  be  disruptive  for  the
    child to go to live in India.  The judge failed to  consider  or  apply
    the guidance in PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) and what the president had to say in that
    regard at [39]:

         "We remind ourselves that  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         reasonableness.  Other legal tests which have gained much  currency
         in this sphere during  recent  years  -  insurmountable  obstacles,
         exceptional  circumstances,  very  compelling  factors  -  have  no
         application in the exercise we are performing.  Self-evidently, the
         test  of  reasonableness  poses  a  less  exacting  and   demanding
         threshold than that posed by the other tests mentioned."

 6. Having found that moving to India will involve disruption,  in  failing
    to consider or apply the guidance, it was  not  properly  open  to  the
    judge to conclude that such moving would be  reasonable.   The  grounds
    claim the judge imposed an incorrect test as could be seen from [38] of
    PD.

 7. Given at [28] of her decision, the judge found that it would be in  the
    child's best interests to remain in the UK, it was not open to  her  to
    conclude that it would be reasonable for the child to leave.  The judge
    recognised at [44] that nine years' residence was a significant  factor
    and that she was a  qualifying  child.   The  error  was  exactly  that
    referred to by the president at [39] of  PD,  that  is,  insurmountable
    obstacles have no application in the test of reasonableness.

 8. Whilst the judge laid out the relevant law from  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705, she failed to apply it.

 9. Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  considered  the  application  and  refused  it.
    Tribunal Judge Doyle said that at [9] and [10]  of  her  decision,  the
    judge correctly directed herself  to  consider  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  She took correct  guidance  from
    case law at [10], [11] and [12].   Between  [13]  and  [21]  the  judge
    focused on the impact of the respondent's decision  on  the  qualifying
    child.  At [27] to [29] the judge reached well reasoned and sustainable
    conclusions in relation to the qualifying child.   At  [34]  the  judge
    considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and between [37] and [46] the  judge
    considered Article 8 outside the Rules.  Tribunal Judge  Doyle  was  of
    the view that the judge correctly directed herself in law.   Her  fact-
    finding exercise was beyond criticism and the grounds of appeal were no
    more than a disagreement with the facts as the judge found them to  be.



10. The application was repeated.  On  11  December  2017,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce gave permission to appeal as follows:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its  approach
         to whether it was 'reasonable' that the qualifying  child  in  this
         family be expected to leave the UK.   The  respondent  accepts,  in
         line with her published policy, that it would normally be  contrary
         to the best interests of qualifying  children  to  expect  them  to
         leave the UK.  The only task  remaining  of  the  Tribunal  was  to
         consider whether there were 'strong reasons' which outweighed  that
         policy: see MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705."

11. The respondent filed a Rule 24  response.   The  judge  identified  and
    assessed the best interests of the child and adopted a  "reasonableness
    test" in terms of return to India.  The judge was entitled  to  balance
    private and family life against countervailing public interest factors.

Submissions on Error of Law

12. Ms Iqbal relied upon the grounds.

13. Ms Iqbal submitted that the judge erred at [29] as the appropriate test
    was that of "reasonableness".  See [39] of PD and Others (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).  That  test
    was confirmed at [46] of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

14. Mr Naith relied upon the Rule 24 response.  The judge did  not  err  in
    the analysis of the appropriate test.  The judge gave detailed  reasons
    for the decision and did not err in her analysis or findings.

Conclusion on Error of Law

15. The judge correctly set out the framework against  which  her  analysis
    was carried out.  She identified the "reasonableness"  test  in  MA  at
    [35].  I do not accept Ms Iqbal's submission that there was an error at
    [29] of the decision.  All the judge was doing was to  acknowledge  the
    degree of hardship which the child might suffer.  The  judge  was  well
    aware of the need to identify the best interests of the child  and  set
    those against the reasonableness test and  the  public  interest.   The
    judge took into account that the child had lived here  for  nine  years
    and that there needed to be strong reasons for refusing leave in  terms
    of  the  respondent's  guidance  at  11.2.4.   See  decision  at  [35].
    Nevertheless, the judge was entitled to take into account  the  child's
    parents' immigration history.

16. Whilst a child's  best  interests  are  a  primary  consideration,  the
    private and family lives  of  parents  and  children  developed  during
    periods of precarious or unlawful residence carry little weight.   That
    is not to penalise the child in this appeal as Ms Iqbal  submitted  but
    merely to reflect s.117 of the 2002 Act.   See  Kaur  (children's  best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).

17. I do accept that the judge erred at [47] of the decision  in  referring
    to "compelling circumstances" but I do not find that  to  be  material.
    It is clear from a close reading of the decision overall that the judge
    always had in mind the best interests of the  child  and  the  test  of
    reasonableness, clearly setting the child's circumstances and those  of
    the parents against the Immigration Rules, legislation and case law.

18. In summary, I conclude that the decision does not  contain  a  material
    error of law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 25 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



