
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU084922015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 May 2017                                |On 7 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 DILDAR MIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shah, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Dildar Mia, was born on 1 January 1983 and claims to  be
    stateless; the  respondent  claims  that  he  is  a  citizen  of  Burma
    (Myanmar).  He claims to have entered the United Kingdom  in  2006  and
    claimed asylum in February 2013.  The  appellant  did  not  attend  for
    interview and absconded and so, on 5 April 2013, the respondent  deemed
    his application as withdrawn.  On 23 June 2015, the  appellant  applied
    for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  Sanzida
    Akhtar Choudhury (hereafter Ms Choudhury).  The respondent refused that
    application considering that the appellant had failed to prove that  he
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms  Choudhury.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which, in
    a decision promulgated on 26 September 2016, dismissed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In essence, there is one ground of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    addition to Article  8  ECHR,  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
    position in respect of paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM of HC  395.   At
    [67] he found that there will be no very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into Burma.  As  regards  Ms  Choudhury,  the
    judge found at [57] that she had been born in Bangladesh  although  she
    is now a British citizen.  Ms Choudhury has been living in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of thirteen years.  Curiously, the decision of the
    judge is silent as to whether or not it  would  be  reasonable  for  Ms
    Choudhury to leave the  United  Kingdom  to  live  in  Burma  with  the
    appellant.  Ms  Choudhury  and  the  appellant  do  not  have  children
    together.  The judge appears to suggest [69] that the  best  course  of
    action is for the appellant to return to Burma to make  an  application
    out of country for entry clearance as the partner of Ms Choudhury.   In
    any event, it is not the judge's failure to deal  with  Ms  Choudhury's
    position but is challenged in the grounds of appeal.  Rather, it is the
    alleged failure of the judge to reach the correct decision  as  regards
    the appellant's Rohingya ethnic and religious  origin.   The  appellant
    submits that the judge failed to recognise that he would  be  stateless
    if returned to Burma; in effect, not only would there be insurmountable
    obstacles to his reintegration in Burmese society, that  he  would,  in
    effect, suffer persecution and ill-treatment on account of his Rohingya
    origins.

 3. The main basis for this assertion is the Country Information Report  of
    the Secretary of State.  Mr Shah showed me the most recent copy  (which
    postdates Judge Turnock's decision) which states at 4.2.1 that:

         General elections took place in Burma  on  8  November  2015.   The
         elections were largely seen as fair although hundreds of  thousands
         of people were not able or eligible to vote including Rohingyas who
         are not recognised as citizens and those affected by ongoing ethnic
         conflicts in seven areas of the country.

 4. The judge did not have a copy of the Country Information Report  before
    him or, indeed, any evidence (as opposed to submissions)  dealing  with
    the appellant's Rohingya status.  I accept, however, that  the  earlier
    Country Information Report which would have been in  existence  at  the
    time of Judge Turnock's decision (although not before him)  would  have
    been likely to make reference to Rohingyas in the  same  terms  as  the
    passage of the most recent report which I have  quoted  above.   I  say
    that because the elections in Burma which are referred to took place in
    November 2015, that is [4] at Judge Turnock's decision.

 5. I have made a distinction above between submissions  and  evidence.   I
    should clarify by stating that the appellant's written statement refers
    to his Rohingya origins and the problems this  would  cause  if  he  is
    returned to Burma.  That statement is, of course,  evidence  but  there
    was no background material, expert report or other evidence relating to
    Rohingyas.  Nor was there any material in the public  domain,  such  as
    the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report.   In  addition  to   the
    appellant's statement, the Tribunal had before it  written  submissions
    in which the appellant's Rohingya origins are considered.

 6. Judge Turnock did not avoid  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  Rohingya
    status in his  decision.   He  appears  to  have  drawn  guidance  from
    paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules. The judge then went on at  [65]
    to say:

         The appellant must be able to discharge the obligation upon him  to
         have had a proper application for citizenship of the  country  with
         which  he  was  most  closely  connected.   In  effect  before  the
         appellant can say that he is stateless  or  a  citizen  of  another
         country altogether he must where circumstances required  have  made
         reasonable endeavour to show whether or not he is a citizen of  the
         country with which he is most closely connected.

         I do not consider the appellant has done enough to demonstrate that
         he has been arbitrarily deprived of Burmese (Myanmar) nationality.

 7. Mr Shah submits  that  that  was  not  enough.   He  submits  that  the
    respondent should  have  been  aware  that  her  own  country  material
    indicated that the appellant will be rendered or treated  as  stateless
    upon return to Burma.  The judge's decision that it will be  reasonable
    to expect the appellant to return and  there  will  be  no  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration was therefore perverse.

 8. I disagree with Mr Shah.  I do so for the following reasons.  First, Mr
    Shah himself admitted that the appellant had chosen not to proceed with
    his asylum claim but instead to make an application on the basis of his
    family life with Ms Chaudhury.  Mr Shah even stated that at the hearing
    before Judge Turnock the appellant's asylum claim had  been  very  much
    treated as a secondary issue to his family life  claim.   In  my  view,
    that may have been done in order to be able to bring an appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in the event that the Article 8 appeal did not  succeed.
    If the appellant wished to prove by evidence that he could  not  return
    to Burma, then he should have done so.  A bare  assertion  in  his  own
    written evidence  together  with  a  number  of  submissions  from  his
    representatives is not the same as discharging  the  burden  of  proof.
    Given that  the  appellant  did  not  actually  produce  any  objective
    material regarding his Rohingya origins, then he should not  have  been
    surprised that the judge found at [66] that the  appellant  had  simply
    not discharged the burden of proof upon him.  Secondly, the Country  of
    Origin Information Report was not before the judge and I  do  not  find
    there was any duty upon the  judge  before,  during  or  following  the
    hearing to make his own research even of materials which  might  be  in
    the public domain.  The appellant was professionally represented and it
    was for his representatives to lead the necessary evidence to prove the
    case.  It appears that, for whatever reason, they chose not to  do  so.
    I find that the judge has reached a conclusion which was  available  to
    him on the evidence adduced.  His analysis is detailed and thorough and
    he has supported his conclusions with cogent reasoning.  I do not  find
    that he has erred in law for the  reasons  stated  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal or at all.  It would have been helpful if the judge had dealt in
    greater detail with the position of Ms Choudhury (the judge found  that
    Ms Choudhury and  the  appellant  were  in  a  subsisting  relationship
    notwithstanding the respondent's doubt as to that  fact)  but,  on  the
    evidence before him, he found that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant, an overstayer with no obvious ability to speak English or to
    support himself financially to return  to  Burma  to  make  an  out  of
    country application for entry clearance.  It  also  seems  to  me  that
    there are  no  obvious  obstacles  to  prevent  Ms  Choudhury  and  the
    appellant returning together to live in Burma on the basis of the facts
    as found by Judge Turnock.  If Ms Choudhury  chooses  not  to  do  that
    because she has been living in the United Kingdom for a period of  time
    and is working here, that is a matter for her.   Her  decision  on  the
    matter does not render the couple travelling together to live in  Burma
    unreasonable.

 9. In the circumstances, I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 6 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 6 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


