
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08842/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 23 July 2021                           |On the 11 August 2021         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     R J
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                         the entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Kiai, Counsel, acting on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Verghis (hereinafter referred to  as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated  on  the  24  February  2020  ,  in  which  the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  application
         for entry clearance to settle in the UK  to  join  her  father  and
         sponsor was dismissed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order but having considered Rule
         14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I find  that
         it is appropriate to make such an order as the proceedings refer to
         a previous protection claim, and the appellant is a  minor.  Unless
         and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is
         granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
         indirectly identify her  or  her  family  members.  This  direction
         applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.  Failure  to
         comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 23 July 2021, by means of Microsoft teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face- to- face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via  video  as  did
         the sponsor and his brother so that they were able to hear and  see
         the proceedings being conducted. There  were  no  issues  regarding
         sound, and  no  problematic  technical  problems  were  encountered
         during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were  able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. The appellant is a national of Iran.  In an application made on  18
         December 2018 she applied for entry  clearance  by  way  of  family
         reunion to enter the UK and settle with her father and sponsor. Her
         father left Iran in 2015 and entered the United Kingdom. He claimed
         asylum and his claim was allowed and he was granted refugee status.



      5. On the 2 May 2019 the respondent refused the application. The Entry
         Clearance Officer (hereinafter referred to as the "ECO") considered
         the application under paragraph 352D but gave the following reasons
         for refusing the application:

         1) Having considered the documentary evidence the ECO accepted that
            the sponsor had named the appellant as his child in his SEF  but
            that the respondent must be satisfied that the appellant  formed
            part of the family unit with the sponsor prior to his  departure
            from Iran in 2015. Reference was made to the divorce certificate
            in 2010 and that the appellant's mother was awarded custody.  It
            was stated that the appellant's father left  Iran  in  2015  and
            that she had not seen him since. The  ECO  considered  that  the
            appellant appeared to have lived for a significant part  of  her
            life separately from the sponsor.  The ECO acknowledged that  an
            affidavit of consent from her mother gave permission for her  to
            join her father and also a  letter  from  legal  representatives
            stating that her mother had started a new life and that she  had
            been residing with her grandmother who had since died  but  that
            the documents did not demonstrate that they had been the  living
            arrangements .The ECO was therefore not satisfied that  she  was
            not leading  an  independent  life  from  the  sponsor  (  under
            paragraph 352D (iii).The ECO was also  not  satisfied  that  the
            appellant was part of the family unit of the sponsor at the time
            the sponsor left  Iran  (see paragraph 352D (iv)).
         2)  The  ECO  considered  whether  the   application   raised   any
            exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of entry  clearance
            outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules, but  the  ECO
            reached the conclusion that the appellant had  not  demonstrated
            that she was a member of the  sponsor's  pre-flight  family  and
            therefore the application was refused.


      6. Following the refusal of the application,  further  documents  were
         submitted with  the  appeal.  On  the  23  October  2019,  the  ECM
         considered the supporting documents submitted but, on  his  review,
         stated that he was satisfied that the original decision  to  refuse
         was correct and was not prepared  to  exercise  discretion  in  the
         appellant's favour.

      7. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         entry clearance came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  27
         January 2020.

      8. In a determination promulgated on the 24  February  2020  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rules in question and on Article 8 grounds.

      9. At paragraphs [21]-[35] the FtTJ set out his findings of  fact  and
         conclusions on the appeal. The FtTJ that paragraph 352D  (iii)  was
         satisfied and that the appellant was a minor and was not leading an
         independent life nor had she formed  any  part  of  an  independent
         family unit (at [27]). The issue centred upon paragraph  352D  (iv)
         and whether the appellant "as part of the family unit of the person
         granted asylum at the time that the person granted asylum left  the
         country of their habitual residence in order to seek asylum."

     10. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  evidence
         relating to  the  separation  and  divorce  of  the  adult  parties
         concerned and the study  from  the  Persia  educational  foundation
         published in 2017 which set out  aspects  of  the  Constitution  of
         Iran, which the judge accepted  "as presented, to be accurate"  (at
         [30]-[31]).  However  having  considered  the  evidence  from   the
         appellant's sponsor as to their circumstances  after  the  divorce,
         the judge found at [32] that the appellant had not  established  to
         the required standard that the appellant was part of the  sponsor's
         family unit and that the arrangements made between the parties  was
         more "malleable and certainly not set in stone" and found that they
         were more akin to a "shared care" notwithstanding the legal  effect
         of Article 1170. The judge found that  the  Article  1170  was  not
         determinative of the  situation  and  that  the  issue  of  whether
         paragraph 352D was engaged was "fact sensitive"  and  that  on  the
         available evidence the judge  found  that  there  was  "not  enough
         evidence to demonstrate to the required standard that the appellant
         was part of  the  sponsor's  family  unit  within  the  meaning  of
         paragraph 352D (iv) prior to his departure from Iran".

     11. At paragraph [35] when considering Article 8, the  FtTJ  considered
         that there was  no  direct  written  evidence  from  the  appellant
         herself nor from her mother and that there was  evidence  that  she
         continued to enjoy the time she spent with her extended  family  in
         Iran and her cousins, and the judge found that  she  had  known  no
         other life than that with her mother father and extended family  in
         Iran. Thus taking the evidence in the round, the judge reached  the
         conclusion  that  refusing   the   application   would   not   have
         "unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  appellant,  sponsor  or
         other family members" and that the decision was  proportionate.  He
         therefore dismissed the appeal.

     12. Permission to appeal was issued on four grounds and  permission  to
         appeal was granted by FtTJ Bristow on 29 April 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     13. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge
         Sheridan) issued directions on 1 July 2020 that he had reached  the
         provisional view that it would  be  appropriate  to  determine  the
         issue of whether there was an error of law and if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside without  a  hearing.  Directions  were
         given that the party who sought permission  to  appeal  may  submit
         further submissions in support of the assertion of an error of  law
         and on the question of whether the FtTJ's decision  should  be  set
         aside if error of law is to be found, to be filed and served on all
         of the parties. Directions were given for the other party  to  file
         and  serve  submissions  in  response.  At  paragraph  3   of   the
         directions, it was set out that if  any  party  considered  that  a
         hearing was necessary to consider the questions set out, they  were
         required to submit reasons for that view within the  timetable  set
         out by UTJ Sheridan (within 21 days  of  the  decision  being  sent
         out).

     14. On th 5 November 2020, the respondent filed a Rule 24 response.  No
         reply was received on behalf of the appellant.

     15. Further directions were sent to the parties on 15 April 2021.

     16. On behalf of the appellant a document was filed  entitled  "written
         submissions" on the 15 July  2021  and  it  is  accepted  that  the
         directions issued on the 1 July 2020 had  not  been  complied  with
         (see paragraph 3).

     17. The hearing was therefore listed as  a  remote  hearing  with  both
         advocates providing their oral submissions. I am grateful  to  both
         advocates for their submissions.

     18. The relevant Rule for this appeal is set out  at  part  11  of  the
         Rules  where  the  Secretary  of  State  has  made  provision   for
         close family members to seek family  reunification  with  persons
         recognised as refugees in the United Kingdom.

     19. Paragraph 352D states:


         352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
         parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:
         (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
         granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and
         (ii) is under the age of 18; and
         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and
         (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at
         the time that the person granted asylum left the country of their
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and
         (v) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by virtue
         of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F of the
         Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their own right;
         and
         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity.

     20. I therefore now turn to the grounds. Mr Diwnycz on  behalf  of  the
         respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response   where   certain
         concessions were made as to Grounds 3 and 4. As to ground 3, it was
         submitted on behalf of the appellant that the FtTJ erred in law  in
         finding that the appellant and the sponsor were  not  part  of  the
         same family unit by reference to the  decision  at  paragraph  [32]
         where it was stated that arrangements were  more  akin  to  "shared
         care". The grounds assert that it was unclear why this  arrangement
         would mean that they were not part of the same family unit.

     21. The respondent conceded that in light of  that  finding  the  judge
         erred in law failing to consider the decision of BM  and  AL  (352D
         (iv): meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007]  UKIAT  00  55  and
         that the question that the judge needed to address, and answer  was
         whether the appellant should properly be separated from the "family
         unit" that remained in the country of origin. On the basis  of  the
         suggestion of "shared care" the respondent considered the remaining
         family unit would be the maternal unit and that the fact  that  her
         mother may have consented to the appellant joining  her  father  in
         the UK was no answer in light of the guidance given in BM  and  AL.
         Thus it was submitted that the judge had needed to  make  a  clear,
         reasoned and unambiguous finding  as  to  what  was  the  "primary"
         family unit if more than one existed as this may  then  inform  the
         merits of separation  from  a  "secondary"  family  unit  which  is
         relevant to the article 8 proportionality assessment.

     22. As to ground 4, the appellant  submitted  that  there  had  been  a
         failure to provide reasons/failure to  consider  material  evidence
         when considering Article 8 and on the basis that the appellant  was
         a minor with no home in Iran and  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
         engage with the factual account as to  her  circumstances  in  Iran
         relating to her family members and their inability to care for  her
         as set out in the statement  of  the  sponsor  and  the  supporting
         evidence set out in 2 witness statements. The judge also failed  to
         consider the impact on the sponsor of separation and his  inability
         to return to Iran to care for her as an accepted refugee.

     23. The respondent also concedes that there  is  a  material  error  in
         respect of ground 4 on the basis that as it is accepted  on  behalf
         of the respondent that there was an error in relation to ground  3,
         and that it would have  material relevance to  the  proportionality
         assessment under Article 8.

     24. In respect of ground 1, it is submitted on behalf of the  appellant
         that there was an error of fact in the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  at
         paragraph [32] which led to unfairness. Ground 2 is  a  failure  to
         take into  account  material  evidence  or  a  failure  to  provide
         reasons. This is based on the failure of the FtTJ  to  consider  or
         attach any weight to supporting evidence that had been provided  at
         the hearing as set out at paragraph 7 - 8 of the grounds.

     25. In the written response the respondent did not have access  to  the
         written statements and therefore could not reach any view on  those
         earlier grounds but stated that it could be addressed at a  further
         hearing.

     26. In respect of Grounds 1 and 2 ( which related to mistake  of  fact)
         and failure to take account of material evidence)  and  having  had
         the opportunity to read the written submissions of Ms  Kiai  it  is
         now also accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  those  grounds
         were made out and that the decision should be set aside.

     27. Having considered the grounds and having done so alongside the oral
         and written submissions made by the advocates and the  decision  of
         the FtTJ I am satisfied that the concession is properly  made   and
         that the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on  a
         point of law and that the decision should be set aside.

     28.  Given the nature of the concessions made it is only  necessary  to
         set out in brief terms why  I  am  in  agreement  with  the  course
         adopted by both advocates' .

     29. The grounds seek to challenge  the  FtTJ's  conclusion  reached  on
         paragraph 352D (iv)). At paragraph [31-34] the judge then  set  out
         his reasons as to why he was not satisfied that the  appellant  was
         part of the pre-flight family unit. Whilst the  respondent  in  the
         rule 24 response conceded an error based on ground 3 and as set out
         above, the respondent had based  that  concession  on  the  factual
         finding that the judge had suggested a  "shared  care"  arrangement
         and not on the factual basis that the appellant had advanced in his
         case. That is because the respondent had not seen at  the  time  of
         the response the statements that related to grounds  1  and  2.  Mr
         Diwnycz accepts now that ground 1 is made out and that there was  a
         mistake of fact made at [32] which formed the basis of the eventual
         assessment under paragraph 352D  (iv)  and  therefore  the  factual
         basis  as  to  the  arrangements  after  the  appellant's  mother's
         engagement and remarriage was incorrectly considered.

     30. As to ground 2, it is also conceded that the judge failed  to  take
         into account material evidence which related to the evidence of the
         sponsor's brother who attended the hearing and gave oral  evidence.
         As the grounds set out the FtTJ at paragraph  10  stated  that  the
         appellant's case was articulated primarily through the sponsor  but
         there was other evidence from the sponsor's brother  and  also  the
         sponsor's  partner,  which  was  also  relevant  to   the   factual
         assessment.

     31. In light of the errors set out in grounds 1 and 2, it also  follows
         that ground 3 and 4 are made out. There  is  no  dispute  that  any
         assessment of paragraph 352D  (iv)  is  a  factual  assessment  and
         therefore the failure to take into account  material  evidence  and
         any mistake of fact made would necessarily have the impact that the
         factual assessment that was made was made on  an  incorrect  basis.
         Whilst this is a human  rights  claim,  the  ability  to  meet  the
         relevant Immigration Rules forms part of the Article 8  assessment.
         For the same reasons, it has  also  been  accepted  on  behalf  the
         respondent that the Article 8 assessment was in error by proceeding
         on the wrong factual premise and as ground 4 sets out, the  failure
         to consider the evidence relating  to  the  circumstances  for  the
         appellant in Iran and also the impact on other family members given
         the sponsor's status in the UK is an error that is material.

     32. In the light of those issues taken together and in the light of the
         FtTJ's misunderstanding of the evidence I am  satisfied  that  this
         may have impacted on his overall conclusions both under  the  rules
         and when considering Article 8 of the ECHR.

     33. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set aside.

     34. As to the remaking of the decision, Ms Kiai relied upon the written
         submissions at paragraph 25 and 36. At paragraph 25,  she  set  out
         that the Upper Tribunal should preserve the finding at paragraph 27
         and remit the appeal to the FtT for further fresh findings of  fact
         to be made. In her oral submissions she sought to  amend  paragraph
         25 to include paragraphs 22 - 25 of the FtTJ's  decision.  Ms  Kiai
         then gave her reasons as to why  she  sought  the  preservation  of
         those particular paragraphs.

     35. Having heard her submissions on this issue and  noting  that  there
         was no dispute between the advocates as to what findings should  be
         preserved I have  reached  the  following  conclusion  as  to  what
         paragraphs/findings should be preserved.

     36. They are as follows:

         1) paragraph 22; that there is no dispute  as  to  the  immigration
            history of the sponsor and that a tribunal on 24  November  2015
            found him to be a credible witness.

         2) Paragraph 23; there is no dispute that the sponsor and appellant
            are related is claimed and are father and daughter and that they
            have a close and loving parent/child relationship.

         3) Paragraph 24; whilst the respondent in the decision  letter  did
            not accept that they had met  each  other  since  the  sponsor's
            departure, it was accepted at the hearing from the evidence that
            the sponsor and appellant had met  in  Turkey  twice  since  the
            sponsor left Iran and on a third occasion the sponsor  travelled
            to Turkey, but the appellant could not travel  unaccompanied  to
            meet her father.

         4) Paragraph 25; it was accepted that the paternal grandparents had
            died.

         5) Paragraph 27; there was no dispute that paragraph 352D (iii) was
            met.

     37. Ms Kiai drew my  attention  to  paragraphs  30-31  and  the  FtTJ's
         acceptance of the study  from  the  Persia  educational  foundation
         published in 2017 which set out aspects of the Constitution of Iran
         with commentary and in particular Articles 1169 and 1170 as to  the
         Constitution relating to custody after divorce. Ms Kiai sought  for
         the finding to be preserved. Mr Diwnycz stated that there had  been
         no issue before  the  FtT  that  the  reference  made  to  those  2
         particular  Articles  of  the  Constitution  was   inaccurate   and
         therefore he accepted what the judge had set out at [30]  that  the
         paper was helpful to the extent that it set out the Articles of the
         Constitution but that the tribunal made no further comments on  the
         recommendations within the paper. As it appears there had  been  no
         challenge to those 2 Articles before the FtT  as  confirmed  by  Mr
         Diwnycz, that can be preserved to the limited  extent  accepted  by
         the FtT as set out at paragraph [30]. If reliance is placed  beyond
         that, it will be matter for the appellant's  legal  representatives
         as to whether expert evidence is required as to  the  operation  of
         Iranian law.

     38. Ms Kiai in her oral submissions stated that the  appeal  should  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in light of the  unfairness  to
         the appellant (grounds 1 and 2) and that the necessity for  factual
         findings to be made on all of the evidence. She also submitted that
         by not remitting the decision it would take from  the  appellant  a
         subsequent right of appeal should it be necessary.

     39.  I have therefore considered whether it should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     40. I have considered the further hearing of the appeal in the light of
         the practice statement recited above and by reference to the
         history of the appeal. The decision is a case management decision,
         and the Upper Tribunal has a broad discretion to remit or remake a
         decision which has been found to involve an error of law (see S12
         of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). In applying that
         discretion, I have reached the conclusion that as a result of the
         nature of the errors of law set out above, and as Ms Kiai has
         submitted, it will be necessary for the sponsor  and two other
         witnesses to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues,
         and therefore further fact-finding will be necessary and in the
         light of the relevant documentary evidence which had not been
         considered by the FtTJ. I accept the submissions made by Ms Kiai
         for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
         hearing. I find that the appeal falls into both categories (a) and
         (b) as set out in the practice statement above as Ms Kiai has
         submitted.

     41. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point of law and
         the decision shall be set aside and will be remitted for a fresh
         hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal with the preserved findings
         as set out above.

Notice of Decision.


     42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision  of  the  FtT
         shall be set aside. The decision shall be remitted  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a hearing with the preserved findings as set  out
         above.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   26/7/2021

