
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/08756/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2020                  |On 17 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [K]

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Knightsbridge Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of birth given  as
    11.4.81, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated   4.12.19   (Judge
    Lawrence), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State, dated 5.4.19, to refuse his application made on
    19.6.18 for entry clearance to the UK, following  his  deportation  and
    subsequent  successful  appeal  on  20.4.17  against  the  respondent's
    refusal to revoke the deportation order.

 2. The relevant background can be summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
    first came to the UK on a spouse visa in 2004,  which  expired  without
    renewal in September 2006.  Despite  overstaying,  on  3.11.09  he  was
    granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  the  UK.   His   subsequent
    application for naturalisation was refused on the  basis  that  he  had
    previously overstayed his spouse visa.

 3. He was subsequently  convicted  of  two  criminal  offences,  involving
    dangerous driving and witness intimidation, and sentenced to terms of 8
    months' and 6 months' imprisonment. Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered that the terms were imposed to run  concurrently,  the
    appellant's  witness  statement  states  that  they  were   consecutive
    sentences, which is consistent with the  information  provided  in  his
    application for entry clearance. In any event, in  consequence  of  his
    criminal offending behaviour, the appellant was made the subject  of  a
    deportation order and removed from  the  UK  on  15.6.16.  His  British
    citizen spouse and five children, born between 2005 and 2016,  remained
    in the UK.

 4. He sought return to the UK and revocation of the deportation order. The
    First-tier Tribunal decision of 20.4.17 allowed his  subsequent  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to revoke the  deportation  order,  on
    the basis that the  decision  disproportionately  interfered  with  the
    article 8 ECHR rights of the appellant and his family remaining in  the
    UK. In consequence of the Tribunal's decision, on 9.5.18 the respondent
    revoked the deportation order. Although Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  the
    appellant should never have been removed from the UK,  the  appeal  was
    against the refusal to revoke, not the deportation itself.

 5. Following his application  for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK  made  on
    19.6.18, the  appellant's  spouse  made  a  statement  withdrawing  her
    support for his application. In the circumstances, his application  was
    refused on the basis that there had been  a  significant  and  material
    change in circumstances since  his  successful  appeal  and  subsequent
    revocation of the deportation order. The respondent was  not  satisfied
    that he had any family life engaging article 8 ECHR and considered that
    there   was   insufficient   evidence   to    render    the    decision
    disproportionate.

 6. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considering  the  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance accepted that the appellant  is  the
    biological father of the five children referred to but, ultimately, was
    not satisfied that there was any extant family  life  between  him  and
    either or both his spouse and the children, concluding that  there  had
    been a significant and  material  change  in  circumstances  since  his
    appeal had been allowed in 2017. No evidence had been  adduced  of  any
    contact with the children since his departure from the UK, or  that  he
    had taken any  active  role  in  their  upbringing.  Indeed,  the  oral
    evidence  was  to  the  contrary.  In  the  premises,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed. The judge was satisfied that the appellant did not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that there was no evidence of
    any compelling circumstances sufficient, exceptionally, to  render  the
    respondent's decision unduly harsh.

Basis of the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 7. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge considered that the merit in the grounds is that at [13]
    of the impugned decision the judge proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had not provided  a  witness  statement  in  support  of  his
    appeal, when such a statement, dated 8.11.19, appears  at  1.3  of  his
    bundle, prepared for the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing.  This  is
    curious, as it is  recorded  in  the  decision  that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer highlighted the absence of such a  statement  as  an
    important issue when considering the issue of family life  between  the
    appellant and his British  children.  Despite  those  submissions,  the
    appellant's representative, it does not appear that Mr Ahmed, who  also
    represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal, did  not  attempt
    to correct the apparent misunderstanding.

 8. In granting permission, it  was  considered  arguable  that  there  was
    insufficient reasoning to explain  rejection  of  the  appellant's  own
    evidence (solely contained in his witness statement). Nevertheless,  it
    was noted by the judge granting permission that ultimately  this  error
    may  not  assist  the  appellant,  given   the   evident   changes   in
    circumstances in  relation  to  family  life,  including  the  apparent
    breakdown of the relationship between the appellant and his  wife,  and
    the absence of any evidence of contact between the  appellant  and  his
    children in the UK. In the view of the judge granting  permission,  the
    conclusion that the appellant does  not  enjoy  family  life  with  his
    spouse is unassailable. In relation to the claim of family life between
    the appellant and the children, the grant of permission considered that
    the  grounds  failed  to  particularise  how,  even  with  his  witness
    statement, the outcome could have  been  any  different,  or  that  the
    judge's conclusion runs contrary to any evidence.  However,  the  judge
    granting permission did not have access to the  witness  statement  and
    permission was therefore granted, perhaps as a precaution.

 9. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received both Mr Ahmed's skeleton argument,  dated  12.11.20,  and  the
    Presenting Officer's Minute from the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing
    on 12.11.19.

The Appellant's Witness Statement

10. Shortly prior to the First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing,  by  letter
    dated 8.11.19, the appellant's representatives sought an adjournment of
    the remote error of law hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal,  so  that  the
    appellant "should have an opportunity  to  present  himself  via  video
    link. This appeal is an extremely  sensitive  matter  relating  to  his
    children and it is important that the appellant is allowed  to  present
    himself." The letter also asserts that the appellant should  have  been
    allowed entry on the basis of his allowed appeal.

11. The adjournment application was refused by  the  Tribunal  Casework  on
    11.11.19, on the basis that it had been made at a very late  stage  and
    without any explanation as to why it could not have been  made  sooner.
    It was noted that whether a party should be permitted to give  evidence
    via electronic means is a judicial one and  the  application  could  be
    renewed to be dealt by the judge with as a preliminary  matter  at  the
    pending appeal hearing. In the event, the application was not  renewed,
    as Mr Ahmed has conceded.

12. The Presenting Officer's Minute also states that prior  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the appellant's representative sought  an
    adjournment for the appellant to provide a statement, and that this was
    refused and not renewed at the hearing, with the appeal proceeding with
    the oral evidence of  the  appellant's  brother  and  a  friend.  After
    hearing Mr Ahmed's submissions, I agree that the Minute is mistaken  in
    suggesting that the  application  was  to  enable  a  statement  to  be
    obtained from the appellant. The appellant's bundle  was  served  under
    cover of  letter  dated  6.11.19,  received  by  the  Tribunal  on  the
    afternoon of 11.1.19, the day before the hearing, and was evidently put
    before the First-tier Tribunal. At  [8]  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    refers to having taken into account, inter alia, the evidence contained
    in the appellant's bundle. Crucial to the primary ground of appeal, the
    bundle contains at [1-3] the witness statement of the appellant,  dated
    8.11.19.

13. I am satisfied and Mr Whitwell accepts that the  judge  overlooked  the
    appellant's witness statement. At [15] of the decision, the judge noted
    that the appeal was entirely predicated  on  there  being  family  life
    between the appellant and his children in the UK, stating, "This  is  a
    significant issue and accordingly there ought  to  have  been  evidence
    from the appellant in the form of a witness statement, at least." Later
    in the same paragraph, the judge observed, "The appellant did not  seek
    an adjournment to obtain  and  submit  a  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant." Evidently, no  adjournment  was  necessary,  as  a  witness
    statement was already in the bundle. It is clear that these  statements
    were made in error of fact.

14. However, more significant than the existence of a witness statement  by
    the appellant, was the extent, if any, of any  evidence  as  to  family
    life with between the appellant and his spouse and/or  children;  which
    evidence could have been addressed in a witness statement.  At [13]  of
    the decision, the judge stated,  "The  appellant  has  not  provided  a
    witness statement in (support) of his own  appeal."  According  to  the
    respondent's Minute, at  the  conclusion  of  the  appeal  hearing  the
    Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  provided  "no
    further evidence with his application regarding his  relationship  with
    his children." This is consistent with what the judge recorded at  [14]
    of the decision: "Ms Arif (the presenting officer) highlighted this  as
    an important issue in considering the issue of  'family  life'  between
    the appellant and his British children." In summary, there was said  to
    be no up to date information such as contact between the appellant  and
    his children or what input he has had in making important decisions  in
    the lives of his  children.  Strictly  speaking,  that  appears  to  be
    accurate even when  considered  against  the  limited  content  of  the
    appellant's witness statement.

15. In that witness statement the appellant asserts that he has always  had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  children.  He
    also stated that he had heard from unnamed other  family  members  that
    his wife has struggled to cope with caring for the  five  children  and
    asked other family members for support. His  statement  suggested  that
    his wife's parents are upset with him  and  have  pressed  her  to  not
    support his application for  entry  clearance.  Although  he  does  not
    assert any direct contact with his wife,  his  statement  asserts  that
    unnamed family members have told him that she will reconcile  with  him
    once he returns to the UK. This was also asserted by  one  of  the  two
    witnesses called on his behalf.

16. In his statement, the appellant maintains that he  has  always  been  a
    loving father to his children and used  to  share  with  his  wife  the
    responsibility of ensuring that his son (U) who has a  serious  medical
    condition, attended hospital appointments. He  complains  that  he  has
    suffered by losing time being with his children and that they need  his
    physical presence. He affirms that he wishes to return  to  the  UK  to
    ensure the welfare and support of his children, suggesting that  it  is
    not in the public interest to leave five British children without their
    father.

17. It is evident that the witness statement is silent as to the  issue  of
    contact or attempted between the  appellant  and  his  wife,  and  more
    particularly with his children. There  certainly  was  no  up  to  date
    information about family life, such as contact  between  the  appellant
    and his children,  or  what  input  he  has  had  in  making  important
    decisions in the lives of his children.  Whilst  in  his  statement  he
    referred to his past  role  as  father  and  he  expressed  his  future
    intentions and desires in relation to his wife and children, it in fact
    contains no evidence of any engagement with the children or involvement
    in their upbringing, or even participating in any way in the  decision-
    making relating to their lives since he was removed  from  the  UK.  It
    would be reasonable to assume that if any  such  evidence  existed,  it
    would have been adduced. I also note that he does not assert  that  his
    wife has prevented or obstructed contact  with  the  children  or  that
    anything other than his physical absence from the UK prevents him  from
    making contact with the children. For example, there is no reference to
    any attempt to telephone or video call the children, or  even  that  he
    has written to them.

18. The appellant's wife's brief statement withdrawing her sponsorship  for
    his entry clearance application, "due  to  personal  circumstances"  is
    dated 21.3.19 and there is no further explanation. I am satisfied  that
    the judge  was  entitled  to  take  that  as  an  indication  that  the
    relationship between the  appellant  and  his  wife  had  broken  down.
    According to what is recorded at [11] and [12]  of  the  decision,  the
    breakdown was confirmed by Mr Ahmed directly, stating that he  accepted
    that there was no family life between the appellant and his spouse, and
    that "the appellant's marriage to (his wife) is over." In  the  grounds
    and at  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  no  such
    concession was made by him. However, I pointed out that as  counsel  he
    should be aware  that  I  cannot  take  evidence  from  him  whilst  he
    continues to represent the appellant. As Mr Whitwell pointed  out,  the
    clear case law of Ortega (remittal; bias; parental relationship) [2018]
    UKUT 00298 (IAC) confirms that there must be a "bright  luminous  line"
    between witness and advocate. "An advocate must never assume  the  role
    of witness." The procedure for such evidence to be given is clearly set
    out. Mr Ahmed made no application to  adjourn  in  order  to  become  a
    witness.

19. It follows that for the purposes of this appeal, I have to  proceed  on
    the basis that the concession was clearly made that there was no extant
    family life between the appellant and  his  wife.  Notwithstanding  the
    concession, at the First-tier Tribunal Mr Ahmed maintained that refusal
    of entry clearance was a disproportionate "breach" of  the  appellant's
    right to enjoy family life with his children. At [12]  it  is  recorded
    that Mr Ahmed "accepts that the appellant's marriage to (his  wife)  is
    over," but went on to submit that until there is a decree  of  divorce,
    they continue to enjoy 'family  life'  with  each  other.  For  obvious
    reasons, the judge rejected that submission. I am  satisfied  that  the
    concession recorded renders much of Mr Ahmed's further  submissions  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and to me on this  point  untenable,  including
    that pressure had been brought  to  bear  on  the  wife  to  make  that
    statement and that family  life  was  continuing.  Notwithstanding,  Mr
    Ahmed continued to pursue the point before me, which  I  reject.  Given
    the concession, those submissions cannot be entertained in this appeal.

20. In any event, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge pointed out,  the  issue
    for the First-tier Tribunal was whether was  family  life  as  of  that
    date. Given the clear change of circumstances and the  absence  of  any
    positive and up to date evidence of a relationship or contact, or  even
    attempted contact, between the appellant and his wife or his  children,
    I am not satisfied that even  without  the  concession  the  overlooked
    witness statement of  the  appellant  would  or  could  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.  The  wife's  withdrawal  of
    support and the lack of evidence of contact between the  appellant  and
    his family since his removal from the UK, more than four years ago, was
    certainly sufficient for the judge to conclude that  family  life  does
    not continue between them, even if he harbours hope  that  one  day  it
    might somehow be revived. It follows that insofar as there was an error
    in overlooking the appellant's witness statement, I am  satisfied  that
    the error was immaterial. The failure  did  not  amount  to  procedural
    unfairness and does not render the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    legally flawed.

21. The judge also rejected Mr Ahmed's submissions that that the finding of
    the previous judge in allowing the appellant's  appeal  to  the  effect
    that there was family life between the appellant  and  his  spouse  and
    children should be accepted at face value.  This  is  repeated  in  the
    grounds asserting that pursuant to Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -
    Extra-territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702, that the  judge
    should have taken the previous findings of family life as the  starting
    point and that there was "no evidence before the FTTJ  to  support  any
    conclusion of family life having been terminated between the  appellant
    and his children." This submission was repeated  by  Mr  Ahmed  in  his
    submissions to me.  In  this  regard,  I  find  that  the  grounds  and
    submissions are flying in the face of the evidence  and  in  particular
    the lack of evidence of a continuing relationship. It follows that  the
    position taken that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  marriage  had
    permanently broken down is unsustainable.

22. Similarly, I am satisfied that the assertion in the  grounds  that  the
    judge failed to "take into consideration the  full  background  to  the
    marriage and also the issues surrounding  medial  (sic)  health  issues
    around his partner and also lack of support/pressure from her  imminent
    (sic)  family  of  appellant's  partner,"  has  no  merit.  Whilst  the
    appellant's brother's statement was that the spouse was being pressured
    by her family to "stay away" and would support the  appellant  once  he
    had returned to the UK, was part of the evidence the judge confirmed to
    have taken into account, it was open to the judge to  find  that  there
    was no such relationship. As stated, the concession  made  renders  the
    pursuit of this argument before me unsustainable.

23. With regard to family life with the children, the judge noted  at  [16]
    of the decision that the witnesses confirmed that the appellant had not
    been in touch with any  of  his  children.  This  was  clear  evidence,
    unchallenged in  the  grounds,  in  the  light  of  which  a  claim  of
    continuing family life with the children is difficult  to  sustain.  In
    effect, this ground is no more than a disagreement  with  the  decision
    and does not disclose any error of law. In Herrera v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 412, the Court of Appeal said that it is necessary to guard against
    the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are  in  truth  no
    more than disagreements about the  weight  to  be  given  to  different
    factors, particularly if the judge  who  decided  the  appeal  had  the
    advantage of hearing oral evidence. It is well-established law that the
    weight to be given to any particular factor in an appeal  is  a  matter
    for the judge and will rarely give rise to an error of law,  see  Green
    (Article 8 -new rules) [2013] UKUT 254.

24. The grounds also argue that "there was no evidence before the  FTTJ  to
    support  any  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  partner   would   not
    facilitate contact  between  the  appellant  and  children."  Here  the
    grounds seek to convert  the  absence  of  evidence  into  evidence  in
    support of family life. Once again, this is a  mere  disagreement  with
    the decision.

25. The grounds also argue, as did Mr  Ahmed  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing, that the  effect  of  the  human  rights  appeal  being
    allowed by the Tribunal in 2017 established  his  right  to  enter  and
    remain in the UK without making an entry clearance application, so that
    the respondent was obliged to facilitate his entry and the  refusal  to
    do so was unlawful.  As  the  judge  pointed  out  to  Mr  Ahmed,  this
    submission is misguided. "It is not  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    'rule' on whether the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Dept  should
    facilitate the appellant's return  to  the  UK  without  the  appellant
    making an application for entry clearance." As the judge pointed out at
    [10] of the decision, that is a matter  for  judicial  review  not  the
    First-tier Tribunal. This ground was not pursued by Mr Ahmed before me.



26. Mr Ahmed did seek to pursue private life grounds, but apart from  being
    mentioned in the grounds of appeal,  this  does  not  appear  from  the
    impugned decision to have to been pursued at the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In any event, the claim is without merit given that the  appellant  has
    been absent from the UK for more than 4 years and must have  a  private
    life in Pakistan. Any argument that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    infringes his article 8 rights to a private life is doomed to  failure.



27. Clearly, as indicated  above,  there  have  been  significant  and  far
    reaching changes in circumstances since the previous Tribunal  decision
    was made in 2017 finding family life  continued  with  the  spouse  and
    children. The judge was entitled to consider the evidence  overall  and
    in  particular  the  lack  of  positive  evidence   of   a   continuing
    relationship.  With  respect  to  Mr  Ahmed,  the  overlooked   witness
    statement does  not  take  the  appellant's  case  any  further.  I  am
    satisfied that on the positive evidence that the appellant has  had  no
    contact with his children and that his wife does not support his return
    to the UK, together with the lack of evidence in support of any  family
    life continuing, independently of the issue as to whether the judge mis-
    recorded Mr Ahmed's submissions or overlooked the  appellant's  witness
    statement, the finding  that  there  is  no  family  life  between  the
    appellant  and  his  wife  or  with  his  children  is  one  which   is
    unassailable and no error of law is disclosed. As Mr  Whitwell  pointed
    out, if there is no family life, then article 8 is not engaged and  the
    issue of proportionality of the decision does not  arise.  Neither  are
    there compelling or exceptional grounds on the limited  facts  of  this
    case to justify granting entry clearance outside the Rules.

28. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

         The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the human rights
         appeal is dismissed.

         I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    13 November 2020

