
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08916/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2020                    |On 11 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               Mr Zenel Kameri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Plowright, instructed by Solacexis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Zenel Kamari is a citizen of Albania, born on 7 April 1990.  On  3  May
    2019, the Secretary of State refused  his  human  rights  claim.  In  a
    decision promulgated on 6  November  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie dismissed the appellant's appeal against that decision. A central
    issue in the appeal had been the impact of the appellant's relationship
    with Ms Ala Abbas, a British  citizen,  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse his human rights claim. One of the bases upon  which
    the appellant contended that there would be "insurmountable  obstacles"
    to his relationship with Ms Abbas continuing  in  Albania  was  a  land
    dispute in which his family is involved.  The judge declined to  engage
    with the land dispute issue, holding that it was a "new  matter"  under
    section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, with
    the effect that there was no jurisdiction for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to consider the point.

 2. On 13 August 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman set aside the decision
    of Judge Wylie, to the extent that it did not engage with  the  claimed
    land dispute. That was a decision on the papers under rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Judge  Macleman  held
    that the issue of the land dispute had always been before the Secretary
    of State, and was  not,  therefore,  a  "new  matter".  Judge  Macleman
    directed that the matter be reheard in the Upper Tribunal to  determine
    the land dispute issue.  Judge Macleman's decision is set  out  in  the
    Annex to this decision.

Factual background

 3. The appellant entered this country clandestinely in March  2015.  On  2
    June 2018, he applied for leave to remain  based  on  his  relationship
    with Ms Abbas. That application was refused and certified  as  "clearly
    unfounded" under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  It did not carry a right of appeal that could  be  exercised
    from within this country. On 30 March 2019, the appellant made  further
    submissions which were treated as a fresh claim  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and refused on 3 May 2019  in  circumstances  which  attracted  a
    right of appeal. It was that decision  that  was  under  appeal  before
    Judge  Wylie,  and  which  remains   under   consideration   in   these
    proceedings.

Preserved findings of fact

 4. The only conclusions of Judge Wylie which have not been  preserved  are
    those which relate to the appellant's claimed land dispute in Albania.

 5. The following findings were not set aside by  Judge  Macleman  and  are
    preserved for the purposes  of  this  decision.  References  in  square
    brackets are to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. As at the date of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 21  October
    2019, the appellant and Ms Abbas were in a relationship, and the  judge
    found their relationship to be genuine [51]. However, the judge was not
    satisfied that they had  lived  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage for at least two years, as Ms Abbas was  still  using  as  her
    correspondence  address  the  address  of  her   parents.   There   was
    insufficient evidence to show that they had both  been  living  at  the
    same address since February 2017 [51].

 7. Ms Abbas is an  educated  woman  with  a  background  in  teaching  and
    experience of working in different work  environments  [57].  While  it
    would be difficult for her to live and find work in  a  small  Albanian
    village, it is likely that she would be able reasonably quickly to find
    employment in the city in Albania, and the appellant would be  able  to
    assist her with his own language skills and experience that  he  gained
    since leaving Albania. He has the resilience to have been able to  cope
    with living  and  supporting  himself  in  this  country,  with  little
    knowledge of the customs or language, since 2015. Ms Abbas  would  have
    his support and assistance if she were to choose to return  to  Albania
    with him.

 8. Ms Abbas, through the appellant, had claimed that she  would  encounter
    difficulties in seeking to practice her Shia faith in Albania, and that
    those difficulties  fell  to  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's claimed "insurmountable obstacles" to them continuing their
    relationship in Albania. At [59], the judge found  that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence to support the contention  that  Ms  Abbas  would  be
    unable to practice her faith in Albania. There  was  no  expert  report
    which supported the difficulties the couple claimed that Ms Abbas would
    encounter.

 9. At [60], while it would be difficult for Ms Abbas to move away from the
    United Kingdom, it would not cause very severe hardship for her  to  do
    so. Pausing here, this is a finding which, by  definition,  relates  to
    the absence of severe hardship not  taking  into  account  any  claimed
    difficulties arising from the land  dispute  limb  of  the  appellant's
    case; it will be necessary for me to address this aspect of the judge's
    findings in light of my own findings concerning the land dispute issue,
    below. Ms Abbas has a close family in this country, and  she  would  be
    able to maintain contact with them personally, or with modern means  of
    communication and holiday visits. Neither of her parents,  who  are  in
    this country, need care.

10. The decision of Judge Macleman held at [15]:

         "The case will be listed in the UT for further decision, by way  of
         remaking the decision of the FTT, limited to  ground  [1],  matters
         arising from an alleged blood feud..."

Legal framework

11. This appeal is brought under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for my consideration is  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellant to be removed, in the light of the private
    life he claims to have established here.   Pursuant  to  the  terms  of
    Judge Macleman's decision, this issue is to be  addressed  through  the
    lens of paragraph EX.1(b), which provides:

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         [...]

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

The hearing

12. The appellant  relied  on  the  original  bundle  from  the  first-tier
    tribunal appeal, and a supplementary bundle. He adopted his  statements
    dated 12 July 2019 and 21 October 2019 and was cross-examined.

13. I will outline the salient parts of the  appellant's  evidence  to  the
    extent necessary to give reasons for my decision. Full  record  of  the
    evidence may be found on my record of proceedings and, of  course,  the
    proceedings were recorded.

14. The hearing was face-to-face.

Discussion

15. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence in the case, in the round, to  the  balance  of  probabilities
    standard.

16. Mr Plowright on behalf of the appellant confirmed that he did not  seek
    to rely  on  any  additional  article  8-based  materials,  such  as  a
    contemporary assessment of his private family life position.  The  sole
    focus of the case was the appellant's  claimed  land  dispute  and  its
    impact on the issue of whether there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    to Ms Abbas and the appellant continuing their relationship in Albania.

17. It was common ground at the hearing that the  appropriate  standard  of
    proof was  the  balance  of  probabilities.  Although  the  appellant's
    claimed  land  dispute  is  a  matter  which  would  more  commonly  be
    considered within the confines of a protection appeal, thereby enjoying
    the benefits of the lower standard of proof applicable  to  asylum  and
    protection proceedings, Mr Plowright  confirmed  that  the  appellant's
    case  was  to  rely  on  the  claimant  land  dispute  as  evidence  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" to the continuation of his relationship with
    Ms Abbas in Albania.

18. It follows, therefore, that the  appellant  must  demonstrate,  to  the
    balance of probabilities standard, that the land dispute he  claims  to
    be a party to is such  that  it  would  amount  to  an  "insurmountable
    obstacle" to the continuation of his  relationship  with  Ms  Abbas  in
    Albania.

19. By way of a preliminary observation, the manner in which the  appellant
    has chosen to have the land dispute issue determined, namely within the
    confines of a human rights appeal concerning the issue of whether there
    are "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  outlined  above,  brings  with  it
    certain structural weaknesses which would not be present  were  this  a
    conventional asylum or protection claim. There has  not,  for  example,
    been a screening or substantive  asylum  interview.  The  Secretary  of
    State has not had the opportunity to consider the appellant's claim  in
    detail, nor provide detailed reasons for refusing this  aspect  of  the
    claim, as would normally be the case in the refusal  of  an  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection claim. The only analysis from the Secretary  of
    State in writing is the following statement, which may be found for  of
    the refusal letter dated 3 May 2019:

         "However, the Secretary of State has not  seen  any  evidence  that
         there are insurmountable obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph
         EX.2. of appendix FM which means the very significant  difficulties
         with which [sic]  would  be  phased  by  you  or  your  partner  in
         continuing your family life together outside the UK in Albania, and
         which could not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship
         for you or your partner. This  is  because  no  evidence  has  been
         provided to  support  your  claim  in  relation  to  your  fear  of
         returning home..."

20. On page 5, the refusal letter continued:

         "You have told us that you have a fear of  returning  home  due  to
         potential abduction or harm inflicted on yourself  and  that  there
         would be serious hardship on yourself and your partner due to  your
         partners [sic] caregiving needs to her parents and brother.

         We have reached this decision because no evidence has been provided
         to support your  claim  in  relation  to  your  fear  of  returning
         home..."

21. The appellant has since sought to provide some evidence,  which  I  now
    consider.

22. Under cross-examination, the  appellant  explained  that  in  1992  his
    family purchased property from the daughter of a landowner who  was  in
    prison for the murder of his brother. The landowner's sons were also in
    prison in Albania at the time of the purchase, but  when  the  youngest
    was released, he demanded the return of the property,  on  the  premise
    that he had not authorised the sale. At that age, the  appellant  would
    have been two years of age. The youngest son of the landowner continues
    to this day to seek return  of  the  property  and  has  contacted  the
    appellant's father at least twice demanding its return, which  led  the
    family to report the approaches to the police.

23. In his statement dated 12 July 2019, the appellant writes:

         "In Albania, my family was involved in  a  land  -related  dispute.
         Unfortunately, this dispute has not resolved yet. I feel  that  Ala
         and I can be easily targeted due to this feud if we had  to  return
         to Albania. I do not have any documentary evidence  to  prove  this
         issue and I never thought that I would be needing any  document  in
         relation to this feud when I left Albania."

24. In his second statement, dated 21 October 2019, the appellant  provides
    some documentary evidence. He writes that,  on  15  October  2020,  his
    father obtained a letter from the local town council office  concerning
    the claimed land dispute, "because my local town council  office  knows
    about it through first-hand reports."  The translation of  the  council
    report states that in 2005, the sons of the former owners  of  property
    demanded it's return, and that, "due to  this  ongoing  conflict,  [the
    appellant] has been obliged to leave Albania, because [the land owner's
    sons] were constantly threatening his life."

25. Also in the appellant's supplementary bundle is a report  from  a  Gijn
    Marku, on behalf of  the  Committee  of  Nationwide  Reconciliation  in
    Albania, a non-governmental  organisation  which  provides  letters  of
    attestation in blood feuds (see EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT
    00348 (IAC) at [4]). It is titled "Opinion on the continued risk  posed
    to the life of [the appellant] and his family due to  blood  feud  with
    [***] kin".  It states that the appellant is at a "very high  risk"  of
    being murdered due to the land dispute and  the  honour  involved,  and
    that he is at a "high risk at any moment and that every corner  of  the
    territory of Albania." The remainder of the report  addresses  accounts
    of people being killed in different blood feuds. There are no  personal
    details relating to why this appellant is said to be at risk.

26. Mr Plowright confirmed that the Mr Marku relied upon by  the  appellant
    is the same Mr Marku who gave evidence before the Upper Tribunal in EH.
     There was evidence before the tribunal that occasion that Mr Marku had
    been involved in the taking of bribes as payment for the  provision  of
    attestation letters: see the summary of the concerns  set  out  in  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada's reports, at [51].   At  [54],
    the tribunal stated, "Overall, by the end of the hearing, we had formed
    a strongly negative view of the credibility of  his  evidence  and  the
    value of any attestation letters from the CNR."   At  [56],  the  panel
    held that Mr Marku's claimed expertise was:

         "so damaged that an attestation letter  from  the  CNR...  adds  no
         weight whatsoever to an  otherwise  unsatisfactory  account  of  an
         alleged blood feud."

27. I find that the appellant's evidence does not  get  remotely  close  to
    demonstrating that there is a land dispute such that he is at  risk  in
    his home area of Albania. He has sought to rely on an unreasoned report
    from a discredited "expert", which itself features no analysis  of  the
    basis upon which the appellant is said to have a fear of the family  of
    the former  landowner.  The  report  consists  entirely  of  unreasoned
    assertions, or details pertaining to unrelated cases.  The report  from
    the town council is similarly lacking in  detail.  As  Mr  Tufan  noted
    during cross-examination, there is no statement  from  the  appellant's
    father, or any other family members, nor any other details of the  sort
    one would readily expect to be available where this claim which  had  a
    shred of credibility at its heart.  The appellant's own account of  the
    incident lacks detail, and, taken at its highest, reveals no threat  of
    harm to him such that there would be grounds  for  finding  that  there
    would be "insurmountable obstacles" to his relationship with  Ms  Abbas
    continuing in Albania. In cross-examination, the  appellant  said  that
    his father had been contacted twice by the former owner  of  the  land.
    There is no evidence, or even a suggestion, of  any  harm  having  been
    inflicted. The account of the dispute in Mr Marku's report is that  the
    trigger for the feud was the 2005 release from prison of  the  sons  of
    the former landowner. That was some 15 years ago.  There is no evidence
    that any events have taken place since then such that it is more likely
    than not that the land dispute even occurred, or that  if  it  did,  it
    continues to the present day.

28. I find, therefore, that the appellant and  his  partner  would  not  be
    prevented from continuing their relationship in  the  appellant's  home
    area by virtue of the claimed land dispute.  In any event, the findings
    of Judge Wylie were that the  appellant  and  his  partner  would  most
    likely encounter difficulties with securing employment for Ms Abbas  in
    the appellant's home village, but that they would be less likely to  do
    so in a city such as Tirana.  The appellant contended that one  of  the
    sons of the landowner in question lives in Tirana, and  that  he  would
    not be safe there.  I reject that suggestion. There is no land  dispute
    such that the appellant would encounter any  difficulties  anywhere  in
    Albania,  still  less  would  he  face  insurmountable   obstacles   to
    continuing his relationship with Ms Abbas in Tirana, or  elsewhere,  on
    its account.

29. Mr Plowright did not seek to advance  any  further  human  rights-based
    grounds upon which the appellant sought to rely.

30. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

31. There has been no application for anonymity, and I do not  consider  it
    necessary to make an order for anonymity.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed    Stephen H Smith                        Date 12 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed    Stephen H Smith                        Date 12 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    HU/08916/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Issued on                            |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ZENEL KAMERI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


               DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW and FURTHER DIRECTIONS


1. The respondent's decision which leads to these  proceedings  is  not  the
   one dated 10 December 2018 in her FtT bundle, but the  one  dated  3  May
   2019 in the appellant's FtT bundle, item 5, p.A19.   That  confusion  has
   something to do with what went wrong at the hearing in the FtT.


2. FtT Judge Wylie dismissed  the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal  by  a
   decision promulgated on 6  November  2019.   At  [8-9]  she  declined  to
   consider the issue of a blood feued, because that was a new  matter,  and
   declined to admit related documentary evidence.   She  went  on  to  find
   that although the appellant had a partner,  their  relationship  did  not
   meet the terms of the rules; there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
   carrying on their family life  in  Albania;  there  were  no  exceptional
   circumstances to make that  unduly  harsh;  and  that  removal  would  be
   proportionate, taking account  of  the  possibility  that  the  appellant
   might, in due course, apply for entry clearance as a partner.


3. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  4  grounds,
   headed:

      [1] Denying admission of  new  evidence  to  establish  insurmountable
      obstacles as a new matter.


      [2] Failing to consider an expert report "detailing the risk  [to  the
      appellant's  partner]  being  Shia  Muslim  in  the  context  of  ISIS
      activities in Albania".


      [3] Attaching no weight to credible evidence of a durable relationship
      [of over 2 years].


      [4] Error on possibility of success in an entry clearance application;
      FtT should have held financial requirements were met.

4. On 2 April 2020, FtT Judge Gumsley granted permission, on the  view  that
   ground [1] was arguable, but without restriction to that ground.

5. By a note  and  directions  issued  on  12  May  2020  the  UT  took  the
   provisional view that it would be  appropriate  to  determine  without  a
   hearing whether the FtT erred on a point of law and, if so,  whether  its
   decision should be set aside.  Parties were also given the opportunity to
   submit on whether there should be a hearing.

6. In a response, received on 26 May  2020,  the  appellant  relies  on  his
   grounds and asks for a "full" further hearing in the FtT.

7. In a response, received on 3 June 2020, the SSHD accepts that ground  [1]
   shows error by the FtT; contests the other grounds; and asks for  "a  re-
   hearing in the UT solely to consider  the  alleged  blood  feud  and  its
   potential application to appendix FM of the immigration rules".


8. Neither party seeks a hearing.

9. In terms of rules 2 and 34, the above issues may now  fairly  and  justly
   be decided without a hearing.

10. The SSHD's concession on ground [1] is correct.

11. The other grounds disclose no error:

      [2] The appellant has not cited anything in the report to support  his
      case.  On reference, it is a general paper, by an expert qualified  in
      the field, concluding that attempts by foreign extremists to impose  a
      different  brand  of  Islam  have  been  successfully  resisted,  that
      religion plays a sensible and moderate role in Albanian life, and that
      peaceful inter-faith co-existence is not threatened; pp.  C22-23,  FtT
      bundle.


      [3] This ground is only disagreement  with  a  finding  of  fact,  not
      involving any error on a point  of  law,  and  which  would  not  have
      changed the outcome.


      [4] There was no evidence before the FtT by which it might  rationally
      have held that the requirements  of  the  rules  for  entry  clearance
      (apart from the requirement to apply from outside the  UK)  were  met.
      Rather, the evidence showed that such an application could  only  have
      failed, because the financial and evidential requirements of the rules
      were not met.  The evidence indicated a possibility that might  change
      in the future, as the FtT said; but that is beside the point.

12. The decision of the FtT is set aside on ground [1] only.


13. The presumption is that decisions are retained in the UT for  re-making.
    The extent of further fact-finding required is  not  so  extensive  that
   this appeal should be remitted.

14. The appellant was legally represented in the  FtT,  but  not  presently.
   The SSHD's submission says that his remedy  on  the  alleged  blood  feud
   should be to raise a protection claim, "and a strong inference as to  the
   credibility of his account should be inferred by his failure to  do  so".
   The matter is not for decision at this stage, I draw no  such  inference,
   and further procedure is up to him; but he should be aware of the point.

15. The case will be listed in the  UT  for  further  decision,  by  way  of
   remaking the decision of the FtT, limited to ground [1], matters  arising
   from an alleged blood feud, in due course.

16. Within 14 days of the date this decision is issued, the appellant is  to
   advise the UT whether he requires an interpreter for the further hearing.

17. Any further evidence on which parties seek to rely must  be  filed  with
   the UT, and served on the other party, not less than 7  days  before  the
   hearing.

18. Communications to the UT may be sent by, or attached  to,  an  email  to
   [***] using the appeal reference number (as at the top of this  decision)
   as the subject line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.   (This  address
   is not generally available for the filing of documents.)

19. Service on the SSHD should be made to [***]

20. The appellant sent his submissions from [***]

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

22. The date of this decision is to be taken as  the  date  it  is  sent  to
   parties.


     UT Judge Macleman

