
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08462/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 July 2017                               |On 27th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Longcheng chen

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in these  proceedings,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  2
    October 2015 to refuse leave to  remain  as  the  civil  partner  of  a
    British citizen came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callender  Smith
    ("FtJ") on 11 November 2016.  The FtJ allowed the appeal.

    The respondent's decision

 3. The respondent's decision to refuse the application for leave to remain
    was made on the basis that the appellant had used deception in relation
    to an English language test taken on 18 July  2012  which  he  used  to
    support an application for further leave to remain  dated  11  December
    2012.  The respondent considered that the appellant did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules and the application was therefore
    refused with reference to D-LTRP.1.3. and S-LTR.1.6. (presence  in  the
    UK not conducive to the public good).

 4. It was also concluded that there would not be insurmountable  obstacles
    to the appellant and his partner continuing family life in  China.   In
    terms of the private life requirements of the  Rules,  given  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the suitability requirements, had not lived in
    the UK for the requisite period, and the conclusion  that  there  would
    not be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  on  return  to
    China, it was concluded that he did not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules in that respect either.

 5. It was decided that there were no exceptional circumstances  warranting
    a grant of leave otherwise than under the Rules.  A decision  was  also
    taken to curtail the appellant's leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, so  as
    to expire on 2 October  2015,  with  reference  to  paragraph  323(ia),
    because he had used deception in seeking leave to remain or a variation
    of leave to remain.

    The FtJ's decision

 6. The FtJ referred to the decision letter in  terms  of  the  refusal  on
    suitability grounds, and set out the appellant's case  on  that  issue,
    including a detailed summary of his oral evidence.

 7. At [31] he said that the issue of  the  respondent's  reliance  on  the
    appellant having taken a fraudulent TOEIC test lay at the heart of  the
    appeal and at [38] that he did not believe that the appellant had  used
    any kind of fraud when he took the  test  in  question.   In  the  next
    paragraph he said that the appellant's previous and current use of  the
    English language was clearly proficient and more than adequate for  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The FtJ also referred to  the  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his
    partner that was given at the hearing.   He  referred  to  there  being
    substantial supporting documentation about their relationship.  Part of
    their evidence was that living in China would mean living in a  country
    that did not recognise gay rights and would not recognise  their  same-
    sex partnership.  The appellant had said that he did not wish  to  have
    to return to China, simply to reapply to rejoin his  civil  partner  in
    the UK.  China did not recognise same-sex relationships and it would be
    a long process.  He would have to give up his work in  the  UK  without
    knowing when he would be able to come back and resume it and resume his
    relationships with his partner.  His  partner  would  not  be  able  to
    accompany him to China because they would not be able to continue their
    relationship there openly.  The appellant had also said that they would
    be at risk in China.

 9. The FtJ concluded at [32] that theirs was a "subsisting  and  enduring"
    relationship.  He went on to state that if the couple returned to China
    simply for the appellant to reapply to join his partner in the UK, that
    would put the two of them at risk.  Further, to require  the  appellant
    to go to China to perfect an application that he has  already  made  in
    the UK "is a disproportionate act" because  it  would  require  him  to
    expend considerable finances, give up his job  and  be  away  from  his
    partner, to subject himself to a procedure that could in fact  properly
    lawfully be dealt with in the UK.

10. He said  that  he  found  it  completely  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant and his civil partner to leave the UK and to live and work in
    China where the nature of their relationship would not be  accepted  at
    all.

    The grounds and submissions

11. The respondent's grounds take issue with the FtJ's conclusion that  the
    appellant and his partner would be at risk  in  China,  the  contention
    being that that finding is completely unreasoned.  The FtJ had made  no
    reference to any background evidence which led him to that  conclusion.



12. The grounds go on to refer to background evidence which  suggests  that
    73% of settlement applications made from Beijing are  concluded  within
    30 days, and 100% within 60 days of the application.  Even if  the  FtJ
    was not referred to that  evidence,  he  was  under  an  obligation  to
    consider "the guiding cases" on that issue.  The grounds then refer  to
    R (on the application of Chen)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189  and  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Agyarko & Ors v Secretary of  the  Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 440 (but see now the decision of  the  Supreme  Court,  [2017]
    UKSC 11).

13. The issue of the appellant's  family  life  being  precarious  is  also
    raised in the grounds.  It is further contended that the  FtJ  had  not
    made a correct assessment of the issue of insurmountable  obstacles  to
    their continuation of family life in China.

14. Lastly, the grounds suggest that the FtJ had not adequately  considered
    the  deception  issue  in  relation  to  the  English   language   test
    certificate.  It is suggested that the FtJ appeared  merely  to  accept
    the appellant's assertion that he had never exercised any deception  or
    made any false representations in any of his immigration  applications.
    The grounds  assert  that  there  had  been  "a  plethora  of  judicial
    activity" on that issue and a number of decisions of the Upper Tribunal
    and the Court of Appeal existed.  However, the FtJ had not engaged with
    any relevant case law.  It is said  that  the  respondent  is  able  to
    discharge the burden of proof with the limited generic evidence and the
    onus thereafter is on the appellant to provide an explanation, which he
    had not done.

15. For reasons which will become apparent, it is necessary to refer to the
    terms of the grant of permission to appeal. The  First-tier  Judge  who
    granted permission to appeal said that it was arguable that  the  FtJ's
    findings in terms of insurmountable obstacles were  not  based  on  any
    evidence, and that no  sufficient  reasons  for  his  conclusions  were
    given.  It was also said to be arguable that the FtJ's findings  lacked
    any  properly  structured  analysis   of   the   issues   arising   for
    consideration.  Further, the FtJ  did  not  refer  to,  or  apply,  the
    insurmountable obstacles test.  In addition, in so far as the  FtJ  may
    have intended to consider the appeal outside the Rules, and it was  not
    apparent  that  he  did,  there  was  no  finding  as  to  whether  the
    circumstances of the case were compelling or exceptional.

16. In relation to the fraud/deception point in  relation  to  the  English
    language test, the judge who granted permission stated as follows:

         "...This ground is not arguable.  While it is true that  the  Judge
         did not refer to the jurisprudence concerning ETS tests, and  while
         the generic evidence relied on by the Respondent has been  held  to
         be sufficient to establish a prima facie case, in the present  case
         the Judge received evidence from the Appellant as to the taking  of
         the test and as to the standard of his English and  found  that  he
         was not guilty of any kind of fraud.  That was a finding the  Judge
         was entitled to  make  on  the  evidence  and  for  which  he  gave
         sufficient reasons.  Although the Judge did not spell it  out,  the
         inevitable consequence of that finding was that the Respondent  had
         not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving   on   the   balance   of
         probabilities that the Appellant was guilty  of  fraud  (see  SM  &
         Qadir [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and Shehzad & Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ
         615), and there was therefore no basis for the Respondent  to  have
         decided that the presence of  the  Appellant  in  the  UK  was  not
         conducive to the public  good.   However,  the  Appellant  was  not
         entitled to succeed in the appeal simply on this point".

17. In submissions, Mr Singh sought  to  persuade  me  that  he  should  be
    allowed  to  rely  on  the  ground  of  appeal  in  relation   to   the
    deception/fraud  point,  notwithstanding  what   the   judge   granting
    permission had said.  He referred to the decision  in  Ferrer  (limited
    appeal grounds; Alvi) Philippines [2012] UKUT 304  (IAC)  and  reliance
    was placed on paragraph 2 of the  guidance  in  the  headnote,  to  the
    effect that the proper notice informing  the  parties  of  the  limited
    grant of permission should have been sent.  Such a notice contains  the
    invitation to renew the application  for  permission  on  grounds  upon
    which it had been refused.  It was submitted that it  was  unfair  that
    the respondent was not put on notice that permission was not granted on
    the fraud/deception ground.

18. Furthermore, it was submitted that it would have been  clearer  if  the
    grant of permission had been more explicit in terms  of  which  grounds
    permission had been granted on.

19. Mr Muquit submitted that it was clear from the permission decision that
    permission was not granted on the fraud/deception ground.  It was  thus
    evident to both parties what could and could not be argued.

20. I indicated to the  parties  that  I  would  hear  submissions  on  the
    fraud/deception point pending my consideration of  its  arguability  in
    the light of the permission judge's decision.  I informed  the  parties
    that my doing so should not be taken  as  any  indication  that  I  had
    decided in favour of the respondent in terms of the arguability of that
    ground.

21. Mr Singh submitted that the FtJ's decision was silent on  the  evidence
    of the respondent in relation to the alleged deception.   There  was  a
    bundle of documents before the FtJ in relation to that issue.   It  was
    submitted that the evidential burden had been discharged  but  the  FtJ
    had not referred to that evidence at all.  Although he  had  noted  the
    evidence at [8], there was no engagement with it.

22. At [13] - [29] the FtJ had gone  through  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant but it had not been explained why  the  appellant's  evidence
    was acceptable.

23. The respondent's grounds otherwise were relied on.   It  was  submitted
    that there was no evidence from which the FtJ could conclude that there
    would be harm to the appellant and his partner on return to China.

24. After submissions on behalf of the appellant, it  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Singh that if the fraud/deception  argument  for  the  respondent  fell
    away, the appeal would succeed with reference to the Article 8 Rules.

25. Mr Muquit referred to [8] of the FtJ's decision where he had identified
    in the respondent's decision the basis of the  refusal  on  suitability
    grounds and the evidence relied on in that context.  The FtJ  had  said
    at [13] that he had considered the  information  that  was  before  the
    respondent at the time of the decision.  It was submitted that  it  was
    wrong to suggest that the FtJ did not consider or have regard  to  that
    evidence.

26. He had evaluated the evidence of the appellant which suggested that  he
    had considered that there was a case to answer.  Reliance was placed on
    behalf of the appellant on the decision  in  Majumder  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167,  in  particular  at
    [32].  It was submitted that the appellant's  case  was  in  the  third
    category of cases which were those where it was held that  the  generic
    evidence had not  discharged  the  initial  evidential  burden  on  the
    Secretary of State, and was thus erroneous in that  respect,  but  that
    other evidence meant that the Secretary of State would  not  have  been
    able to discharge the legal burden.  The Secretary of  State  indicated
    that she was minded to concede those appeals and abandon them.

27. It was submitted that even if the FtJ was wrong  not  to  confront  "in
    form" the evidence of the  respondent,  he  had  still  looked  at  the
    individual evidence and said that he believed the  appellant,  for  the
    reasons he gave.  If there is an error of law it is  of  no  substance.
    Furthermore, the FtJ had before him a skeleton argument in relation  to
    these issues.

28.  With  reference  to  the  Rules,  it  was  submitted   that   if   the
    fraud/deception  argument  fell  away,  the  appellant's  appeal  would
    succeed because he met all the requirements of the Rules.   Taking  out
    the issue of the suitability requirements, there  was  no  other  basis
    upon which leave to remain as a partner would be refused.  The FtJ  had
    decided that the relationship was genuine.  There was evidence  of  the
    relevant level of income.  The  immigration  status  requirements  were
    met,  and  the  English  language  requirement  was  also  met  if  the
    fraud/deception point is not a valid one.  Paragraph  EX.1  would  only
    apply if the other requirements were not met.

29. It was submitted therefore, that the FtJ was correct to state  at  [35]
    that the application for leave  to  remain  would  have  been  approved
    without any further difficulties had the respondent not  believed  that
    there had been some kind of fraud in the English language test.

30. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant before me  that  it  was  an
    error for the FtJ to find as he did in relation  to  the  risk  to  the
    appellant and his partner in China, and in relation  to  insurmountable
    obstacles, but it was submitted that the error was not material.

    Conclusions

31. The guidance in Ferrer that is material to this appeal is as follows:

           "(1)    In deciding an application for permission to appeal the
           Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
           Immigration and Asylum Chamber, a judge of that  Chamber  should
           consider carefully the utility of granting  permission  only  on
           limited grounds. In practice, such a limited grant  is  unlikely
           to be as helpful as a general grant, which identifies the ground
           or grounds  that  are  considered  by  the  judge  to  have  the
           strongest prospect of success. In this way, the judge identifies
           the likely ambit of the forthcoming Upper Tribunal  proceedings,
           which - if that Tribunal concurs - can then  form  the  backdrop
           for the Upper Tribunal's subsequent case management directions.

           (2)    Where the First-tier Tribunal judge nevertheless intends
           to  grant  permission  only  in  respect  of  certain   of   the
           applicant's grounds,  the  judge  should  make  this  abundantly
           plain, both in his or her  decision  under  rule  25(5)  of  the
           Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and  by
           ensuring that the Tribunal's administrative staff send  out  the
           proper notice, informing the applicant of the right to apply  to
           the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on  grounds on which
           the applicant has been unsuccessful in the  application  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal.

           (3)    If an applicant who has been granted permission to appeal
           to the Upper Tribunal on limited grounds  only  applies  to  the
           Upper Tribunal on grounds in respect  of  which  permission  has
           been  refused,  the  Upper  Tribunal  judge   considering   that
           application should not regard his or her  task  as  merely  some
           form of review of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  the
           application.

           (4)    Whatever may be the position in other  Chambers  of  the
           Upper Tribunal,  in  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  the
           overriding objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
           Rules 2008 is unlikely to be advanced by  adopting  a  procedure
           whereby new grounds  of  appeal  can  be  advanced  without  the
           permission of the Upper Tribunal under rule 5 of those Rules.

           ..."

32. The pertinent facts of that appeal can be seen from [16] - [17]:

             "16. On 8 September 2011, a Designated Judge of the First-tier
                  Tribunal granted permission on ground 3  (Article  8)  but
                  not on grounds 1 and 2.  The Designated  Judge  considered
                  that ground 1 had "no merit  at  all"  as  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge had "pointed out the rule change applicable
                  to this appellant occurred four weeks before she made  her
                  application".  The "legitimate  expectation"  argument  in
                  ground 2, according to the Designated Judge,  ignored  the
                  fact that "guidance is regularly  issued  to  ensure  that
                  applicants are not being paid at a lower salary rate  than
                  those set out in the code of practice.  It  was  incumbent
                  upon the appellant and employer to  ensure  that  she  was
                  paid at the appropriate hourly rate".


             17.  In an undated letter received by the Upper Tribunal on  3
                  October 2011, the appellant's  solicitors  contended  that
                  they did not agree that the grant of permission to  appeal
                  to the Upper Tribunal should be restricted to ground 3, as
                  had  been  done  by  the   Designated   Judge.    In   the
                  circumstances, the Upper Tribunal treated that  letter  as
                  an application "to  review  the  grant  of  permission  on
                  limited grounds". Having done  so,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
                  Storey was "satisfied that the grant of permission  should
                  be varied so as to make clear that all three  grounds  are
                  arguable". In deciding to accept the letter,  rather  than
                  an application made in form UT1, the Upper Tribunal  noted
                  that the Designated Judge had not helped matters  "by  not
                  making clear expressly that his grant was  on  limited  or
                  restricted grounds".  Had he made that  clear,  the  grant
                  would have been accompanied by a notice  -  IA68  -  which
                  stated in terms that "you may apply to the Upper  Tribunal
                  for permission to appeal on a point of  law  arising  from
                  the First-tier Tribunal's decision on any ground on  which
                  permission has been refused"."

33. At [20] the Tribunal referred to rule 25 of the  Procedure  Rules  that
    then applied.  The  relevant  Procedure  Rules  are  now  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 ("the First-tier Rules").  In this context, rule  34  contains  an
    equivalent provision to the former  rule  25  to  the  effect  that  if
    permission to appeal is granted on  limited  grounds,  notification  to
    that effect must be provided.  Rule 34(4) provides as follows:

           "(4) If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it  must  send
           with the record of its decision-

           (a) a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and

           (b) notification of the right to  make  an  application  to  the
           Upper Tribunal for permission to  appeal  and  the  time  within
           which, and the manner in which, such application must be made.

           (5) The Tribunal  may  give  permission  to  appeal  on  limited
           grounds, but must comply with paragraph (4) in relation  to  any
           grounds on which it has refused permission."

34. As is clear from [21] of  Ferrer,  in  that  case  the  judge  granting
    permission failed to make it  clear  that  the  grant  was  on  limited
    grounds only. The Tribunal said  that  had  it  been  made  clear,  the
    applicant for permission would have realised that she needed  to  apply
    to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on the other grounds.

35. Ferrer does not decide, nor indeed could it, that permission cannot  be
    granted on limited grounds.  Further, I do not interpret  the  Tribunal
    as saying that a failure to send the appropriate notice, which is still
    the form IA68, renders a grant of permission on limited grounds  either
    invalid, or as requiring to be interpreted as a grant of permission  on
    all grounds. The overriding consideration, it seems to me, is that  the
    permission decision should be clear as to on which  grounds  permission
    has been granted and which not.  It is  also  worthwhile  pointing  out
    rule 6(1) of the First-tier Rules which  states  that  an  irregularity
    resulting from a failure to comply with any requirement in the Rules, a
    practice Direction or a Direction does not of itself  render  void  the
    proceedings or any step taken in the proceedings.

36. In the appeal before me, it is clear that the judge granting permission
    refused permission on the  fraud/deception  ground.   Albeit  that  the
    notice to the parties stating that permission had been granted is on  a
    form IA66, which does not indicate that the grant of permission was  on
    limited grounds, and therefore does not notify the respondent that  she
    may apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on any  ground
    on which permission had been refused, it cannot realistically  be  said
    that anyone reading the permission decision could have been  misled  by
    it.  Although Mr Singh suggested that the grant  of  permission  should
    have been clear in terms of identifying explicitly the grounds on which
    permission was granted/refused, the application for permission was  not
    itself expressed in terms of separate grounds.  It  consisted  of  nine
    paragraphs, not being enumerated as separate grounds.

37. Whilst the guidance in Ferrer remains applicable, applying  it  to  the
    facts of this appeal does not lead me to conclude  that  the  grant  of
    permission was on the basis of anything other than on limited  grounds.
    This is readily discernible from the permission decision.

38. In those circumstances, it is not open to the respondent to rely on the
    deception/fraud ground upon which permission was refused.

39. Accordingly, the refusal of leave  to  remain  on  suitability  grounds
    falls away.  There was no need for the FtJ to consider  paragraph  EX.1
    because, as submitted by Mr Muquit, the appellant met  the  eligibility
    requirements of  the  Rules.   Such  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent before me, and  is  any  event  evident  from  the  decision
    letter.  Again, Mr  Muquit  was  correct  to  suggest  that  the  FtJ's
    conclusion at [35] that the application for leave to remain would  have
    been approved but for the  fraud/deception  contention,  was  accurate.
    The respondent's only ground of appeal therefore falls away.

40. Neither party touched on the issue of curtailment  of  the  appellant's
    leave, set out in the last paragraph of the respondent's decision.  The
    FtJ stated that the appeal was allowed "under the  Immigration  Rules".
    However, there was no ground of  appeal  before  him  confined  to  the
    Immigration Rules, that no longer being a permissible ground of appeal.
     Nevertheless, it is clear that the human rights appeal with  reference
    to Article 8 encompasses the decision to curtail leave.  On that basis,
    this is not an issue that requires further consideration.

41. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant before me that the  FtJ  had
    erred in law in terms of his conclusions  on  insurmountable  obstacles
    and the conclusion that the appellant and his partner would be at  risk
    on return to China as a same-sex couple, there having been no  evidence
    to support the appellant's assertion in that respect.  However, in  the
    light of my conclusions, any  error  of  law  in  that  regard  is  not
    material.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. However, that error of law is not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal and accordingly the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is not set aside. Its decision to allow the  appeal  therefore
    stands.





Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                                   24/09/17



