
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08901/2017
                                                               HU/08903/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                         Alla [D] (FIRST appellant)
                        Alina [D] (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S McTaggart, instructed by Andrew Russell & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants who are sisters and citizens of  Ukraine  and  who  were
    aged 24 and 22 at the time of the hearing of their appeals before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox in August 2018 arrived in the UK  from  Ireland
    on a date in 2009 with their mother and  her  British  citizen  husband
    whom she had married in Ukraine.

 2. Their appeals had been against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    4 August 2017 refusing their applications for leave to  remain  in  the
    UK.  The judge observed in his decision  that  they  were  issued  with
    (visit) visas in 2008.  On 10 July 2009 they claimed  to  have  entered
    the United Kingdom via Dublin on  visas  which  were  valid  for  three
    months.  They made the human rights applications on 7  June  2017  that
    led to the refusal and these appeals.

 3. Although this was  clearly  not  the  case  the  judge  understood  the
    applications were considered by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  without
    interview.  But it is not disputed that there was no interview prior to
    the refusal of the applications.  In respect of the first appellant  it
    was not accepted that she was in a relationship with a Mr  [C]  and  it
    was thus refused under  the  Partner  Rules.   Both  applications  were
    refused on the private life basis;  it  was  contended  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  notwithstanding   the   first   appellant's
    indication that she suffers from epilepsy.

 4. At [12] the judge noted the family connections in the United Kingdom as
    follows:

         "12. The Respondent does not take issue with the Appellants'  dates
             of birth and  nationality.   No  dispute  arises,  as  to  the
             relationship between the Appellants, their  mother  and  their
             half-brother [O].  There is no dispute  with  the  Appellant's
             immigration history.  There is no dispute that the Appellant's
             mother, Iana, married Geoffrey [B] and that they had  a  child
             together [O] who  was  born  on  5  May  2011  at  Letterkenny
             Hospital.  He is now aged seven (7)  years  old.   The  family
             lived  together  at  3  Highgate  Manor,  Newtownabbey   until
             domestic disharmony broke out and Iana [B]  and  Geoffrey  [B]
             separated.  Various court proceedings ensued.  The  Appellants
             continue to live at this address with their mother  and  young
             [O].  I am not aware if  there  are  any  divorce  proceedings
             issued or concluded."

    And in respect of potential adoption of the appellants, he observed  at
    [13]:

         "13. Although there was detailed and pressing cross examination  of
             all three witnesses, I am satisfied that  it  is  also  common
             case, that Geoffrey [B] promised to adopt the  Appellants  but
             failed to deliver on that promise.  There is a document in the
             papers before me today  which  attracted  some  criticism  and
             negative observation by the  Respondent.   This  document  was
             signed by the Appellant's natural father.  Although there  may
             be some doubt whether it had to be registered in the  judicial
             system  in  Ukraine  or  not,  it  is  an  indication  of  the
             biological father's intention not to object  to  any  adoption
             proceedings.  Mr Geoffrey [B] reneged on a promise so  to  do.
             The Appellants clearly, are now adults and it is not  possible
             for them to be adopted.  The first Appellant no  longer  makes
             the case that she is in a relationship with Jordan  [C].   The
             partner route under family life is no longer an issue."

 5. After surveying the evidence in respect of both appellants as to  their
    background,  ties  with  Ukraine  and  the  first  appellant's  medical
    condition, the judge concluded that the matters  referred  to  did  not
    amount to insurmountable obstacles or exceptional circumstances.

 6. Turning to Article 8 the judge considered that on  the  evidence  there
    was not an arguable case for its consideration.  He took account of the
    best interests of the child O who was aged 7 and after a further survey
    of evidence, including the possibility of visits by the child  and  his
    mother to the appellants in Ukraine, concluded that neither had adduced
    evidence of any exceptional circumstances or insurmountable  obstacles.
    The judge reached a similarly negative conclusion in  relation  to  the
    appellants' private life and dismissed the appeals.

 7. Permission to appeal was sought  on  two  grounds.   The  first  was  a
    failure by the judge to make factual findings on one of the main points
    of the appellants' case, being that they  and  their  mother  had  been
    misled that they would be sorted out by their stepfather  in  terms  of
    their immigration status.  As part of this ground  it  is  also  argued
    that there was also a failure to make a finding whether the appellants'
    removal would be in the child's best interests.  The second  ground  of
    challenge regards a  failure  by  the  judge  to  have  regard  to  the
    mandatory  provisions  of  sections  117A  to  D  of  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. Certain matters were clarified at the beginning of the hearing.  It was
    thought (although Mr McTaggart could not confirm) that  the  appellants
    and their mother had obtained a visa for Ireland and  then  made  their
    way to Northern Ireland.  The birth of the child O  in  Letterkenny  in
    Ireland  was,  according  to  the  mother's  evidence,  considered   an
    advantage by her husband.  The grant of leave to the mother had been in
    the light of the presence here of a British Citizen child.  Neither the
    appellants nor their mother have ever had any form of  prior  leave  or
    permission to remain in  the  UK.   It  was  also  clarified  that  her
    marriage had broken down in 2013 and the appellants had been 15 and  13
    respectively when they arrived in 2009.  Both of  the  appellants  were
    adults at the time of the applications to the Secretary of State.

 9. As to the first ground, Mr McTaggart argued that the judge  had  failed
    in the Article 8 analysis to take account of the deception by Mr [B] in
    respect of his assurances that the appellants' immigration status would
    be regularised.  The judge had observed at [13] that he  was  satisfied
    "... that it is also common case, that Geoffrey [B] promised  to  adopt
    the appellants but failed to deliver on that promise ...   Mr  Geoffrey
    [B] reneged on a promise so to do".   Mr  McTaggart  argued  that  this
    aspect  was  important  because  it  tied  in  with   the   appellants'
    circumstances which were not of their own making.  He also argued  that
    a further factor in the Article 8 analysis was the strength  of  family
    life because of the immigration history.

10. In response to my observation that the judge's finding on  family  life
    was not in the grounds  of  challenge  Mr  McTaggart  referred  to  the
    observation by Judge Swaney who observed that no finding had been  made
    whether or not there is family life between the  appellants  and  their
    mother in the light of the fact that although  they  were  adults  they
    still lived with her and their brother and  they  had  not  established
    independent family units of their own.  As part of this ground he  also
    argued there had been a failure by  the  judge  to  identify  the  best
    interests of O with particular reference  to  the  appellants.   As  to
    family life he considered the judge had arguably reached  a  conclusion
    on this aspect in [30]:

         "30. [O] is currently seven (7) years old and is attending  primary
             school.  He is a British citizen and up until his  mother  and
             father separated, he enjoyed  family  life  with  his  mother,
             father and two half-sisters.  Legal  proceedings  have  ensued
             and up until 2015 the child's father was  no  longer  able  to
             have contact with  him,  so  far  as  I  am  aware  of.   That
             situation may have changed more recently.  In any event, there
             is no suggestion that the child should be  forced,  encouraged
             or required to leave the United Kingdom.   I  make  a  similar
             observation in regard to his mother Iana.  I note however that
             her leave to remain is currently limited and  will  expire  in
             the next few years."

11. As to the second ground of challenge relating to a failure by the judge
    to have regard to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, although accepting that the  appellants  were  relying  on  a
    private life established here when unlawfully, it was  still  necessary
    to examine the extent to which they  had  integrated  evidence  in  the
    material before the judge.

12. By way of response Mr McVeety argued the judge had made a clear finding
    regarding Mr [B]'s promise but it was difficult to assess the relevance
    of this from 2013 after separation; no application had been made by the
    appellants or their mother for permission to stay.  He  contended  that
    the judge had looked at all other factors and there was nothing in  the
    case that he had not considered.

13. In respect to family life being a sub-ground of  the  first  ground  Mr
    McVeety referred me to  [33]  of  the  judge's  decision  in  which  he
    recorded the evidence regarding the relationship between the appellants
    and O:

         "33. Both Appellants confirmed that there is little in common  with
             [O] given the age gap between the three.  They  do  not  watch
             the same television programmes.  They do  not  engage  in  the
             same activities.  No doubt [O] has his own friends  with  whom
             he  engages,  at  school  and  afterwards.   The  relationship
             between  the  Appellants  and  ask   [sic]   is   a   standard
             relationship between two adult siblings and their younger half-
             brother.  I am satisfied that there are no particularly strong
             ties that demonstrate a relationship beyond the  norm  between
             such siblings."

14. He contended the best interests were dealt with in [34] as follows:

         "34. I have no doubt that when the Appellants have the family  home
             (be it for  marriage,  cohabitation,  employment  or  returned
             [sic] to Ukraine, or any other reason) that  young  [O]  would
             initially miss his half-sisters.  As a  seven-year-old  that's
             likely to be a short-lived event, given the  lack  of  intense
             involvement in his life, from his half-sisters."

15. In respect of the second ground, Mr McVeety argued  that  although  the
    judge had not specifically considered the case pursuant to section 117A
    to D, this was not material.

16. Mr McTaggart had nothing to add by way of reply.

17. I reached the following conclusions.   Although  Mr  McVeety  contended
    that there was  nothing  the  judge  had  not  taken  account  of,  the
    materials in the case raised points which he does not  appear  to  have
    considered.  A copy of the appellants' mother's passport indicates that
    it was issued in August 2008, with expiry  in  2018.   A  stamp  by  an
    Immigration Officer at Dublin Airport dated 14 November  2008  has  the
    following legible text in manuscript: "Join Irish spouse".  A  visa  on
    the same page issued on 10 October 2008 refers to the appellant by her
    married  name.   A  further  visa  issued  by  the  Irish   immigration
    authorities on 21 April 2009 also relates to the appellants' mother and
    appears to confirm a grant of  leave  for  six  months,  together  with
    another visa dated 15 October 2009 that runs until 7 October 2010, from
    which it is clear the appellants' mother was granted a form of leave to
    remain in Ireland as the spouse of an Irish citizen.  A stamp evidently
    by immigration control at Dublin Airport confirms further permission to
    remain for the appellants' mother until 11 October 2012.   I  have  not
    recorded all the entries which had been copied from the passport but it
    is difficult to reconcile this regime of leave with the evidence before
    the judge that the family crossed into Northern Ireland in 2009.  It is
    clear that Mr [B] is a British citizen evidenced by  the  copy  of  his
    passport which was issued on 11 August 2008.  In the light of the Irish
    authorities recognising him as an Irish citizen, it is evident that  he
    has dual nationality.  It is not indicated by the evidence how  Mr  [B]
    supported himself and his family during the years prior to  separation.
    The position is unclear and does not appear to have  been  explored  at
    the hearing or considered by the judge.

18. The judge began his Article 8 analysis within the Rules by  considering
    paragraph 276ADE and there is no challenge  to  the  findings  that  he
    reached under this provision.  Instead,  the  grounds  focused  on  the
    adequacy and correctness of the judge's approach on Article 8  grounds.
    It is correct that the judge did not make a clear  finding  on  whether
    the appellants continue to share a family life with  their  mother  and
    although this is not specifically raised in the grounds, I consider the
    reference to the judge's "acceptance" of family life that this point is
    engaged, and the grounds do  not  require  amendment.   Paragraph  [30]
    refers to the existence of family life in the past and in  my  judgment
    the judge was  required  to  consider  whether  that  family  life  had
    continued  into  the  appellants'  adulthood.    Although   the   older
    appellant's relationship outside the marriage point to this  no  longer
    being the case it is an aspect on  which  the  judge  was  nevertheless
    required to make a finding.

19. As to  O's  best  interests,  I  consider  that  these  were  partially
    addressed by the judge but only with reference to the impact on him  of
    the appellants' return to Ukraine.

20. The focus of the judge's attention in large part  was  on  the  private
    lives of the appellants and whilst it is not disputed that  these  have
    been developed whilst neither has had lawful presence, section  117B(5)
    has been interpreted as not  meaning  no  weight.   In  this  regard  I
    consider a clearer picture of the appellants'  immigration  history  is
    relevant in relation to the expectation of the appellants in coming  as
    minors with their mother to Ireland and Northern  Ireland.   They  have
    spent their teenage and thus formative years here in a family  and  the
    judge did not explain in  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  how  he
    factored in the earlier histories of the appellants when  minors.   The
    task before him was to assess outside the Rules whether a fair  balance
    was struck between the competing public and private interests.   In  my
    judgment the judge erred by failing to explain what weight he  gave  to
    the lives the appellants had established but instead  appears  to  have
    approached the case on the basis that there was  no  compelling  reason
    why the appellants should not leave for Ukraine instead of carrying out
    a balancing exercise of all the circumstances to see whether  the  case
    was exceptional which does not impose a requirement that  there  should
    be "some highly unusual" or "unique" fact or feature:  Agyarko  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 as explained in the recent Court of Appeal  decision  in
    GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.

21.  In  my  judgment  the  judge  failed  to  carry  out  the  appropriate
    proportionality exercise and I therefore set aside his decision.  Given
    the extent of fact-finding required,  the  case  is  remitted  for  its
    further consideration by a differently constituted Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 11 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

