
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/08900/2018 (P)
                                                           HU/08904/2018 (P)
                                                           HU/08929/2018 (P)
                                                           HU/08932/2018 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On Monday 15 June 2020               |On Tuesday 23 June 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    (1) N D
                                   (2) C I
                                   (3) C I
                                    (4) C D
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  it  is
appropriate to make one as the appeal involves minor children.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them or any  members  of  their  family.  This  direction  applies,
amongst others, to both parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

1.          The Appellants appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  N  M  Paul  promulgated  on  7  October  2019   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'
      appeals  against  the  Respondent's  decisions  dated  29  March  2018
      refusing their human rights claims (under Article 8 ECHR).

2.          The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria.  The First  and  Second
      Appellants are in a relationship as partners.  The  Third  and  Fourth
      Appellants are their two minor children.  The First Appellant came  to
      the UK as a student in 2008 with leave as a student to May 2010.   She
      then sought to remain as the spouse of an EEA (Czech) national in July
      2010 and she was given a residence permit valid to January 2016.   She
      divorced her husband  on  14  July  2015.   She  submitted  a  further
      application for a residence permit in June  2016  which  was  refused.
      She appealed that decision but later withdrew her appeal.  She  became
      appeal rights exhausted on 15 November 2017.

3.          The Second Appellant also came to the UK in  2008  with  an  EEA
      family permit to accompany his EEA (also Czech) national  spouse.   He
      was granted a further permit in that connection to December 2014.   He
      divorced his wife on 8 August 2014 and  his  further  application  was
      also refused.  He also appealed but withdrew his  appeal.   He  became
      appeal rights exhausted by 31 October 2016.

4.      The  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  were  born  in  2010  and  2014
      respectively and are currently aged nine years and five  years.   They
      were aged just over seven years and just under three years at date  of
      application, nearly  eight  years  and  four  years  at  date  of  the
      Respondent's decision and over eight years and four years at  date  of
      the hearing before Judge Paul.  The First and  Second  Appellants  are
      parents of both children  even  though  both  were  married  to  other
      persons (EEA nationals) when the children  were  conceived  and  born.
      The First Appellant says  that  she  became  pregnant  by  the  Second
      Appellant whilst still with her Czech husband.  It is  said  that  the
      Second Appellant subsequently moved in with them, following a  stroke,
      by which time his relationship was over.  It is said  that  the  First
      Appellant's husband then moved out and she became  pregnant  with  the
      Fourth Appellant.

5.          At the heart of  the  Appellants'  human  rights  claim  is  the
      position of the Third Appellant who was  aged  over  seven  years  (by
      about two weeks) when the application was made to remain.  The primary
      issue, as the Judge recognised,  was  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
      expect the eldest child (the Third Appellant)  who  is  a  "qualifying
      child" under the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and Section 117B  (6)
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("Section  117B(6)")  to
      leave the UK. The Judge concluded that the Respondent's  decision  did
      not breach Article 8 ECHR and therefore dismissed the appeals.


PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

6.          The Appellants raise three grounds of appeal.  First,  they  say
      that the Judge has failed to  make  clear  findings  as  to  the  best
      interests of the Third  and  Fourth  Appellants.   The  second  ground
      asserts that the Judge has failed to consider  relevant  case-law,  in
      particular MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA (Pakistan)") which is said  to  be
      to the effect that "leave should be granted unless there are  powerful
      reasons to the contrary".  By the third ground, the Appellants  submit
      that the Judge has failed to have regard to other factors  in  Section
      117B, particularly that they had leave to remain  for  some  of  their
      time in the UK, that they both speak English and  are  integrated  and
      that they would be financially independent if given the right to work.
       It is also said that the Judge has ignored evidence as to the  Second
      Appellant's ill health, the employment situation in  Nigeria  and  the
      integration of the family with their church group.

7.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Shimmin on 5 February 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

            "... 2.    The grounds requesting permission to  appeal  to  the
           Upper Tribunal lodged 18 October 2019 argue that the  judge  has
           failed to make clear findings on what is in the  best  interests
           of the children.  There is arguably some confusion in  paragraph
           28 of the decision which may lead to an arguable error of law.
            3.   Furthermore, it is arguable that the judge  has  failed  to
           apply jurisprudential authority in relation  to  the  qualifying
           child.
            4.   Lastly, it is argued that the  judge  has  failed  to  take
           material factors into account when conducting a  proportionality
           exercise under Article 8.  It is  arguable  hat  the  judge  has
           failed to take into account appropriate factors including  those
           under section 117B.
                 5.    I grant permission on all grounds."

 8.         By a Note and Directions dated 26 March  2020  and  sent  on  24
      April 2020, having reviewed the file, I reached the  provisional  view
      that it would be appropriate to determine without a hearing  (pursuant
      to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  -
      "the Procedure Rules") the following questions:

            (a)  whether the making of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law and, if so
                 (b)   whether that decision should be set aside.

            Directions were given for the parties  to  make  submissions  in
      writing on the appropriateness of that course and further  submissions
      in relation to the  error  of  law.  The  reasons  for  the  Note  and
      Directions was the "present  need  to  take  precautions  against  the
      spread of Covid-19, and the  overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
      Procedure Rules".

9.          On 6 May 2020, the Appellants, via  their  Counsel  acting  pro-
      bono, filed further submissions.  Those further submissions include  a
      further ground which was not directly raised in the original  grounds,
      namely that there was a delay in  the  promulgation  of  the  Decision
      which constituted a material  error  of  law,  having  regard  to  the
      analysis applied to that issue by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS  (Sri
      Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
      1391. No application  was  made  to  amend  the  Appellants'  grounds.
      Instead, the author of the grounds sought to link this  issue  to  the
      grounds previously pleaded on the basis that the Judge has  failed  to
      understand or properly to record the evidence and therefore  that  the
      delay has materially affected the fairness or safety of the  Decision.



10.         Somewhat confusingly, in relation to the procedure by which  the
      appeals could be determined, the Appellants submitted first  that  the
      grounds disclosed a material error and that, since credibility was not
      in issue, the  Decision  could  be  re-made  on  the  basis  of  legal
      submissions alone, but taking into account  some  additional  evidence
      but, second, that procedural fairness demanded that there be  an  oral
      hearing in relation to the error of law so that a  Judge  could  raise
      any matters of concern.   In  relation  to  the  additional  evidence,
      although the further submissions refer to Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, no explanation is given for the
      failure to adduce the evidence earlier.  I accept that, insofar as the
      evidence post-dates the previous hearing and is intended to deal  with
      the position, in particular of the children, at the present  time,  it
      could not be included before.  That may  be  an  explanation  for  the
      first ten pages of the additional bundle but not  for  the  subsequent
      twenty-two pages.  I accept however that, if I were to set  aside  the
      Decision for material error, I would need  to  re-decide  the  appeals
      based on the up-to-date position.

11.         On 6 May 2020, the Respondent filed written submissions  seeking
      to uphold the Decision.  She agreed that this case was suitable to  be
      considered without an oral  hearing.   The  Tribunal  forwarded  those
      submissions to the Appellants for comment.  The  Appellants  responded
      to the Respondent's submissions on 14 May  2020,  expanding  upon  the
      grounds as originally formulated by reference to what is said  by  the
      Respondent.

12.         The Appellants have now  had  three  opportunities  to  set  out
      their  case  -  in  the  original  grounds  of  appeal,  the   further
      submissions  and  the  submissions  in  reply  to   the   Respondent's
      submissions.  As they point out, credibility is not in issue  in  this
      case.  The challenge is based on the Judge's assessment, having regard
      to case-law which is now relatively settled.  Indeed,  the  Appellants
      accept  that  the  appeals  could  be  re-determined  based  on  legal
      submissions only.  Their only objection to  the  error  of  law  being
      determined based on legal submissions made only in writing is that the
      Appellants would lose the opportunity to make oral representations  on
      any matter of concern to a Judge.  It is not explained why the grounds
      which  are  fully  pleaded  and  expanded  upon  by  way  of   written
      submissions do not cover each and  every  matter  which  needs  to  be
      considered.  Nor is it explained why the Appellants  are  denied  "the
      quality and  effectiveness  of  representation"  merely  because  that
      representation is made in writing  rather  than  orally.   Indeed,  it
      might well be argued that they have had a greater opportunity  to  put
      forward their case than is available to them in the normal  course  of
      events via a ninety minutes' hearing.

13.         Having regard to the detailed nature  of  the  grounds  and  the
      submissions, I have reached the view that the  issues  can  fairly  be
      determined on the basis of the pleadings put forward.   I  proceed  to
      determine the error of law issue on the papers.   At this  stage,  the
      issue for me is whether the Decision contains an error of law.   If  I
      so conclude, I will need to either re-make the decision or  remit  the
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

14.          I  begin  my  consideration  with  the  issue  raised  somewhat
      belatedly in the Appellants' further  submissions,  namely  the  delay
      between the hearing in December  2018  and  the  promulgation  of  the
      Decision in October 2019.  That is a period of about  ten  months.   I
      begin by repeating that this issue was  not  raised  in  the  original
      grounds of appeal.  It appears from the  face  of  the  Decision  that
      there was a delay in promulgation.  However, what the grounds fail  to
      mention is that the delay was not in the writing of the  Decision  but
      in its promulgation to the Appellants.  The Tribunal's file shows that
      the Decision was originally promulgated on 8 January 2019.  It is also
      evident from the face of the Decision that it  was  written  by  Judge
      Paul much earlier; it is dated on 22 December 2018 - that  is  to  say
      some two days after the hearing.  It appears from the Tribunal's  file
      that, on 28 September 2019, the First Appellant contacted the Tribunal
      to say that she had not received the Decision and was  unaware  of  it
      until she received a letter from the Respondent seeking to enforce the
      family's return to Nigeria.  Her e-mail triggered the  re-promulgation
      of the Decision on 7 October 2019.  The Decision however remains dated
      December 2018.   There  is  therefore  no  conceivable  merit  in  the
      Appellants' attempt to rely  on  any  delay  in  the  writing  of  the
      Decision, as indeed they should have known both based on the  date  as
      shown on the Decision and on the background  to  the  re-promulgation,
      triggered by their own contact with the Tribunal.   I  therefore  need
      say no more about this issue.

15.         Turning then to the grounds as pleaded,  at  the  heart  of  the
      appeals and therefore also the grounds of appeal is  the  position  of
      the Third Appellant in particular.   However,  it  is  appropriate  to
      start with the third ground of appeal concerning the other factors  in
      Section 117B which might be relevant to these appeals.

16.         As the Respondent points  out,  the  fact  that  the  Appellants
      speak English (which is also the language largely spoken in  Nigeria),
      and are said to be financially independent (or would be  if  permitted
      to work), are neutral factors (see in particular Rhuppiah v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC [58]  at  [57]).  Indeed,
      the Appellants' reply to the Respondent's  submissions  recognises  as
      much.  It is asserted that those factors "should  properly  have  been
      afforded neutrality in the proportionality exercise" and that "another
      Judge, taking these neutral factors into account, could have come to a
      different conclusion when considering the other factors  submitted  to
      weigh heavily in the Appellants' favour".

17.         The question whether the Decision contains a material  error  of
      law is not whether another  Judge  could  have  reached  the  opposite
      conclusion  but  whether  this   Judge   reached   a   conclusion   by
      appropriately directing himself as to the relevant law  and  assessing
      the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.  It is also difficult  to
      understand how factors which are neutral can  be  afforded  weight  as
      such.  The fact that those factors are neutral means that they are not
      afforded  weight,  whether  positive  or  negative  in  the  balancing
      exercise.

18.         The Appellants' real complaint in this regard appears mainly  to
      be directed at the weight which it is said should have been  given  to
      other factors, such as the family's ties to their  local  church,  the
      children's integration in the UK and lack of  integration  with  their
      Nigerian heritage and  family.   Those  factors  are  properly  to  be
      considered in relation to the other grounds.

19.         The Judge was clearly aware of the immigration  history  of  the
      First and Second Appellants from what is said at [2] and  [3]  of  the
      Decision.  However, as he noted at [29]  of  the  Decision,  both  had
      overstayed since 2016 and their position had been unlawful since then.
       As the Judge there observed "that is an important factor in terms  of
      the SSHD's responsibility to maintain  proper  immigration  controls".
      That reference is to Section 117B (1).

20.         Although I accept that the Second  Appellant  makes  mention  in
      his witness statement    of having had a stroke in 2011 which he  says
      "still has serious ramifications for [him] now" (at �7, [AB/C2]),  the
      medical evidence does not support that position.  The letter from  his
      GP dated 11 March 2015 ([AB/73]) says only that "[p]atients may suffer
      from communication problems due to stroke in certain  cases"  and  the
      sickness notes at [AB/74-76] cover only a period of one month and  one
      week respectively in 2016 and refer only to the Second Appellant being
      unable to work for short periods because he was unwell and  tired  and
      having back pain.  A letter dated 20 November 2018 ([AB/241]) from the
      Second Appellant's GP indicates that he is taking medication  for  his
      earlier medical problems, that he has some regular reviews but that he
      is "compliant with his medication" and that bloods were "also normal".
       There is no up  to  date  medical  evidence  which  suggests  ongoing
      medical concerns arising from the stroke.  There is  further  evidence
      in the Appellants' supplementary bundle dated February  2020  ([ABS/8-
      9]) which refers to a further MRI but does not  disclose  any  current
      medical concerns; the MRI  appears  to  be  purely  precautionary  and
      relates to a possible prostate condition.  Neither does it appear from
      what is said at [19] to [21] of  the  Decision  that  the  Appellants'
      representative placed any reliance on this aspect of  the  Appellants'
      case.

21.         The Judge was entitled to proceed based on the case put  forward
      by the Appellants.  Even if it were an error to fail  to  mention  the
      Second Appellant's medical condition (which I  do  not  in  any  event
      accept), such error is immaterial given the  paucity  of  evidence  on
      this point.  Similarly, the relevance of the family's integration into
      their Church community is noted at [12] of the Decision and  there  is
      limited  if  any  evidence  in  support  of  this  contention  in  the
      Appellant's bundle.  I deal with this aspect below in more detail when
      looking at the first and second grounds.  For now,  I  note  that  the
      Judge recorded the evidence about that  issue  and  the  lack  of  any
      direct reference to  it  other  than  the  reference  to  there  being
      "precious little to justify the appellants' case for remaining in  the
      UK" when conducting the balancing exercise  is  not  an  error  or  is
      immaterial.  For those reasons, I reject the third ground.

 22.        It is appropriate to take the first and second grounds  together
      as both concern the position of the  minor  Appellants.   In  essence,
      those grounds are to the effect that the Judge failed to consider  the
      best interests of the Third and Fourth Appellants and failed  to  have
      regard to caselaw,  in  particular,  MA  (Pakistan)  when  considering
      whether it was reasonable to expect the Third Appellant to  leave  the
      UK, having regard to her age and the length of time that she has  been
      in the UK.  The Appellants rely in particular on the following passage
      from MA (Pakistan):

            "49. ...the fact that the child has been in  the  UK  for  seven
           years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in   the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."
            [my emphasis based on the Appellants' submissions]

             The  Appellants  say  that  no  powerful  reasons   have   been
      identified.  The Respondent says that such reasons  are  evident  from
      what is said at [17] and [23] of the Decision.  I accept that [17]  of
      the Decision record  the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions  on  this
      issue. Nonetheless, as with  the  evidence  recorded  earlier  in  the
      Decision, and the Appellants' submissions, the Judge must be taken  to
      have considered those submissions when reaching his conclusions.

23.         The Judge dealt with the best interests of the  Third  Appellant
      in particular at [23] to [28] of the Decision as follows:

            "23. The critical issue therefore relates to the best  interests
           of the third appellant.  It is trite to observe  that  the  best
           interests of that child are served by being with the family.  In
           this context, it seems to me proper to  take  into  account  her
           wider family.  The  first  and  second  appellant  are  Nigerian
           nationals, and both in  their  evidence  and  in  the  materials
           provided it seems to me  that  they  are  clearly  people  whose
           culture and background is important to them.  They come  from  a
           culture in which the extended family is  an  important  feature.
           They are living in relative isolation in the UK, unsupported  by
           family.  As already stated above, they are living in very modest
           circumstances.
            24.  The  third  appellant  clearly  had  the  benefit  of  good
           education and has demonstrated that she is a lively  and  bright
           young  child.   She  has  all  the   qualities   necessary   and
           commensurate  with  children  of  that  age,  to  adapt  to  the
           environment in which she finds herself, so long as she is  in  a
           secure environment  with  her  parents.   The  benefits  of  her
           education are such that she has not yet reached the level  where
           she is entrenched within the UK educational system, by reference
           to exams necessary to proceed to higher education.  She has  all
           the benefits of an English education which would assist  her  in
           her transition to education in Nigeria.  The same goes  for  her
           younger sibling for whom it is perhaps even more obvious to  say
           that the transition would be of little detrimental effect.
            25.  In this respect, I have regard to the factors  set  out  in
           EV Philippines, and in my view they have not been here  so  long
           and/or so established in the educational system that they  would
           find any move disruptive.  Moving country  and  education  is  a
           common feature within a modern world, and in this  context  they
           would be moving to a culture and environment  with  which  their
           parents will be familiar, and from which they will benefit.
            26.  In my view, the first appellant's evidence and  the  second
           appellant's witness statement do not disclose, in my view,  that
           there are not strong family  ties  with  Nigeria.   Furthermore,
           there are no obvious linguistic or medical difficulties  in  any
           of the parties adapting to life in  Nigeria.   The  language  of
           commerce and professional life is  English  in  Nigeria  and  as
           bright, young children, they would be expected to  aspire  to  a
           life in which that would probably be the language of their adult
           life.
            27.  Finally, it is plain that a critical factor  here  is  that
           they would be returning with their parents in the context  of  a
           family unit.
            28.  Applying the criteria set out in the case  of  section  55,
           in my view adopting the analysis as set out in that case  [sic],
           there is no question that the strength of a child's relationship
           with her parents or other family members would be severed if the
           child was to move to Nigeria with her family."

24.         Contrary to the submission at [5] of  the  grounds,  it  is  far
      from unclear what are the Judge's findings as to the  children's  best
      interests.  The children would be  returning  with  their  parents  to
      their and their parents' country of nationality.   I  accept,  as  the
      Appellants say in their reply to the  Respondent's  submissions,  that
      there is no issue of a family split in this case.  I do not understand
      the Respondent's assertion that the Judge has missed out  a  "not"  at
      [28] of the Decision.  The point  there  made,  as  reflected  in  the
      earlier paragraphs, is that the family  have  no  support  network  of
      other family members in the UK.  They have extended family in Nigeria.
       The children's best interests are, in the  Judge's  view,  served  by
      remaining in the family unit and  returning  with  that  family  unit.
      There would be "no question" that the strong  family  relationship  of
      the unit would be severed if the family moved as a whole.

25.         The Judge did not accept the evidence that the adult  Appellants
      do not have strong family ties with Nigeria ([26]).   It  is  asserted
      that this finding was not open to the Judge  on  the  evidence.   That
      evidence is recorded at [8] to [11] of the Decision.   Even  accepting
      that the family do not have contact with some siblings in Nigeria,  it
      is worth noting that the First Appellant  accepted  that  she  retains
      some contact with her family in Nigeria and  indeed  her  brother  has
      provided written evidence that  he  would  be  unable  financially  to
      support and accommodate the family if they returned to  Nigeria.   The
      Second Appellant has family members even though his evidence  is  that
      he has not maintained contact.

26.         Whilst it may well be the case that the  minor  Appellants  have
      not yet formed a  relationship  with  their  extended  family  members
      because they have not met them and have not visited Nigeria, that does
      not undermine the Judge's findings that they have  no  family  members
      here and could form ties with  their  relatives  and  culture  in  the
      country of their nationality.

27.         As to integration in the UK and preservation  of  cultural  ties
      with Nigeria, the Respondent asserts that the  evidence  is  that  the
      Appellants attend a church which "is in fact a  Nigerian  church  with
      its headquarters in Nigeria and attended by the Nigerian community  in
      the UK".  The Appellants say in reply that the church  is  "[a  multi-
      national Church, not a 'Nigerian Church', as would be recorded in  the
      note of live evidence] in the UK, which  happened  to  have  a  branch
      opening in Nigeria at the time  of  the  First  Tier  hearing  [not  a
      headquarters in Nigeria, as would be recorded  in  the  note  of  live
      evidence]".  The parts in square brackets are,  as  I  understand  it,
      targeted at the issue of delay in writing  the  Decision  and  alleged
      impact on the Judge's  understanding  of  the  evidence.   As  I  have
      already explained, that issue is a non-starter on the facts here.   It
      is not explained why the evidence about the nature of the  church  (if
      relevant) was not contained in the written evidence.  Nor is Counsel's
      note of the oral evidence included with those  submissions.   Notably,
      although the First Appellant has provided an updated statement in  the
      supplementary bundle, where she says that  she  is  trying  to  get  a
      further letter from the Church but could not do so  due  to  lockdown,
      she does not give evidence herself as to the  status  of  that  church
      which she could easily do if, as Counsel says, this formed part of her
      oral evidence.

28.         In any event, whilst I accept that  the  Respondent's  assertion
      in her submissions may overstate the position in relation to the  base
      of the Church, that is not relevant to the findings of the  Judge  nor
      the evidence which was presented to him (as recorded at  [12]  of  the
      Decision).  In that regard, the Judge's record of evidence  shows  the
      following.  In relation to the First  Appellant's  evidence,  she  was
      taken to [AB/240] which is the updated letter from the  Church  (which
      merely describes itself as  "a  multi-national  evangelical  church").
      Her evidence in this regard in  response  to  what  was  apparently  a
      question whether the church was also in Nigeria was that it had  "just
      recently opened in Nigeria -  Abuja".    Leaving  aside  that  even  a
      cursory search of the internet suggests that the church had  a  branch
      in Lagos prior to the more recent opening of that in  Abuja  and  that
      its founding member comes originally from Nigeria, the Appellants' own
      evidence was that there was at least one  branch  of  that  church  in
      Nigeria and therefore, by implication, that  they  could  continue  to
      practise their religion in Nigeria.   I can find no reference  by  the
      Judge to the Church being a Nigerian one.  He  says  at  [12]  of  the
      Decision that "the Church has an international branch,  and  they  had
      recently opened a Church in Nigeria, in  Abuja"  which  is  consistent
      with the evidence as presented to him.  It is for  the  Appellants  to
      evidence the interference that they say  there  would  be  with  their
      private and family lives.  There is no  arguable  error  made  by  the
      Judge in relation to the practising  of  the  family's  religion  when
      viewed against the evidence put forward by the Appellants.

29.         As to circumstances in Nigeria, the Judge had evidence that  the
      Appellants were able to find work in the UK and the First Appellant in
      particular has an accountancy  qualification.   The  circumstances  of
      their family members in Nigeria is  therefore  of  less  significance.
      In any event, the letter at [AB/12] from the First Appellant's brother
      confirms only  that  he  is  unable  to  support  or  accommodate  the
      Appellants.  It says little about his own circumstances.  That  letter
      in any event stands in some contrast with the  account  of  the  First
      Appellant's evidence at [11] of the Decision that her brother is still
      running the family business.

30.         The Judge has considered the impact on the  Third  Appellant  in
      particular in terms of her education.  As I have already pointed  out,
      her position was the primary focus of the appeal given her age but  it
      is not right to say that the Judge did not also consider the  position
      of the Fourth Appellant (see in  particular  [24]  to  [26]  as  cited
      above).

31.         The Appellants' grounds rely  on  one  paragraph  of  the  First
      Appellant's statement as to  the  children's  integration  as  follows
      ([AB/B6]):

            "41. My children literally could not imagine  life  outside  the
           UK, daughter says to me, 'I am not from Nigeria' and my son says
           'I am from England' - they see themselves as truly British.  Our
           children could not cope with such a huge change and upheaval  to
           their lives; even the prospect of moving  back  to  Nigeria  has
           been extremely distressing for them.  I am concerned about their
           stress levels as children as even the  thought  of  leaving  our
           lives here causes them to be extremely upset."

            The Judge has however considered that point in what he  says  at
      [24] and [25] of the Decision.  That passage has to be  read  moreover
      in the context of what other evidence there is as  to  the  children's
      integration.  As would  perhaps  be  expected  at  the  age  of  these
      children, that concerns their health, development and  education  (see
      in particular [AB/85-171]).  Those are  the  very  factors  which  the
      Judge considered.  As would be expected from a child of her  age,  the
      Third Appellant in her letter at [AB/237] expresses her wish  to  stay
      in the UK but the question is  what  is  in  her  best  interests  and
      reasonable in the "real world" situation in which she finds herself.

32.         The Judge has therefore  adequately  considered  the  children's
      best interests.  There is  no  error  of  law  in  that  regard.   The
      question which then arises is whether he has properly  understood  the
      weight to be given to those interests and the  way  in  which  Section
      117B (6) in particular operates.

33.         I begin with the  caselaw  in  this  regard.   The  case  of  MA
      (Pakistan) is clearly relevant.  However, the Supreme Court had  cause
      to deal also with Section 117B (6) and to review MA (Pakistan)  in  KO
      (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)").   The  following  passage  is  of
      particular importance:

           "16.              It is natural to begin with the first in time,
           that is paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).  This  paragraph  is  directed
           solely to the position of  the  child.  Unlike  its  predecessor
           DP5/96 it contains no requirement to consider the criminality or
           misconduct of a parent as a balancing factor. It  is  impossible
           in my view to  read  it  as  importing  such  a  requirement  by
           implication.
           17.              As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated
           the substance of the rule without material change, but this time
           in the context of the right of the parent  to  remain.  I  would
           infer that it was intended to have the same effect. The question
           again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As  Elias  LJ  said
           in MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and   Asylum
           Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there
           is nothing in the  subsection  to  import  a  reference  to  the
           conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out a number of factors
           relating  to  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  but
           criminality is not one of them. Subsection  117B(6)  is  on  its
           face free-standing, the only qualification being that the person
           relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of relevant
           factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above) seems to  me
           wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the context  of  section
           117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).
           18.              On  the  other  hand,  as  the  IDI  guidance
           acknowledges,  it  seems  to  me  inevitably  relevant  in  both
           contexts to consider where the parents, apart from the  relevant
           provision, are  expected  to  be,  since  it  will  normally  be
           reasonable for the child to be with them.  To  that  extent  the
           record of the parents may  become  indirectly  material,  if  it
           leads to their ceasing to have  a  right  to  remain  here,  and
           having to leave. It is only if,  even  on  that  hypothesis,  it
           would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
           provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point  was
           well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department 2017 SLT  1245, [2017]  Scot  CS
           CSOH_117:
                 '22.     In my opinion before one embarks on an  assessment
                 of whether it is reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                 the UK one has to address  the  question,  'Why  would  the
                 child be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In  a  case
                 such as this there can only be  one  answer:  'because  the
                 parents have no right to remain in the UK'. To approach the
                 question in any other way strips away the context in  which
                 the assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."
           19.              He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made  a
           similar point in considering the "best interests" of children in
           the context of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
           Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:
                 '58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment  of  the
                 best interests of the children must be made  on  the  basis
                 that the facts are as they are in the real  world.  If  one
                 parent has no right to remain, but the other  parent  does,
                 that is the background  against  which  the  assessment  is
                 conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,  then
                 that is the background  against  which  the  assessment  is
                 conducted. Thus  the  ultimate  question  will  be:  is  it
                 reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no
                 right to remain to the country of origin?"
           To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise  in MA
           (Pakistan) para 40, I would  respectfully  disagree.  There  is
           nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be
           considered otherwise  than  in  the  real  world  in  which  the
           children find themselves."


34.   I take into account also what was said by this Tribunal  when  dealing
      with the way in which Section 117B (6) is  to  be  applied  in  Younas
      (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba;  Zambrano)  [2020]  UKUT  00129  (IAC)
      ("Younas"):

            "110.      Section 117B(6)(b) requires a court or  tribunal  to
           assume that the child in question will leave the  UK:  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica)  &  Anor  [2019]
           EWCA Civ 661 and JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey
           [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC). However, once that assumption has  been
           made, the court or tribunal must move from the  hypothetical  to
           the real: paragraph 19 of KO (Nigeria)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53. The length of time
           a child is likely to be outside the UK is part of the real world
           factual circumstances in which a child will find herself and  is
           relevant to deciding, for the  purpose  of  section  117B(6)(b),
           whether it would be unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
           the UK.
                  111. A  court  or  tribunal  must  base  its  analysis  of
           reasonableness on the facts as they are (having assumed, for the
           purpose of this analysis, that the child will leave the UK  with
           his or her parent or parents). The "real world" context includes
           consideration of everything relating to the child, both  in  the
           UK and country of return, such as whether  he  or  she  will  be
           leaving the UK with both or just one parent;  how  removal  will
           affect his or her  education,  health,  and  relationships  with
           family and friends; and the conditions in the country of return.
           The conduct and immigration history of  the  child's  parent(s),
           however, is not relevant. See KO at paras. 16 - 18."

35.         Although I accept that what is there said arises in a  different
      factual context as the child in that case was expected to leave the UK
      only for a temporary period, the approach to the issue is  nonetheless
      the same.  A Judge has to consider the position of the child based  on
      the facts and evidence which apply to that  issue  and  determine  the
      impact on the child.  As the approach adopted in  that  judgment  also
      makes  clear,  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are   a   primary
      consideration and as such will inform  consideration  of  the  Section
      117B (6) issue.

36.         I accept that, perhaps unusually, the Judge does  not  refer  to
      Section 117B (6) in terms.  Nor indeed does  he  refer  to  any  other
      provision of Section 117B expressly.  Nonetheless, he does so in form.
       By way of example, I have already referred to the  Judge's  reference
      to the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  which  is  a
      significant feature of that section.

37.         In relation to Section 117B (6), the  way  in  which  the  Judge
      self-directed himself on that issue appears at [19]  to  [21]  of  the
      Decision in his record of the submissions of the  Appellants'  Counsel
      as follows:

            "19. Ms Gherman relied on her skeleton argument,  which  put  at
           its very forefront the basic question  as  to  whether  or  not,
           having regard to the third appellant having been born in the  UK
           and having lived in the UK for more than 7 years, it  would  not
           be reasonable for her to return to Nigeria.  She relied  on  the
           well known authorities  and  skeleton,  to  make  the  following
           points:
            20.  Lengthy residence in a country of  origin  was  a  relevant
           and significant factor in determining whether or not it would be
           appropriate to disrupt that.  Following the case of KO,  it  was
           clear that the conduct of the parents could not form part of the
           assessment of reasonableness, but could  be  considered  in  the
           real world analysis of what the children  should  do,  and  also
           with regard to  the  overall  proportionality  of  the  proposed
           removal.  She also relied on section 11(b)(v) of the 2014 Act to
           point out that the statutory provision was to  the  effect  that
           there was no public interest in  requiring  a  person's  removal
           where they had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
           with  a  qualifying  child  and  it  would  [not]  be   properly
           reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.
             21.   She  also  referred  to  other  authorities   which   are
           applicable to the situation in this case, including  section  55
           of the 2009 Act."

38.         Whilst as I accept there is no  direct  reference  there  to  MA
      (Pakistan), the Judge did direct himself in accordance  with  what  is
      said in KO (Nigeria) and in  accordance  with  the  approach  of  this
      Tribunal in Younas.  The approach there set  out  is  also  consistent
      with what is said by the Court of Appeal in Runa v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 514  at  [36]  (although  that
      case post-dates the  Decision).   The  mere  failure  to  make  direct
      reference to MA (Pakistan) cannot amount  to  an  error  provided  the
      correct  approach  has  been  followed.   I  do  not  understand   the
      Appellants to contend otherwise.

39.         The question then is whether the Judge  has  adopted  the  right
      approach.  Coming back to where I began, the Appellants say  that  the
      Judge has  erred  because  he  has  not  identified  the  "strong"  or
      "powerful" reasons  to  outweigh  the  best  interests  of  the  Third
      Appellant.

40.         There are two difficulties with that submission.  The  first  is
      that, contrary to the Appellants' position, I have concluded that  the
      Judge did identify where the Third  Appellant's  best  interests  lay.
      Those are to be with her parents wherever they are.  Since  they  have
      no leave to remain, the "real world" means that they would  return  to
      Nigeria.  The Judge has determined that it would be in the  children's
      best interests to return with their parents and therefore no  question
      of "strong" and "powerful" countervailing  reasons  arises.    As  the
      Court of Appeal made clear in MA (Pakistan) at [47], even  in  a  case
      where a child's best interests are found to favour  remaining  in  the
      UK, it will not necessarily follow that it is unreasonable  to  expect
      that child to leave.   The resolution of that latter issue involves "a
      careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the  UK  and
      in the country where it is proposed  [he]  should  return".   In  this
      case, based on the evidence, the Judge concluded on the evidence  that
      the best interests of the children were to remain with  their  parents
      wherever they were and did not require them to remain in the  UK.   He
      did so by analysing the case based on links  with  the  UK  and  links
      which could be forged in the children's country of nationality.

41.         The second difficulty  is  that  the  way  in  which  the  Judge
      approached this issue is entirely consistent with the Supreme  Court's
      approach in KO (Nigeria).  The consideration of the best interests  of
      the child and whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
      leave the UK has to leave out of account any wrongdoing on the part of
      a parent (provided it is not a deportation case).  There is nothing in
      paragraphs [23] to [28] of  the  Decision  which  indicates  that  the
      parents' immigration history was taken into account in this context.

42.         I accept  that  the  Judge  does  not  in  terms  state  in  his
      conclusion in the section I have set out  that  it  is  reasonable  to
      expect the Third Appellant to leave the UK.   However, that  is  plain
      when the first sentence of [23] of the Decision is read with  what  is
      said at [22] that "the central issue in this case is  whether  or  not
      the third appellant - a child born and raised in the  UK  -  could  be
      reasonably expected to leave the UK" and when read  with  the  way  in
      which the Judge directed  himself  when  summarising  the  Appellants'
      Counsel's submissions at [19] and [20] of the Decision.

43.         For those reasons, there is no error of law  identified  by  the
      first and second grounds of appeal.  For the sake of  completeness,  I
      note that, having found  what  the  best  interests  of  the  children
      required and, by implication, that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
      Third Appellant to leave the UK, the Judge went on at [29] and [30] to
      consider the overall proportionality of the Respondent's  decision  to
      remove the family.  At that point, it clearly was appropriate for  the
      Judge to take into account the immigration history of  the  First  and
      Second Appellants.  I do not understand the Appellants to  take  issue
      with what is there said (other than in relation to the  points  raised
      by the third ground with which I have already dealt).  In  any  event,
      the approach taken is consistent with the case-law and the conclusions
      reached are ones which were open to the Judge on the evidence.

44.         The Appellants rely in their written submissions on the  changed
      position of the children.  The Third Appellant in particular  has  now
      reached  the  age  where  an  application  can  be  made  for  British
      nationality as she has been in the UK for ten years.  That is not  and
      could not be relevant to whether there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
      Decision which relates to a hearing over eighteen months ago.  If  the
      circumstances of the family have materially changed in the interim, it
      is for the Appellants to make a further application to remain based on
      those circumstances.

45.         In conclusion, the Decision does not contain an  error  of  law.
      I therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION
The Decision does not involve the making of a material error on a  point  of
law. I therefore uphold the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  Paul
promulgated on 7 October 2019 with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellants'
appeals remain dismissed.


Signed  L K Smith

Dated: 15 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

