
                                        [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08491/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                  Xueqi [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dated 8 November 2018 dismissing her appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 22 March 2018 refusing her further  leave
    to remain on the basis of her family life with her partner.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of China  born  on  7  December  1990.  Her
    immigration history can briefly be summarised as  follows.   She  first
    entered the UK on 13 October 2013 with a Tier 4  visa  valid  until  30
    September 2014.  She returned to China and subsequently applied for and
    was granted further Tier 4 visas. Her most recent entry into the UK was
    on 1 March 2016.  On 13 June 2017 her leave to remain was curtailed  to
    expire on 16 December 2017 and on 14 September  2017  she  applied  for
    further leave to remain on family life grounds.

3.    The appellant  claimed  that  she  was  in  a  relationship  with  her
    partner, who has two daughters, born on 12 August 2007 and 18 May  2009
    respectively.  The respondent was not satisfied that she could meet the
    requirements of the Rules:  she did not fall within the  definition  of
    "partner" as she had not been living with her partner for two years  at
    the date of application  and  she  could  not  meet  the  private  life
    provisions in para 276ADE(1). The respondent also found that there were
    no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from both the appellant and her partner.  At [20] he said that
    he did not accept that there was a relationship between them but, if he
    was wrong  about  that  and  they  had  family  life  in  the  UK,  the
    respondent's  decision  would  have  consequences   of   such   gravity
    potentially to engage the operation of article 8.

5.    He took into account the fact that the appellant and her  partner  had
    been through an Islamic ceremony of marriage on 9 July 2017, when  they
    moved in together  and  had  married  on  18  April  2018  [36].   When
    considering  the  provisions  of  s.  117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, he said that there were no  qualifying
    children [30].   He  considered  the  factors  weighing  in  favour  of
    immigration control and those in favour of family and private  life  at
    [40]-[41].   He  concluded  that   public   interest   outweighed   the
    interference with private and family life  and  that  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

6.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  a
    variety of ways.  When granting permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge said:

         "The judge was clearly aware that the appellant was married to  her
         partner at the  date  of  hearing  but  does  not  appear  to  have
         considered  the  application  of  article  8  at  that  date.   The
         appellant's original grounds make reference to the fact that  there
         are two British children, who  live  with  the  appellant  and  her
         husband, but their interests have not been considered or taken into
         account at all by the judge.  At [30] of his  decision,  the  judge
         states that there are no qualifying children, which would appear to
         be incorrect.  At [20] of his decision, the judge indicates that he
         does not accept the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
         partner, although its subsistence  did  not  appear  to  have  been
         challenged by the respondent.  At [42], the judge acknowledges that
         the appellant and her husband have lived together in the UK and can
         do so again in China, thereby  indicating  contradictory  findings.
         He  does  not  appear  to   have   considered   the   question   of
         insurmountable obstacles."


7.    At the hearing before me  the  appellant  was  unrepresented.   Before
    hearing from her, I asked Mr Tufan whether he sought  to  maintain  the
    decision in the light of the grounds of appeal and the basis  on  which
    permission to appeal had been granted.  He indicated very  fairly  that
    he was prepared to concede that the judge had erred in law in the  ways
    identified in the grant of permission.

8.    I am satisfied that this concession is  properly  made  and  that  the
    judge has erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.   In
    written submissions from the appellant's solicitor, the Upper  Tribunal
    is invited to remake the decision by allowing the appeal but  as  there
    needs to be a full rehearing with a full review of the facts,  this  is
    an appropriate case for a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision.

9.    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision is set  aside  and
    is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full  rehearing  by  a
    different judge.





Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 12 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
