

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/08648/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10th May 2017                     |On: 1st June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Tazneem Bibi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Harrison,    Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hashmi, Mamoon Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  1st  January
    1979.  On the 30th September 2016 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  D.
    Taylor) allowed her appeal, on human rights grounds, against a decision
    to refuse to grant her indefinite leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK. The Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department now has permission to appeal against that decision.










    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Respondent (hereinafter Mrs Bibi) married a Mr  Muhammad  Qadir  in
    Pakistan in 2003. Her husband is British and in due course  the  couple
    came to live here. She was granted entry clearance as his spouse on the
    14th June 2005.  Her visa expired on the 14th June 2007.  She  did  not
    make an application for further  leave  until  the  13th  August  2007.
    Although  that  application  was  initially  refused   Mrs   Bibi   was
    subsequently granted discretionary leave, on the basis of her marriage,
    on the 12th March 2009, a status she has held ever since.

 3. On the 16th April 2015 Mrs Bibi  made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain. She asserted that she had lived in the UK as a  spouse
    for approaching ten years and that she met all of the  requirements  of
    the rules. The application was made under cover of  letter  dated  14th
    April 2015 from Mamoon Solicitors which  asserted  that  Mrs  Bibi  was
    about to take the 'life in the UK test' and that the results  would  be
    forwarded when available.  A test certificate dated 22nd May  2015  was
    duly forwarded to the Respondent.

 4. The refusal letter is dated the 9th  October  2015.  The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that Mrs Bibi had in fact passed the 'life in  the
    UK test' and accused her of having submitted a counterfeit certificate.
     On that basis the application  fell  to  be  refused  under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the immigration rules.  The letter  went  on  to  refuse  to
    grant indefinite leave to remain  with  reference  to  E-ILRP.1.2  (the
    requirement that she have leave to remain as a partner at the  time  of
    her application) and E-ILRP.1.3 (that she has accrued a  period  of  60
    months with leave to remain as a partner of a settled person).  In  the
    alternative consideration was given to whether she  should  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  6  years'  discretionary
    leave, but because of the fraud accusation, the application fell to  be
    refused on this ground.

 5. When the appeal came before Judge Taylor there was no appearance by the
    Home Office. A letter from the Presenting Officers Unit apologised  and
    blamed the absence on staff shortage. Judge Taylor  proceeded  to  hear
    the appeal.   Having considered all of the evidence Judge Taylor  found
    that it "fell well short" of establishing any sort of fraud.  He  found
    as fact that Mrs Bibi had taken the test and that the  certificate  was
    genuine. The Secretary of State's refusal letter had acknowledged  that
    Mrs Bibi could qualify for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of
    her 60 months' discretionary leave,  and  since  the  only  ground  for
    refusal under that head was the accusation of fraud, it  followed  that
    the appeal should be allowed on that basis.

 6. The Secretary of State argued three grounds  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The first was that the Tribunal erred in law in not  agreeing
    with the Secretary of State about the  'life  in  the  UK  test'.    In
    refusing permission on this ground  Judge  Kimnell  rightly  recognised
    that Judge Taylor conducted a careful analysis of the evidence and  was
    perfectly entitled to reach the decision  that  he  did.   No  arguable
    error of law arises.

 7. The second ground was that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in
    law in failing to address the matters raised in the refusal  letter  in
    respect of E-ILRP.1.2 and E-ILRP.1.3, and the financial requirements at
    E-LTRP 3.1 TO 3.4.  Judge Kimnell was prepared, albeit reluctantly,  to
    grant permission on the basis that it was arguable that  these  matters
    had not been addressed.

 8. The third ground was  that  "there  were  no  findings  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE". Quite why the First-tier Tribunal  would  have  made
    findings on that rule is unclear. Judge Kimnell did  not  address  this
    point in his permission decision and it was not pursued before me.



    My Findings

 9. The only ground that Judge Kimnell considered arguable was  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's failure to consider the matters raised in  the  refusal
    letter relating to whether or not Mrs  Bibi  qualified  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under the rules. As Mr Harrison had to acknowledge, the
    drafter of the grounds,  and  indeed  Judge  Kimnell,  appear  to  have
    overlooked the fact that the appeal was not allowed with  reference  to
    those provisions. It was accepted by Ms Hashmi that Mrs Bibi could  not
    meet them all: for instance, she could not  demonstrate  that  she  had
    leave to remain as a partner at the date that she made the  application
    since she in fact held discretionary leave at that time.  Paragraph  44
    of the decision makes clear that the appeal was allowed  on  the  basis
    that Mrs Bibi had  accrued  six  years  of  continuous  residence  with
    discretionary leave.   She did not have to demonstrate that she met any
    of the requirements mentioned in the grounds or  grant  of  permission.
    That ground is not therefore made out.


10. That is not however the end of the matter. Mr Harrison  submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal nevertheless  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appeal "under the immigration rules".  The  decision  to  refuse  leave
    that was taken on the 9th October 2015 was a decision to refuse a human
    rights claim. That was the appeal pursued,  and  the  only  basis  upon
    which the Appellant could have succeeded.

11. Ms Hashmi conceded that it had not been open to the Tribunal  to  allow
    the appeal "under the immigration rules".

12. I am satisfied that this amended ground of appeal is made out. I am not
    however satisfied that it can have any material impact on  the  outcome
    of this appeal. There was no dispute that Article 8 was engaged by  the
    facts in this case. Mrs Bibi has a family  life  and  the  decision  to
    refuse her lawful leave to remain would constitute an interference with
    it.  It is accepted that all other things being equal, Mrs  Bibi  would
    qualify for leave on the basis of the Secretary of  State's  policy  of
    granting indefinite leave to remain to persons  who  have  accrued  six
    years' continuous residence with discretionary leave  to  remain.    If
    she qualifies for leave under a  published  policy,  the  Secretary  of
    State can hardly show the decision to be proportionate, no matter  what
    factors might weigh against her in s117B of the Nationality Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.    The findings of  the  Tribunal  were  that  all
    things were equal and that the sole reason  given  for  refusal  -  the
    accusation of forgery - was  unfounded.   It  followed  that  Mrs  Bibi
    should be granted leave to remain on the basis of the published policy,
    and that the appeal should have been allowed on human rights grounds.




    Decisions


13. The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  "under  the
    immigration rules". Following the amendments to s82 of the  Nationality
    immigration and Asylum Act 2002 introduced by the Immigration Act  2014
    that was no longer an option available to the Tribunal. The decision is
    set aside to that extent only. The decision is remade as follows:


    "the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


14. There is no direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               31st May 2017


