
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU/08065/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 May 2019                       |On 21 May 2019                       |


                                   Before:

                       The Hon Mrs Justice Whipple DBE
                    and Upper Tribunal Judge John Freeman


                                  Between:

                                 Carlos [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  David Jones (counsel instructed by Sutovi? and
Hartigan)
For the respondent: Miss Julie Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Iain Ross), sitting at Hendon  on  31  January,  to   a
    human rights appeal by a citizen of Ghana,  born  1974.  The  appellant
    arrived as a visitor in 2000, and has overstayed ever since.  His  wife
    came here as a student a little later, with  leave  till  2004.  During
    that year they married, and in 2005 they had a son 'D', with a daughter
    'A' in 2009.

 2. In 2010 both the appellant and his wife  received  suspended  sentences
    for offences involving obtaining and possession of false ID, 15 months'
    in his case, and 9 in hers. Deportation decisions were served on  them,
    and their appeals dismissed,  coming  to  a  final  end  following  the
    refusal of permission to appeal by the Upper  Tribunal  on  11  January
    2012. Deportation orders followed on 3 April, and  further  submissions
    were refused in 2012, 2013 and finally on 12 February 2016,  each  time
    without right of appeal.

 3. Next D, being ten by this time, was registered as a British citizen  on
    23 June 2016, so he  no  longer  faces  deportation  with  his  family.
    Further submissions were made about the effect of that, and refused  on
    8 July 2017. This gave the appellant an  in-country  right  of  appeal,
    following Kiarie and Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42, and is the decision under
    appeal in this case.

 4.  The  appellant's  suspended  sentence  did   not   involve   automatic
    deportation; but he was regarded by the respondent, with whom the judge
    agreed on this, as someone whose offence had caused serious harm.  This
    made him a 'foreign criminal': see Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, s. 117D (2) (c) (ii). There is no dispute that both  children
    are 'qualifying children', under s. 117D (1), nor  that  the  appellant
    has a 'genuine and subsisting relationship'  with  both  them  and  his
    wife.

 5. The relevant part of s. 117C follows:

         '(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's deportation  unless  ...  Exception  2
         applies.

         ...

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.'

 6. The judge approached the case from paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration
    Rules; but his decision can be summarized by saying that he allowed the
    appeal on the basis that Exception 2 applied, because the effect of the
    appellant's deportation on both children would be unduly  harsh.  D  of
    course could not be removed to  Ghana;  and  the  respondent  does  not
    pursue this appeal on the basis that either of the children  should  be
    expected to go there.

 7. The real question for the judge was whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the children to stay in this country  without  the  appellant.  The
    appellant's r. 24 response suggests that the judge's  consideration  of
    this point should be taken as beginning at  paragraph  23;  but,  apart
    from noting that the 'genuine and subsisting relationship' between them
    and him was not in dispute, paragraphs 23 - 25 are dealing  exclusively
    with the consequences to  the  children  if  they  had  to  leave  this
    country.

 8. The judge's consideration of what we regard as  the  real  question  is
    confined to paragraph 26:

         "I am also satisfied that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  two
         children to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.  He
         has been an integral part of their lives since they were born.  The
         nature of the criminal offending is not such as could be said  that
         it would be in the children's best interests for the  appellant  to
         be living apart from  them.  Further,  given  that  the  children's
         mother does not have leave to remain, it would not be an option for
         the children to remain in the UK with her."

 9. The judge then sets out the legislation to be applied, citing  s.  117C
    in full; but at no point does  he  look  into  the  difference  between
    'harsh' and 'unduly harsh'. That crucial distinction had been drawn  in
    this way in KO (Nigeria) & others [2018] UKSC 53 at paragraph 23:

         "... the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under
         section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent."

10. The existence of a 'genuine and subsisting relationship' between  child
    and parent is not a basis on which that test can be  satisfied,  but  a
    condition for its having to be applied at all; and the  judge  said  no
    more about it than is set out at paragraph  26.  Perhaps  he  may  have
    thought the point was effectively settled by the last  sentence,  where
    he regards it as 'not an option' for these children to stay  here  with
    their mother, since she had no existing leave to remain.

11. That point is challenged at paragraph 2 of the respondent's grounds  of
    appeal, since the children's mother has had a separate application  for
    leave to remain, on the basis of her relationship with  D,  outstanding
    since  March  2017.  Miss  Isherwood  pointed  out  that,  while   that
    application was outstanding,  the  mother  could  not  be  removed.  Mr
    Jones's answer to that was that any grant of  long-term  leave  to  her
    would be 'a long way off'.

12. It does not seem to us  that  either  of  these  contentions  forms  an
    entirely satisfactory basis for deciding whether  the  children  either
    could, or could not live here without their mother. If  the  respondent
    chose either to grant or refuse her leave to  remain,  their  situation
    would become clear. As he had chosen, deliberately or not, to leave her
    in limbo, that was the situation with which the judge had to deal.

13. The result is that the judge's decision has to be set aside,  for  lack
    of reasons on the 'unduly harsh' point. As the authorities make  clear,
    this in itself is an evaluative exercise, not a fact-finding  one,  and
    we have considered whether we could deal with it ourselves. However, it
    is an exercise which has to be carried out on a full evaluation of  the
    factual situation.

14. As Mr Jones pointed out, the case put forward by the respondent in  the
    decision letter was that both the appellant and the  children's  mother
    were to be removed. This  was  no  doubt  why  the  judge  treated  her
    position as settled, when it was  not;  and  why  he  gave  no  further
    reasons as to whether or not it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    remain in this country with her.

15. In our view, the appellant, and the family as a whole, were entitled to
    have the benefit of a detailed examination of the evidence  as  to  how
    the children and their mother would cope here on their own without him,
    since on the respondent's case this is now at least a possibility. That
    will require a fresh hearing, on all points, which can best take  place
    before another first-tier judge.

Appeal : decision set aside

Fresh hearing at Taylor House, not before Judge Ross


                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                                                           Dated 20 May 2019
