
                                      [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              MARIBEL URENA REY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Butterworth, instructed by Bespoke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Maribel Urena Rey, was born on 3 March  1981  and  is  a
    citizen of the Philippines.  She first entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    August 2009 on a student visa.  She met  and  subsequently  married  Mr
    Martin Sharp,  a  British  citizen.   A  child  (N)  was  born  in  the
    Philippines in February 2014.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom
    as a visitor on 21 January 2015 bringing the child  N  with  her.   Her
    leave was valid until 12 July 2015.   On  7  July  2015,  she  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    her family and private life.  By a decision dated 1 October  2015,  the
    respondent refused that application.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chapman) which, in a decision dated 29  June
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I note that the appellant now has a
    second child (B) who was born in the United Kingdom in 2016.

 2. Mr Whitwell, for the Secretary of State, acknowledged that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law in its decision.  Having  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, Judge Chapman had proceeded at [51]
    to consider the appeal outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8  ECHR
    grounds.  He wrote:

         In doing so, I take into account all of the  factors  that  I  have
         referred to above.  The children are not  qualifying  children  for
         the purposes of the 2002 Act, but the Act limits me from  attaching
         significant weight to  the  appellant's  private  life.   In  these
         circumstances I would find that  the  best  interests  of  the  two
         children in this appeal are outweighed by the public interest in  a
         fair, effective and constant immigration control.

 3.  Both  the  children  are  British  citizens.   They  are,   therefore,
    "qualifying children" for the purposes of the  application  of  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act (as amended).

 4. Further, at [47] the judge considered whether it  would  be  reasonable
    for the children to return to the Philippines  with  their  mother  but
    without their father, Mr Sharp.   He  observed  that  there  are  "many
    absent fathers who have strong  healthy  and  fulfilling  relationships
    with their children.  Mr Sharp could, in these circumstances, visit and
    continue to support the family  financially  although  not  perhaps  as
    comfortable as he does now (sic)".  The judge's observations appear  to
    be at odds with the provisions of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 5.  The  judge's  reasoning  has  been  flawed  by  what   is   either   a
    misunderstanding of the facts of the appeal (whether the  children  are
    "qualifying children") or  possibly  by  his  misunderstanding  of  the
    statutory provisions.   In  any  event,  I  find  that  the  flaws  are
    sufficiently serious to lead me to set aside the decision  and  to  re-
    make the decision in the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Mr Butterworth, for the appellant, submitted that a proper  application
    of Section 117B(6) should lead  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal.  The only  question  for  determination  by  the  Tribunal  was
    whether it was reasonable for the British children to leave the  United
    Kingdom.  The children are "qualifying children" whilst  the  Secretary
    of State has not placed in  doubt  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children.

 7. Both Mr Whitwell for the respondent and Mr Butterworth referred  me  to
    the relevant IDI (Appendix FM Section 1.0b: family life (as  a  partner
    or parent) and private life:  ten  year  routes  (August  2015)).   The
    relevant Sections are [11.2.2] and [11.2.3]:

         11.2.2. Is the child a British Citizen or have they lived in the UK
         for a continuous period of at least 7  years?  The  decision  maker
         should  establish  from  the  application  or  claim  the  age  and
         nationality of each child affected by the decision. Where the child
         is a foreign national, the decision maker  should  establish  their
         immigration history in the UK (e.g. how long have they lived in the
         UK and where they lived before). In  establishing  whether  a  non-
         British Citizen child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
         the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  application,  the
         decision maker should include time spent in the UK with and without
         valid leave. Short  periods  outside  the  UK  -  for  example  for
         holidays or family visits - would not  count  as  a  break  in  the
         continuous period of at least 7 years required.  However,  where  a
         child has spent more than 6 months out of the UK at any  one  time,
         this will normally count as a break in continuous residence  unless
         any exceptional factors apply.

         11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen  child
         to leave the UK? Save in cases involving criminality, the  decision
         maker must not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary
         carer of a British Citizen child where the effect of that  decision
         would be to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of
         the age of that child. This reflects the European Court of  Justice
         judgment in Zambrano. The decision maker must consult the following
         guidance when assessing cases involving criminality: (  Criminality
         Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal) ( Criminality  Guidance  in  ECHR
         Cases (external) Where a decision to refuse the  application  would
         require a parent or primary carer to return to  a  country  outside
         the EU, the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would
         be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
         with that parent or primary carer. Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life  (as
         a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes  August  2015
         56 In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
         the parent or primary carer, to enable them to  remain  in  the  UK
         with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship. It may,  however,  be
         appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where  the  conduct  of  the
         parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of such weight
         as to justify separation, if the child could  otherwise  stay  with
         another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the EU.
         The  circumstances  envisaged  could  cover   amongst   others:   (
         criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph  398
         of the Immigration Rules; ( a very poor immigration  history,  such
         as where the person has repeatedly and  deliberately  breached  the
         Immigration  Rules.  In  considering   whether   refusal   may   be
         appropriate the decision maker must  consider  the  impact  on  the
         child of any separation. If the decision maker is minded to refuse,
         in  circumstances  where  separation  would  be  the  result,  this
         decision should normally be discussed with a senior caseworker and,
         where appropriate, advice may be sought  from  the  Office  of  the
         Children's Champion on the implications  for  the  welfare  of  the
         child, in order to inform the decision.  Where  the  applicant  has
         made  an  application  under  the  family   and/or   private   life
         Immigration Rules, the application must:  a)  be  considered  under
         those Immigration Rules first; b) where  the  applicant  falls  for
         refusal, the decision maker must go on to  consider  whether  there
         are any exceptional circumstances that would  warrant  a  grant  of
         leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules;  and  c)  where  the
         applicant falls for refusal under the Immigration Rules  and  there
         are no exceptional circumstances, and where  satisfactory  evidence
         has been provided that all of the following criteria are  met,  the
         case must be referred to European Casework for review: i. the child
         is under the age of 18; and ii. the child is a British Citizen; and
         iii. the primary carer (care responsibilities and court orders  are
         examples of evidence) of the child is a non-EEA national in the UK;
         and iv. there is no other parent/guardian/carer upon whom the child
         is dependent or who could care for the child if the  primary  carer
         left the UK to go to a country  outside  the  EU.  The  originating
         decision maker should not issue a decision on the Immigration Rules
         application whilst awaiting this Zambrano decision. The originating
         decision maker must not grant leave outside the Rules because  they
         believe the applicant has a Zambrano right, but must instead always
         refer the  case  to  European  Casework  for  them  to  review  and
         determine the case under EU law if  the  criteria  above  are  met.
         Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or  Parent)  and  Private
         Life: 10-Year Routes August 2015 57 European Casework  will  decide
         whether or not the person has established a right to reside in  the
         UK under EU law, and will notify the originating decision maker  of
         that decision. European Casework will then return the case file  to
         the originating decision maker. The originating decision maker must
         then serve the Zambrano decision on the  applicant,  together  with
         the decision on the  original  application  under  the  Immigration
         Rules. In cases where a decision to refuse  the  application  would
         require a parent or primary carer to return to a country within the
         EU, it may be possible to require the child to return or  go  there
         with that person. However, consideration must  still  be  given  to
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

    Mr Butterworth also relied upon Sanade (British children -  Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 0048 (IAC):

         Where in the context  of  Article  8  one  parent  ("the  remaining
         parent") of a British citizen child is also a British  citizen  (or
         cannot be removed as a family member or in their  own  right),  the
         removal of the other parent does not mean that either the child  or
         the remaining parent will be required to leave, thereby  infringing
         the Zambrano principle, see C-256/11  Murat  Dereci.  The  critical
         question is whether the child is  dependent  on  the  parent  being
         removed for the exercise  of  his  Union  right  of  residence  and
         whether removal of that  parent  will  deprive  the  child  of  the
         effective exercise of residence in the United Kingdom or  elsewhere
         in the Union.

 8. He also referred to Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT
    00674 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal had considered the  "discrete  regime"
    imposed by Section 117B(6) and found that "where these three conditions
    are satisfied the public interest does not require the removal  of  the
    parent from the United Kingdom.  Ambiguity there is none".

 9. I accept the guidance provided by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Treebhawon;
    there was no need  to  determine  the  public  interest  where  Section
    117B(6) applies; it is enough to apply the statutory  provision.   What
    remains, therefore, having determined on the facts that the  first  two
    conditions of  section  117B(6)  are  met,  is  an  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of expecting a qualifying  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  In that assessment, the contents of the respondent's IDI (see
    above) would appear to be engaged; decision makers are informed that it
    is "not reasonable to take a  decision  in  relation  to  a  parent  or
    primary carer of a British citizen  child  where  the  effect  of  that
    decision would be  to  force  that  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
    regardless of the age of that child".  The IDI goes on to  record  that
    "save in cases involving criminality" the  decision  maker  should  not
    take a decision which would involve the British citizen  child  leaving
    the United Kingdom.  However, as Mr Whitwell pointed out,  the  conduct
    of the parent or primary carer may, according to the IDI, give rise  to
    "consideration of such weight such as to justify separation.  The child
    could otherwise stay with another parent or alternative  primary  carer
    in the UK or in the EU".  I did not receive any evidence concerning the
    ability of Mr Sharp to care for a very young  baby  (B).   Further,  by
    reference to a non-exhaustive list of circumstances which might justify
    separation, the IDI cites instances of criminality  and  "a  very  poor
    immigration history, such  as  where  the  person  has  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached the Immigration  Rules".   Criminality  does  not
    arise in the present case but Mr  Whitwell  suggested  to  me  that  my
    assessment of reasonableness should be informed by the poor immigration
    history of the appellant.

10. Decision makers are required to take into account all the circumstances
    in a given case when determining reasonableness (see, in particular, MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617).   Whilst I accept that the  respondent's
    IDI, which I have quoted above, does not seek to set out an  exhaustive
    list of circumstances (in particular  as  regards  the  conduct  of  an
    appellant) which should inform the assessment, the  present  appellant,
    while she may (as the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found)  have  brought
    problems upon herself by her own somewhat eccentric engagement with the
    United Kingdom immigration system, can hardly be described as having  a
    "very poor" immigration  history.   It  is  indeed  puzzling  that  the
    appellant did not seek a more permanent form of leave when she  applied
    to return to the United Kingdom with  her  child.   By  applying  as  a
    visitor and then, before her leave expired, seeking to convert to  more
    substantial leave  on  the  basis  of  private  and  family  life,  she
    immediately excluded herself from entitlement to remain under parts  of
    the Immigration Rules (see, for example, Appendix FM  E-LTRPT.3.1).   I
    do not find, however, that such conduct, whilst difficult  to  explain,
    can properly be described as having produced a "very  poor  immigration
    history".  It is difficult to  escape  the  conclusion  that  a  proper
    application of Section 117B(6) should lead  me  to  conclude  that  the
    public interest requires the removal of the mother of  two  very  young
    British citizen children.  In the circumstances, and having  regard  to
    all the relevant facts, I have concluded  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Separation from her children would,
    in my assessment, cause the appellant  significant  disruption  in  her
    family and private life whilst, for the reasons  which  I  have  stated
    above, the public interest as expressed in the terms of Section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act does not outweigh that interference.  Accordingly,  the
    appeal is allowed.





Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  29  June  2016  is  set
    aside.  I have re-made the decision.  The appeal is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 10 December 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

