
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08937/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 9 April 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                TAHERA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M M Hossain, Counsel, instructed on a direct
access basis
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Beg (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 18  July
         2019, dismissed the appellant's human  rights  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision of 2  May  2019  refusing  her  human  rights
         claim.




Background

      2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 1 October 1978. She
         entered the United Kingdom on 13 January 2010 as a Tier 4 (General)
         Student with leave valid until 31 May 2012.

      3. The appellant made an in-time  application  for  further  leave  to
         remain in the same category, but this was refused with a  right  of
         appeal on 1 November 2012. It appears that the appellant  exercised
         her right of appeal, but her appeal was dismissed. I have not  been
         provided with  the  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal.
         According to the  appellant's  grounds  her  appeal  rights  became
         exhausted on 19 June 2013  when  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  her
         application for permission to appeal. On  this  day  her  leave  to
         remain, which had been extended by virtue  of  section  3C  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971, ceased.

      4. On 6 August 2013 the appellant applied for further leave to  remain
         as a Tier 4 (General) Student. This application was made  when  the
         appellant had no leave to remain in the  UK.  The  application  was
         refused on 12  December  2013  under  paragraph  322  (1A)  of  the
         Immigration Rules on the basis that an NCC Bank Ltd statement and a
         further bank letter  (a  solvency  certificate)  submitted  by  the
         appellant were not genuine. According to the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter the documents had been checked with "the issuing  body"  who
         confirmed that they did not issue the statement or letter submitted
         by the appellant  in  support  of  her  application  and  that  the
         documents were forged. This decision did not  attract  a  right  of
         appeal because the appellant had no leave to remain in the UK  when
         her application was made.

      5. On 9 May 2014 the appellant  requested  a  reconsideration  of  the
         decision refusing her application made on 6 August 2013. I have not
         been provided with a copy of this request. The  respondent  treated
         this request as a human rights claim, presumably on the basis  that
         it raised Article 8 ECHR considerations. On 25  November  2014  the
         respondent refused the human rights claim. This decision was  based
         on the appellant's inability to meet the  Suitability  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules as a  result of her alleged use of a proxy
         test taker in respect of a TOEIC English language  test  undertaken
         under the auspices of Educational Testing Service (ETS) on 18 April
         2012 at Westlink College. The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  the
         appellant met the requirements  of S-LTR.2.2(a) ("Whether or not to
         the applicant's knowledge - (a) false information,  representations
         or documents have been submitted in  relation  to  the  application
         (including false information submitted to any person  to  obtain  a
         document  used  in  support  of  the  application").  Nor  was  the
         respondent satisfied that the appellant met any of the requirements
         of Appendix FM. Nor was the respondent satisfied that the appellant
         met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  (there  being  no
         'very significant obstacles' to her integration in Bangladesh). The
         decision did not expressly refer to the previously raised  concerns
         with the NCC Bank documents.

      6. Although the decision dated 12 December 2013 was based on paragraph
         322 (1A) of the Immigration Rules, as the  respondent  treated  the
         reconsideration request made on 9 May 2014 as a human rights claim,
         paragraph 322 (1A) was not available to her by virtue of  paragraph
         A320 of the Immigration  Rules.  This  paragraph  established  that
         paragraph 322 did not apply to an application for leave  to  remain
         as a family member under Appendix FM, and that Part 9  (except  for
         paragraph 322 (1)) did not apply to an  application  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life under paragraph 276ADE.

      7. The appellant appealed the decision of 25 November 2014 and,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 16  June  2015,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal C A Parker allowed the appeal under the immigration  rules
         but dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds. Judge Parker  was
         not satisfied that the respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
         proving that a  proxy  test  taker  had  been  used.  Although  the
         respondent relied on generic evidence to support her  decision,  no
         evidence specific to the appellant in respect of the TOEIC test had
         been provided for the appeal.

      8. I pause at this point to note that Judge  Parker  should  not  have
         allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules because there was no
         longer a right of appeal against a  refusal  of  a  decision  taken
         under the Immigration Rules on the basis that the decision was  not
         in accordance with the Immigration Rules. Following the  amendments
         to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 wrought by  the
         Immigration Act 2014 the appellant  only  had  a  right  of  appeal
         against a refusal of a human rights claim. The appellant could not,
         in any event, have exercised a  right  of  appeal  relying  on  the
         grounds  that  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance   with   the
         immigration rules even under the earlier iteration of the 2002  Act
         as her leave to remain, extended pursuant  to  section  3C  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971, expired on 19 June 2013.

      9. Following Judge Parker's decision, the respondent  made  a  further
         decision on 2 May 2019. The new decision is a  direct  response  to
         the application made on 6 August 2013. There was  no  reference  to
         human rights in the decision. The decision referred to an NCC  Bank
         Ltd statement dated 30 July 2013 in  the  appellant's  name  and  a
         letter from the same bank. The respondent was  satisfied  that  the
         letter and the statement were false because NCC Bank Ltd  confirmed
         that the account did  not  exist.  The  application  was  therefore
         refused under paragraph 322 (1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
         decision indicated that the appellant had a right  of  appeal.  The
         basis of the right of appeal was not identified. I  have  not  been
         provided with any documents identifying the  legal  basis  for  the
         right of appeal.

     10. It is not  clear  to  me  why  the  respondent  believed  that  the
         appellant had a right of appeal. the appellant's leave, extended by
         virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971,  expired  on  19
         June 2013. She did not have leave to remain when she made her  Tier
         4 (General)  Student  application  on  6  August  2013.  Under  the
         Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 3, Transitional  and  Saving
         Provisions)  Order  2014/2771,  the  appellant  (Article   9)   the
         appellant would have a right of appeal if her application was  made
         before 20 October 2014 (which it was) and the decision was made  on
         or  after  6  April  2015  (which  it  was,  as  the  decision  was
         reconsidered following the  decision  of  Judge  Parker)  but  only
         "where the result of that decision is that  the  applicant  has  no
         leave to enter or remain." As the appellant had no leave  when  her
         application was made, the respondent's decision had  no  effect  on
         her immigration status. It was not because of the decision that the
         appellant had no leave to remain. Although  the  respondent  issued
         the appellant with  a  'Notice  to  a  Person  Liable  to  Removal'
         (IS.151A) on 25 November 2014 pursuant to s.10 of  the  immigration
         and Asylum Act 1999 on the basis that the appellant used  deception
         in seeking leave to remain (by reference to her  TOEIC  certificate
         only), the grounds of appeal only focused on the decision  refusing
         the appellant leave to remain. There is nothing  to  indicate  that
         the respondent made a further decision  pursuant  to  s.10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 that could be  the  subject  of  an
         appeal under the appeal provisions prior to the changes brought  in
         by the Immigration Act 2014.

     11. The appellant nevertheless appealed under s.82 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Her appeal was  heard  on  2  July
         2019. No issue appears to have been raised with regard to the First-
         tier Tribunal's jurisdiction to hear the  appeal.  The  grounds  of
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contended that the issue relating
         to the NCC Bank statement and  letter  had  been  resolved  in  the
         respondent's reconsideration decision dated 25  November  2014  and
         that the  respondent  could  have  relied  on  this  allegation  of
         deception within that decision. The respondent's decision was  said
         to be unfair and in breach of the common law duty of fairness.  The
         decision  was  additionally  said  to  jeopardise  the  appellant's
         Article 8 rights and those of her family (her husband and her child
         born in the UK - the appellant had two children by the time of  the
         appeal hearing in July 2019, aged 6 and 3). The decision  was  said
         to constitute a disproportionate interference  with  Article  8  in
         light of the appellant's length of residence and in  light  of  the
         best interests of her children.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     12. The judge had before  her  a  bundle  of  documents  filed  by  the
         appellant that included the decision of Judge Parker dated 16  June
         2015, the respondent's decision dated 25 November 2014, the IS.151A
         decision dated 25 November 2014, the respondent's decision dated 12
         December 2013, and a letter purportedly  issued  by  the  NCC  Bank
         dated 15  January  2014.  The  judge  additionally  had  a  witness
         statement from the appellant. The respondent's  bundle  included  a
         'Temporary  Migration  verification  referral  form'  referring  to
         communication between the UKVI Verification Team and the  NCC  Bank
         between 24 May 2018 and 13 June 2018 in which a bank representative
         confirmed by return email that the bank records indicated that  the
         appellant's account did not exist. At the outset of the hearing the
         respondent served a Document  Verification  Report  (DVR)  dated  9
         September 2013 detailing communication between the  Visa  Assistant
         working at the British High Commission in Dhaka and the  NCC  Bank.
         Having   refused   an   application   made   by   the   appellant's
         representative to adjourn, the judge heard oral evidence  from  the
         appellant.

     13. In the section of her decision headed 'Determination  and  Reasons'
         the judge noted the submissions made  by  the  appellant's  counsel
         that the respondent could not rely on the NCC Bank documents  issue
         because it had not been raised in the November  2014  decision.  At
         [13] the judge stated,

             "I find that the respondent is perfectly entitled to raise the
             issue of deception involving the NCC  Bank  even  at  a  later
             stage, that is in the refusal letter dated 2 May 2019. I  find
             that the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal on 16 June 2015
             was in relation to a different issue of deception that is  the
             ETS test. The appeal was not allowed on the basis of  the  NCC
             Bank issue because that was not an issue before  the  Tribunal
             at that time. I do not find that there has  been  an  inherent
             unfairness to the appellant  in  the  respondent  raising  the
             issue of  deception  regarding  the  NCC  Bank  statement  and
             letter."

     14. The judge went on to consider all of the evidence relating  to  the
         NCC Bank statement and letter,  including  the  letter  purportedly
         from the bank dated 15 January 2014, and  the  appellant's  written
         and oral evidence, and concluded that the respondent had discharged
         the burden of proving that the NCC Bank statement and  letter  were
         forgeries. In reaching this decision the judge directed herself  in
         accordance with the principles established in AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]
         EWCA Civ 773.

     15. The judge went on to consider the grounds  relating  to  Article  8
         ECHR. The judge indicated that she had taken into  account  section
         117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  s.55
         of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act   2009.   The
         appellant's representative indicated that  the  appellant  was  not
         relying on family life but only upon her private  life.  The  judge
         accepted that the appellant had a private life having regard to her
         studies in the UK and the fact that she lived with her husband  and
         her two children. The judge noted that none of the  family  members
         had leave to remain in the  UK.  There  was  very  little  evidence
         before the judge relating to the appellant's  children.  The  judge
         found that the best interests of the children, who were aged 6  and
         3, were to live with their parents who were their  primary  carers.
         The children were young enough to adapt to life in Bangladesh  with
         the support of  their  parents.  They  would  be  able  to  receive
         education in Bangladesh and the family had a  network  of  support.
         The appellant had previously worked in Bangladesh as a teacher  and
         would be able to  use  her  skills  and  qualifications  to  obtain
         employment. The appellant failed to identify  her  specific  health
         issues and there was no suggestion that  she  would  be  unable  to
         obtain appropriate treatment in  Bangladesh.  The  judge  concluded
         that  the  decision  would  not  result  in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences and would not therefore constitute a  disproportionate
         breach of Article 8. The  judge  dismissed  both  'the  immigration
         appeal' and 'the human rights appeal'.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     16. The grounds contend that the judge failed to consider the issue  of
         res judicata, and in particular the cause  of  action  estoppel  or
         issue estoppel.  As the issue of the appellant's bank statement had
         been raised in the decision dated 12 December  2013,  and  was  not
         subsequently relied on by the respondent, despite her having  ample
         opportunity to do so, the respondent was estopped from now  relying
         on the same issue. The appellant legitimately  expected  the  issue
         relating to the  bank  statement  and  bank  letter  to  have  been
         resolved and the judge should not have permitted the respondent  to
         reopen the issue. The judge failed to make relevant findings  given
         that the appellant said her bank account had closed  in  2015.  The
         judge placed too much weight on the respondent's  new  verification
         report as the respondent's enquiries were with a  different  branch
         of the bank.

     17. The grounds further contend that the judge failed to  consider  the
         best interests of the appellant's oldest child given that the child
         would now have to adjust to new schools and a new  community  where
         another language was spoken and  would  lose  face-to-face  contact
         with school friends and extended family  in  the  UK.  The  grounds
         contend that the judge failed to adequately consider the  5  stages
         identified in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  failed  to  consider  the
         principles established in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 37.

     18. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan stated,

             "I remind myself that 'arguable' is a low hurdle to cross.  An
             issue arises in this matter as to the weight that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal  could  appropriately  give  to  a  document  or
             documents that have previously be considered by the respondent
             to be false during earlier statutory  appeal  proceedings  but
             were not relied upon by the respondent at the  earlier  appeal
             hearing. It  is  arguable  that  the  res  judicata  principle
             applies in such circumstances.

             The Tribunal would be aided by the parties addressing, but not
             limiting their argument to: AS and AA  (effect  of  previously
             linked determinations) Somalia [2006]  UKAIT  00052;  Chomanga
             (binding effect of an appealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT
             312 (IAC); Mubu & Ors (immigration  appeals  -  res  judicata)
             Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 398 (IAC) and Koori v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
             Civ 552."

     19. In his submissions  at  the  'error  of  law'  hearing  Mr  Hossain
         accepted  that  Judge  Parker's  decision  was  "unusual"  and   he
         indicated that he could not understand how Judge Parker was able to
         allow the appeal under the immigration rules given that it  was  an
         appeal against the refusal of the human rights  claim.  Mr  Hossain
         reiterated that the respondent's decision from  November  2014  and
         Judge Parker's decision in 2015 made no reference  to  the  alleged
         use  of  false  bank  statements.  The  respondent  had  sufficient
         opportunity to raise the issue during the previous appeal  and  the
         2018 DVR was not  supported  by  any  email  evidence.  Mr  Hossain
         accepted that there had been no previous judicial  finding  respect
         of the bank statement issue and that there was now further evidence
         available in the form  of  the  2018  DVR.  Mr  Hossain  relied  on
         Chomanga in support of his submission that the respondent  was  not
         entitled to rely on the NCC Bank statement issue when  no  reliance
         had been placed on that issue in the November 2014 decision or  the
         2015 appeal.

Discussion

     20. The decision that is the subject of the appellant's appeal  to  the
         IAC is a refusal to grant the appellant leave to remain as a Tier 4
         (General) Student dated 2 May 2019. The appellant's application for
         leave to remain was made on 6 August 2013. For the reasons set  out
         above,  and  in  particular  paragraph  4  of  this  decision,  the
         appellant had no leave to remain when she made her application on 6
         August 2013. This is  accepted  by  her  in  her  grounds.  As  the
         appellant had  no  leave  to  remain,  the  decision  refusing  her
         application did not result in her ceasing to have leave to  remain.
         Nor does it appear that a further decision was made to  remove  the
         appellant as a person unlawfully in the UK  (there  is  nothing  to
         suggest that the IS.151A decision made on 25 November  2014,  which
         was based on the ETS allegation, remained extant or was  maintained
         following Judge Parker's decision).

     21. The respondent's decision that gave rise this appeal does not refer
         to human rights, does not consider the appellant's Article 8 rights
         or those of her family, and does not purport to be a refusal  of  a
         human rights claim. This would be consistent with the dismissal  by
         Judge Parker of the appellant's human rights claim. It is therefore
         very difficult to understand  why  the  respondent  stated  in  her
         decision that the appellant had a right  of  appeal.  I  appreciate
         that the question of whether the appellant had a  right  of  appeal
         was not raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  respondent
         cannot however bestow a right of appeal where  there  is  none.  In
         these circumstances I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal
         had jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against the decision  dated
         2 May 2019.

     22. However, even if I am wrong and the appellant does enjoy a right of
         appeal in respect of her application made  on  6  August  2013  and
         eventually refused on 2 May 2019, I am not persuaded that the judge
         erred in respect of the res judicata  principle.  Unlike  Chomenga,
         where the Upper Tribunal held that unappealed findings of fact in a
         judge's decision  were  binding  on  the  parties,  there  were  no
         previous judicial findings in relation to the bank  account  issue.
         In Chomanga the Secretary of State was relying on identical factual
         assertions in the second appeal as had been determined in the first
         appeal. As the issue relating to the NCC Bank statement and  letter
         was not raised in the respondent's decision of  25  November  2014,
         there were no binding factual findings made by  Judge  Parker  that
         applied in the appeal before Judge Beg. The findings of  fact  made
         in the earlier decision were  simply  not  relevant  in  the  later
         decision.

     23. There  was,  in  any  event,  fresh  evidence  produced  after  the
         respondent's decision dated 25 November  2014  and  Judge  Parker's
         decision of 2015, namely, the further DVR report. This new evidence
         was based  on  further  correspondence  between  the  British  High
         Commission and the NCC Bank. I accept  that  the  new  evidence  is
         deficient in some respects. The email from the Bank referred to  in
         the DVR was not provided, and it is not clear  whether  the  answer
         from the Bank - that the account 'does not exist' - took account of
         the appellant's claim that she closed the bank account in 2015. The
         new DVR  was  nevertheless  sufficient  evidence,  when  considered
         alongside the 2013 DVR, which did contain correspondence  from  the
         NCC Bank, upon which the  respondent  could  rely  to  support  her
         refusal to grant leave to remain.

     24. I am reinforced in  my  conclusion  that  the  respondent  was  not
         estopped from raising the NCC Bank document issue by  reference  to
         the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Mubu.  Having  considered   the
         authorities relating to res judicata the Upper  Tribunal  held,  in
         clear terms, that "... the  principles  of  res  judicata  are  not
         applicable in immigration appeals" (see also [40]).  As  there  had
         been no judicial consideration of  the  NCC  Bank  document  issue,
         Judge Beg was entitled to adjudicate upon it. Further, there can be
         no cause of action estoppel because  there  has  been  no  judicial
         pronunciation in respect of the NCC Bank issue (see Mubu, at [34]).



     25. Nor is it arguable that there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  the
         respondent relying on the NCC Bank document  issue.  The  appellant
         was aware since the decision in December 2013 that  the  respondent
         considered  the  bank  statement  to  be  a  false  document.   The
         reconsidered decision (which was a refusal of a human rights claim)
         dated 25 November 2014 made no reference one way or  the  other  to
         the NCC Bank document issue. There was certainly no  concession  by
         the respondent that the bank statement and letter were genuine, and
         no reasonable indication that the issue had been 'closed  down'  or
         determined as suggested in the grounds. As Judge Beg pointed out in
         her decision the appellant had ample opportunity to obtain  further
         evidence from the NCC Bank, in addition  to  the  letter  allegedly
         issued by the bank dated 15 January 2014, to support  her  position
         that the bank  documents  in  issue  was  genuine,  and  to  obtain
         evidence that she had closed her account in  2015  and  transferred
         the funds to the UK. I note the absence of any  ground  challenging
         the First-tier Tribunal judge's refusal to grant an adjournment.  I
         am not persuaded there has been any procedural  unfairness  in  the
         judge's decision to determine the NCC Bank document issue.

     26. Nor is it arguable that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
         relevant considerations when assessing the evidence relating to the
         NCC  Bank  documents.  The  judge  fully  considered   the   letter
         purportedly issued by the bank dated 15 January 2014  at  [20]  and
         engaged with the appellant's claim that she closed her bank account
         in 2015 at [19]. The judge attached significant weight to the  full
         DVR that had been undertaken in 2013, including the email from  the
         vice-president and manager of the appellant's branch  (e.g.  [21]).
         From [14] to [21] the judge gave  cogent  and  legally  sustainable
         reasons for concluding  that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
         burden of proving that the NCC Bank documents were forgeries.

     27. I can deal briefly with the remaining grounds relating  to  Article
         8. The judge accurately stated that  there  was  relatively  little
         evidence provided by the appellant relating to  her  eldest  child,
         and the judge demonstrably considered the best interests of both of
         the appellant's children ([25] and [26]),  based  on  the  evidence
         before her and  taking  account  of  all  relevant  considerations,
         including the ages of the children, their length of residence,  and
         the support that could be provided to the children from both  their
         parents and their extended family in Bangladesh. The judge properly
         applied the approach identified in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  took
         account of the factors identified in s.117B of the 2002 Act.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of errors on points of law.

The appeal is dismissed.



D.Blum                                  31 March 2020

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
