
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08097/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                        |On 21st March 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                           MISS TYRA TAISHA JAMES
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. [PL], Sponsor assisted by Ms. [R], McKenzie
                    Friend
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Keith promulgated on 30th July 2018 dismissing the appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant's
    application for entry clearance as a child.


 2. At the hearing before me, the appellant had no legal representation but
    the appellant's mother and sponsor, Ms [L] attended.  She was assisted
    by Ms [R] who acted as a McKenzie friend.  The Tribunal was told that
    the appellant's mother cannot read or write English, and would be
    assisted by Ms [R].  Ms [R] confirmed that she has no legal
    qualifications and is a teacher and trainer in health and social care.
    She is a friend of the appellant's mother, and she confirmed that she
    is not been paid to assist the appellant with the appeal.


 3. The appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She was born on 20th September
    1999 and has remained in Jamaica living with her maternal grandparents
    for the significant majority of her life. On 6th March 2017, aged 17�,
    she made an application for leave to enter the UK as a child to join
    her mother.  The application was refused for the reasons set out in a
    decision dated 28th June 2017.  The Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO")
    was not satisfied that the requirements for indefinite leave to enter
    the UK as the child of a parent present and settled in the UK under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules, are met by the appellant.
    Furthermore, the ECO was not satisfied that there are any exceptional
    circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect for private
    and family life contained in Article 8, might warrant the grant of
    entry clearance outside of the requirements of the rules.  The
    appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by FtT Judge
    Keith and it is that decision, that is the subject of the appeal before
    me.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 4. A summary of the background to the appeal and the reasons for refusal
    relied upon by the ECO are set out at paragraphs [2] to [5] of the
    decision of the FtT Judge.  The appellant's case on appeal is
    summarised at paragraphs [6] to [7] of the decision, and the Judge
    identified the issues at paragraph [10] to [25] of the decision.  The
    fact that the appellant is the daughter of Ms [L], her sponsor, was not
    in issue.  At paragraphs [17] to [27] of the decision, the Judge refers
    to the evidence set out in the appellant's bundle and the oral evidence
    of the sponsor at the hearing of the appeal.


 5. Having heard evidence from the appellant's mother, the FtT Judge had
    regard to the requirements set out in paragraph 297 of the Immigration
    Rules, and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in TD ("Sole
    Responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  The FtT Judge sets out his
    findings of fact at paragraphs [41] to [52] of his decision.


 6. For the reasons set out at paragraph [41] of the decision, the Judge
    found that the appellant was unable to satisfy the requirement that she
    can and will be accommodated adequately by her mother without recourse
    to public funds.  For the reasons set out at paragraph [42] of the
    decision, the Judge found that the appellant could not satisfy the
    requirement that she will be maintained adequately without recourse to
    public funds.  The Judge then turned to consider, at paragraphs [43] to
    [47] of the decision, whether the requirements set out at paragraph
    297(i)(e) or 297(i)(f) of the rules could be met by the appellant.
    That is, one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and
    has had sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing, or, one
    parent is present and settled in the UK and there are serious and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion of the
    appellant undesirable.  The Judge concluded, at paragraphs [44] and
    [47] as follows:


             "44. Based on the above findings, I concluded that it had not
             been shown that there were serious and compelling family or
             other circumstances making the appellants exclusion
             undesirable. Whilst reference has been made to the particular
             vulnerability of the appellant in the absence of supervision,
             living in Jamaica, there is no suggestion that the situation
             had resulted in such risks and I was not satisfied that those
             risks would increase in the event of refusal of entry
             clearance.


             ...


             47.  In summary, I find that at best, the sponsor has joint
             (sic) parental responsibility for the appellant with her own
             parents, i.e. The appellant's grandparents, who are engaged in
             matters of parental responsibility such as in the appellant's
             educational progress"


 7. Having found that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of the
    immigration rules, the FtT Judge addressed the Article 8 claim.  At
    paragraph [48] of his decision, the FtT Judge states:


         ".. The appellant was on the cusp of adulthood at the time of her
         application and is now over 18 years old. I accepted the appellants
         and the sponsor are in regular contact and the sponsor has made
         some financial contributions to the appellant's upbringing. I am
         not however satisfied that their relationship goes beyond normal
         emotional ties. In reaching this conclusion, I find that the
         appellant's focus will continue to be with her grandparents, with
         whom she has lived the entirety of her life and who have had
         engagement in important aspect of her life. The regularity of
         contact between the appellant and sponsor as well as financial
         remittances did not, I concluded, constitute relations beyond that
         of an adult daughter/ mother relationship and in particular I do
         not find that there were greater ties by virtue of any kind
         vulnerability."


 8. The Judge's conclusions are to be found at paragraphs [49] to 52] of
    the decision.  Insofar as the requirements of the Immigration Rules are
    concerned, the Judge states at paragraph [49] as follows:


         "Based on the findings that I made, I concluded that the sponsor
         did not have sole parental responsibility for the appellant and I
         concluded that there was not serious and compelling family (sic)
         circumstances that would make the appellant's exclusion from United
         Kingdom undesirable. I also concluded, based on the above findings
         that the appellant would need recourse to public funds both in
         respect of accommodation and income were she permitted to enter
         United Kingdom. I concluded therefore that the appellant did not
         meet the requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules."


 9. As to the Article 8 claim overall, the FtT Judge states at paragraphs
    [50] to [52] of the decision as follows:


         "50. However, I also considered the appellant's claim by reference
         to Article 8. Based on my findings, I concluded that the appellant
         has not established a family life at the date of this hearing with
         the sponsor (sic), noting that she is no longer a minor, beyond the
         normal emotional ties. However, I accept that there is a genuine
         relationship between the two, and I therefore consider the question
         proportionality, using the balance sheet approach recommended by
         Hersham Ali. On the one hand, the appellant did not meet the
         Immigration Rules and I considered the need to avoid recourse to
         public funds where a person seeking entry clearance to settle
         should not be a burden on the public taxpayer. This was a weighty
         consideration. On the other hand, I also considered the fact that
         the appellant and sponsor evidently wish to develop a relationship
         and that the refusal of entry clearance would impact on that.
         However, I was also conscious that the sponsor's physical presence
         with the appellant has been intermittent, noting that for the first
         10 years of the appellant's life she was not present at all and
         thereafter, not even on an annual basis. The couple have been able
         to develop the relationship via social media, including regular
         contact and the sponsor has been able to visit the appellant in
         Jamaica.


         51.  For the reasons already set out, I do not accept the appellant
         would be vulnerable in Jamaica and has a home to live in with her
         grandparents who while ageing would, I find, continue to provide
         her with a social network and accommodation. I considered that at
         the time of her application, the appellant was a minor for the
         purposes of section 55 of the 2009 Act. That being said, she was on
         the cusp of being 18 and continues to live in her home and with her
         grandparents with whom she has lived the entirety of her life. I
         find that the appellant's best interests have not been affected
         because of her remaining with those grandparents. Considering
         section 117B of the 2002 Act, I noted the appellant's lack of
         financial independence in the sense of needing to rely upon
         taxpayers money to support herself if she were permitted to enter
         the United Kingdom.


         52.  The refusal of entry clearance in the circumstances would be
         no more than to maintain the status quo and having weighed the
         impact of refusal on the development of the relationship, versus
         the evident financial burden that the appellant would place on the
         UK taxpayer, and having considered all of the factors already
         referred to I have concluded that it was proportionate for the
         appellant to be refused entry clearance.


The appeal before me


10. In support of her appeal before me, the appellant claims that the Judge
    erred in his evaluation of the evidence, and that impacted upon the
    analysis of whether the appellant is able to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules and the assessment of the Article 8 claim.  The
    appellant makes a number of criticisms about the Judge's consideration
    of the evidence.  The appellant claims that her mother had previously
    made applications, on two separate occasions, for the appellant to join
    her mother in the United Kingdom. The applications were refused.  It is
    said that the Judge also erred in his consideration of the number of
    occasions upon which the appellant's mother had travelled to Jamaica to
    visit her.  The appellant claims that the Judge erred in his assessment
    of whether the appellant's mother has had sole responsibility for her
    upbringing.  She claims that the Judge could not rationally have
    concluded on the evidence, that parental responsibility for the
    appellant has been exercised jointly between the appellant's mother and
    the appellant's grandparents.  It is said that parental responsibility
    could not lawfully be vested in such a way, and it would be considered
    unlawful if applied to anyone living in United Kingdom.


11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  FtT  Judge
    Hollingworth on 1st November 2018.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether the decision of the FtT contains a material error  of
    law, and if so, to remake the decision.


12. Before me, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
    decision of the FtT Judge contains a number of factual errors. For
    example, at paragraph [3] of his decision, the FtT Judge states "..The
    appellant had last seen the sponsor in 2014 and the sponsor has been
    resident in the UK since 2011..".  In fact, the FtT Judge had before
    him in the appellant's bundle, the witness statement made by the
    appellant's mother.  She confirms in her witness statement dated 14th
    July 2018, at paragraph [1], that she arrived in the UK in 2001, and at
    paragraph [6], that she visited the appellant in 2010, 2012, 2014 and
    2017.  It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that there has never
    been any formal transfer of parental responsibility from the
    appellant's mother to the appellant's grandparents.  The appellant's
    mother maintains that she has always retained parental responsibility
    and it was not open to the Judge to conclude that parental
    responsibility is held jointly between the appellants mother and the
    appellants grandparents. It was said that the fact that the appellant
    had been left in the care of her grandparents, is not to say that the
    sponsor has given up her responsibility for her daughter. The appellant
    maintains that the decision of the FtT Judge is entirely unreasonable
    and that in reaching his decision, the Judge took into account factors
    such as the lack of a signature on school documents. It was submitted
    that the FtT Judge simply failed to properly consider the role that the
    appellant's mother plays in the appellant's life.  The appellant's
    grandparents are unable, and do not want to continue, to look after the
    appellant and so the current arrangements cannot continue. The
    appellant submits that the health of her grandparents and the fact the
    current arrangements cannot continue should have led to the conclusion
    that is the exclusion of the appellant from the UK, is undesirable.


Discusssion


13. It is now well established that what is required in a decision is  that
    the reasons provided must give sufficient detail to  show  the  parties
    and the  appellate  Tribunal,  the  principles  upon  which  the  lower
    tribunal has acted, and the reasons that led it  to  its  decision,  so
    that they are able to understand  why  it  reached  its  decision.  The
    reasons need not be elaborate, and need not deal  with  every  argument
    presented. The Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
    982 held that a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the
    grounds of perversity if it  was  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.


14. I have carefully read  the  paragraphs  that  the  appellant  seeks  to
    criticise, and the decision as a whole. It is uncontroversial that  the
    appellant was left living  with  her  maternal  grandparents  when  the
    appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom in  2001.  I  reject  the
    claim that the Judge proceeds upon a mistake as to fact.  At  paragraph
    [3] of the decision of the FtT Judge, the Judge  is  referring  to  the
    matters set out in the respondent's decision to refuse the application.
     At paragraph [17] of his decision, the Judge  refers  to  the  witness
    statement made by the appellant's mother, and properly notes that  "...
    The sponsor had visited the appellant in Jamaica in  2000,  2002,  2004
    and 2017.  The sponsor had been present at the  appellant's  graduation
    ceremony.".  At paragraph [18] of the decision,  the  FtT  Judge  noted
    that "The sponsor had made a previous application for the appellant  to
    join her in the United Kingdom.".   The FtT was clearly  aware  of  the
    evidence relied upon by the  appellant,  as  set  out  in  the  witness
    statement made by her mother.  In reaching his decision,  at  paragraph
    [45], the FtT Judge noted that "... the sponsor  has  not  visited  the
    appellant for nearly 10 years from entering the United Kingdom in  2000
    until 2010. Whilst I note that the sponsor had made regular  visits  to
    Jamaica since that date, even then, her evidence  was  contradictory.".
    In reaching that decision, the Judge considered the  oral  evidence  of
    the appellant's sponsor as set out at paragraph [20]  of  the  decision
    that "... She visited every year except for one year when she  believed
    she had visited in 2012 ..." and the evidence as set out in the witness
    statement.


15. In my judgement, it was open to the FtT Judge, on the evidence, to find
    that the requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  could
    not be met by the appellant for the reasons set out at paragraphs  [41]
    to [47] of the decision.  I reject the claim that the  Judge  erred  in
    his assessment of whether the requirement of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the
    rules was met.  The question for the Tribunal Judge was not whether the
    appellant's mother retains parental responsibility for  the  appellant,
    but whether the appellant's mother has had sole responsibility for  the
    appellant's upbringing.   In  reaching  his  decision,  the  FtT  Judge
    referred to the guidance set out in TD ("Sole  Responsibility")  (Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049, noting in particular that  "responsibility"  for  a
    child's upbringing may  be  undertaken  by  individuals  other  than  a
    child's parents, and may be shared between different individuals.  That
    is likely to arise particularly in cases  where,  as  here,  the  child
    remains in their country of nationality, whilst the parent claiming  to
    have responsibility for the child lives  in  the  UK.   It  was  in  my
    judgement open to the Judge to find, at paragraph [47] as follows:


             "47. In summary, I find that at best, the sponsor has joint
             (sic) parental responsibility for the appellant with her own
             parents, i.e. The appellant's grandparents who are engaged in
             matters of parental responsibility such as in the appellant's
             educational progress"


16. Having carefully considered the circumstances in  which  the  appellant
    finds herself, it was in my judgment open to the FtT to also  conclude,
    at paragraph [44] as follows:


             "44. Based on the above findings, I concluded that it had not
             been shown that there were serious and compelling family or
             other circumstances making the appellants exclusion
             undesirable. Whilst reference has been made to the particular
             vulnerability of the appellant in the absence of supervision,
             living in Jamaica, there is no suggestion that the situation
             had resulted in such risks and I was not satisfied that those
             risks would increase in the event of refusal of entry
             clearance.


17. At paragraph [36], the FtT Judge correctly noted that  the  appellant's
    ability to satisfy the immigration rules is  not  the  question  to  be
    determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a  weighty,  though
    not  determinative  factor,  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing  immigration  control.
    Here, the Judge found that the interference  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


18. At paragraph [42] of his decision, albeit in  brief  terms,  the  Judge
    addresses the appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the  evidence
    before him. It is well-established in the authorities that there is  no
    relevant family life for the purpose of Article 8 simply because  there
    is a family relationship between two  adults  (such  as  a  parent  and
    child) who live in different countries. There has to be something  more
    than normal emotional ties.   In  this  case  it  was  claimed  by  the
    appellant that there is  more  because  of  the  appellant's  continued
    dependence upon her mother notwithstanding the fact that she lives with
    her grandparents on a day-to-day basis. The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant and sponsor are in regular contact, and that the sponsor  has
    made some financial contributions to the appellant's  upbringing.   The
    Judge did not however accept that the relationship goes  beyond  normal
    emotional ties, and found that the appellant's focus will  continue  to
    be with her grandparents, with whom she has lived the entirety  of  her
    life and who have had engagement in important aspects of her life.  The
    Judge stated, at paragraph [48], as follows:


         "... The regularity of contact between the appellant and sponsor as
         well as financial remittances  did  not,  I  concluded,  constitute
         relations beyond that of an adult daughter/ mother relationship and
         in particular I did not find that there were greater ties by virtue
         of any kind vulnerability."


19. Ordinarily, a parent and an adult child would not  necessarily  acquire
    the protection of Article 8 without evidence  of  further  elements  of
    dependency, involving more than the normal emotional  ties.  Article  8
    protects the rights not only of the appellants but  also  their  family
    members and each case has to be assessed on its own  particular  facts.
    In the end, the evidence was insufficient to satisfy the Judge that the
    family life between the appellant and her mother is greater  than  that
    normally to be found between adult children and  their  parents.   That
    was against a backdrop of the appellant's mother having lived in the UK
    since 2001, and the appellant having lived with her grandparents  since
    that time.  The assessment of an  Article  8  claim  is  entirely  fact
    sensitive, and whilst I accept that a different Judge might have  found
    the relatively modest threshold required to establish a family life  to
    have been met, that is not to say that  the  decision  reached  by  the
    Judge on the evidence, is irrational or perverse.


20. In any event, even if the Judge erred in his finding that the appellant
    has not established a family life with her mother, that error is, in my
    judgment immaterial.  Even if Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal  would
    need to look at the extent to which an appellant is said to have failed
    to meet the requirements of the rules,  because  that  may  inform  the
    proportionality balancing exercise that must follow.


21. Here, the judge concluded that the requirements of the rules cannot  be
    met.  Furthermore, the  Judge  concluded  that  any  interference  with
    family life is proportionate to  the  proper  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of fair but firm immigration.  The test under Article 8  is
    an objective one, whatever the subjective feelings of the appellant may
    be. Understandably, the appellant would wish to join her mother in  the
    UK.  It is also understandable that the  appellant's  grandparents  who
    are now much older than when the appellant was left with them in  2001,
    might find  it  more  difficult  to  maintain  responsibility  for  the
    appellant and that the appellant, her mother and her grandparents would
    wish to have the appellant living in the United Kingdom.  On any  view,
    the appellant was an adult by the time of the hearing  before  the  FtT
    and the Judge was bound to consider the Article 8 claim, on  the  facts
    as they were at the time of his decision.


22. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the burden of proof was upon the
    appellant to show, on the balance of probabilities, that she has
    established a family life with her mother and that her exclusion from
    the UK as a result of the respondent's decision, would interfere with
    that right. It was then for the respondent to justify any interference
    caused. The Judge found that it was proportionate for the appellant to
    be refused entry clearance.  It was open to the Judge to conclude that,
    weighing all matters up, the decision to refuse entry clearance is not
    disproportionate, for the reasons set out.


23. Having carefully considered the  decision  of  the  Ft  Judge  and  the
    submissions made before me, in my judgment the findings made by the FtT
    judge are not irrational or unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,  or
    findings that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.   The  Judge  did
    not consider irrelevant factors, and the weight that he attached to the
    evidence either individually or cumulatively, was  a  matter  for  him.
    The  written  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  nothing  more   than   a
    disagreement with the findings of the Judge, that were properly open to
    him.


24. It follows that in my judgment,  the  decision  of  the  FtT  does  not
    contain a material error of law, and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


25. The decision of the FtT Judge did not involve the making of an error of
    law and the appeal is dismissed.


26. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          24th January 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia










TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          24th January 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


