
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08657/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2020                 |On 27th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                                 QAYAM UDDIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

          1. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
             refusing his human rights claim was  dismissed  by  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Munonyedi for reasons set  out  in  a  decision
             promulgated on 30th July 2019.

             Background

          2. The appellant had sought leave to remain on 24th October  2017
             outside the Rules after an appeal for leave to remain had been
             dismissed and he had become appeal rights  exhausted  on  16th
             October  2017.  That  application  for  leave  to  remain  was
             subsequently varied to an application for leave to  remain  on
             the basis of 10 years lawful residence.  The  application  was
             refused by the respondent for reasons set out  in  a  decision
             dated 2nd May 2019. The respondent referred to  the  appellant
             having demonstrated dishonest conduct in  submitting  a  TOEIC
             certificate fraudulently obtained and that he had not  resided
             lawfully in the UK for 10 years. The  appellant  appealed  and
             his appeal was dismissed.

          3. Permission to appeal was sought and granted  on  a  number  of
             grounds, including that it was arguable an adjournment  should
             have been granted, that the  judge  had  failed  to  correctly
             apply the Devaseelan principles and had failed to give  proper
             reasons.

             Error of law

          4. Just before the appeal hearing to the First-tier Tribunal, the
             appellant sought an adjournment on  the  ground  that  he  was
             suffering pain from a fall, supported by a doctor's note  that
             he had presented suffering  from  pain.  The  application  was
             refused, one of the reasons being cited that he had failed  to
             provide evidence that he was  unfit  to  attend  the  hearing.
             Nevertheless, he did not attend the hearing  and  produced  no
             explanation for such failure to attend. Nor did he  renew  his
             application for an  adjournment.  The  appeal  was  thereafter
             treated as a paper appeal, the respondent confirming that  she
             was content for the appeal to proceed  in  the  absence  of  a
             presenting officer.

          5. The judge was entitled, in the light of  the  evidence  before
             him to proceed with the hearing in the appellant's absence.

          6. The appellant had  been  sent  directions  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal to file and serve such further evidence as he  sought
             to rely upon. He did not file any such evidence. The appellant
             did not provide an explanation for  failing  to  provide  such
             evidence as he relied upon. The judge was entitled to reach  a
             decision on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him  which
             included a copy of the appellant's previous appeal decision.

          7. The judge who heard the previous appeal  (First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Ross in a decision promulgated  on  1st  February  2017)
             reached a conclusion that the appellant had  not  provided  an
             innocent explanation and that the decision of  the  respondent
             to refuse him leave under paragraph 322 (2) Immigration  Rules
             was lawful. The appellant did  not  produce  any  evidence  to
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi that could be  considered,
             in accordance with the  Devaseelan  principles,  to  enable  a
             departure from the findings of First-tier Tribunal judge Ross.
             The appellant does not in his grounds of appeal  identify  any
             such evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
             which was not taken into account. There is no error of law  by
             the First-tier Tribunal judge in maintaining the  decision  of
             the First-tier Tribunal judge who heard  the  appeal  in  2017
             that the appellant had not taken the test as he claimed.

          8. Although permission to appeal was granted to the appellant  on
             the basis that it was arguable the decision  was  inadequately
             reasoned, it is difficult to ascertain  what  else  the  judge
             could have said. The appellant had not  produced  evidence  of
             any significant private  or  family  life;  he  had  not  been
             lawfully resident in the UK for 10 or more years; he had  been
             resident in India for the majority of his life and he had  not
             produced  any  significant  evidence  that   he   would   have
             difficulties reintegrating into India; the previous First-tier
             Tribunal decision had concluded he had fraudulently obtained a
             language certificate.

          9. The judge has considered the evidence before him and reached a
             decision that was plainly open to him. The paucity of evidence
             could not lead to any more detailed reasons being given.

         10. Mr Chohan eloquently referred to evidence that, he  submitted,
             ought to have been before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  but
             was not. He acknowledged that  the  appellant  ought  to  have
             attended the hearing but that there was no explanation why his
             then solicitors had not informed him of that. Nevertheless, it
             cannot be an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal judge to
             fail to grant an adjournment in the circumstances  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal judge; it cannot be an error  of  law  for
             the First-tier Tribunal judge to  fail  to  consider  evidence
             that was not before her.

         11. There is no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

             Addendum

         12. It seems there may have been evidence that could have been but
             for some reason was not put before the First-tier Tribunal  or
             sent to the respondent. No doubt the SSHD will  consider  this
             evidence if a further application is made.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge dismissing the appeal stands.


     Date 22nd January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
