
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08565/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2016                  |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m o o
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Osakanu in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  and  is
    40 years old. He first came to the United Kingdom in 1995  and  claimed
    asylum at port. On 31st December 1999 his British  citizen  daughter  V
    was born.  On 22nd October 2002 he was  granted  Exceptional  Leave  to
    Remain. He was then convicted on a guilty plea of two counts of  sexual
    assault which included attempted rape. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    set out the full extent of the appellant's offending  at  [33]  of  his
    decision and this included three driving  offences  (including  driving
    with excess alcohol and no insurance) in 1997-1998, assaulting a police
    officer in 2004 (for which he received a fine and a compensation order)
    and disorderly behaviour in 2005 and the index  offences  committed  in
    2006.

 2. On 11th February 2012 the appellant was notified that he was liable for
    deportation.   A decision was made to deport the appellant on 2nd  July
    2012 but his appeal against that decision was allowed such that he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain for six months pending resolution
    of the family court proceedings.  Those family proceedings with respect
    to V were concluded on 15th July 2013.

 3. On 10th December 2014 his partner a citizen of  the  DRC  with  refugee
    status gave birth to the appellant's second daughter A.   On  11th  May
    2015 he was again notified that the Secretary of State had  decided  to
    make a  deportation  order  against  him  under  Section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 because his presence was not considered  conducive
    to the public good.  He was invited to make representations  which  the
    appellant did on 1st June 2015.

 4. Following the further submissions on Article 3 and Article 8 grounds on
    8th October 2015 the appellant's human rights claim was refused by  the
    Secretary of State.

 5. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had misdirected himself
    as to the length of sentence and relevant  Rules  when  determining  at
    paragraph 122 that the deportation of the  appellant  would  be  unduly
    harsh upon his  daughter.   In  considering  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules the judge had failed to recognise that the  appellant
    was detained under Section 37 of the Mental  Health  Act  1983  between
    being sentenced on 19 October 2007 and his  discharge  on  15  February
    2012.  It was noted  that  Section  117D  (4)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 includes a person who is  sentenced  to
    detention or ordered or directed to be detained in an institution other
    than prison (including in particular a hospital or an  institution  for
    young offenders) for that length of time.

 6. It was submitted that the appellant was detained for  over  four  years
    and thus the exception at 399(a) did not apply  and  therefore  it  was
    incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider  398(c)  which
    reads as follows:

         "(c) The deportation of the  person  from  the  United  Kingdom  is
         conducive to the public good and in the public interest because, in
         the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has  caused
         serious harm  or  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
         particular disregard  for  the  law,  the  Secretary  of  State  in
         assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or  399A
         applies and, if it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation
         will only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A."

 7. The Secretary of State advanced that the judge's consideration of  very
    compelling circumstances at paragraphs 126 and 138 failed  to  identify
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.  It was therefore submitted that the judge  by
    failing to direct himself as to the correct test had  materially  erred
    in law by carrying out a balancing exercise without  reference  to  the
    threshold that those circumstances might be over and above.

 8. Further, and in the alternative, it was submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into consideration that the report  of  Peter  Horrocks,
    the independent social worker, was dated 21 March  2013  [64]  and  the
    conclusions Mr Horrocks made with regard to  the  appellant's  daughter
    were relevant to the circumstances at that time rather  than  when  the
    appellant's daughter was  considerably  younger.  In  other  words  the
    material relied upon was out of date.

 9. The judge failed to acknowledge  the  lack  of  up-to-date  independent
    evidence regarding the impact the appellant's  deportation  would  have
    upon the appellant's daughter and that the appellant's daughter did not
    attend the appeal hearing.   The  appellant's  daughter's  most  recent
    evidence before the Tribunal was dated January 2012.  It was  submitted
    that there was a suggestion that the appellant's daughter was unable to
    articulate her own opinion as to the impact  that  deportation  of  her
    father would have upon her.  It was submitted that the judge's  failure
    to consider the relevant evidence and circumstances at the present time
    was an error of law.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me Mr Bramble relied on the  written  grounds  of
    appeal.  The appellant and his partner appeared in person.  Mr  Bramble
    emphasised that the judge had not referred to the sentencing remarks of
    the judge and the length of time the appellant had been detained  under
    the Mental Health Act. Further to KMO the judge needed to consider  the
    whole picture.  The judge appeared to accept that the  appellant  could
    not succeed  in  relation  to  his  private  life  but  there  must  be
    circumstances over and above the exceptions in paragraphs 399 and  399A
    of the Immigration Rules.  There was no up to  date  evidence  and  the
    judge was not entitled to find in favour of the appellant just  because
    the effect on V was unduly harsh or the exceptions in paragraph 399  or
    399A had been fulfilled.  There needed to be compelling circumstances.

11. The appellant responded in person that he retained his family life with
    V and his partner and baby daughter.

Conclusions

12. The automatic deportation provisions do not apply and this  case  is  a
    'conducive deportation'.  The appellant's conviction  on  27th  January
    2007 predated passing of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  the  coming  into
    force of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Immigration  Judge
    must, nonetheless, attach weight to the Secretary of  State's  view  of
    the public good and public interests without any statutory presumption.
    Deportation is a matter of discretion for the Secretary of State guided
    by consideration of all  relevant  factors  including  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Deportation, however, is still to be treated as in  the  public
    interest and for the public good. OH Serbia v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694,
    referred to factors to be considered which included  the  risk  of  re-
    offending, the deterrent effect and  the  role  of  deportation  as  an
    expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes. There are also the
    Section  117  Nationality  Immigration   and   Asylum   Act   statutory
    considerations to take into account.

13. Relevant to this case is Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 which
    sets out

         'A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
         to the public good; or ...'

14. Paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules is the focus and this reads  as
    follows:

         "Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         maintaining the deportation  order  will  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors."

    The Immigration Rules at A398 set out.

         "These rules apply where:

         (a)  a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         (b)  a foreign  criminal  applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
         against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    For clarity The Immigration Rules at 399 set out.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

15. The first ground of complaint was that the judge had not realised  that
    the detention of the appellant within hospital was for the purposes  of
    the Immigration  legislation  a  period  of  imprisonment  and  counted
    towards  the  total  of  imprisonment  when   applying   the   relevant
    Immigration Rules.  Although the reference in Section 1117D is for  the
    interpretation of 'this part' the courts have held that Section 117  is
    an aid to construction of the Immigration Rules as Section 117A states

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether an interference ...

16. Section 117D sets out what is to be classified as counting towards  the
    length of time for the purposes of imprisonment and which in turn  will
    set the relevant test for deciding the weight of  the  public  interest
    and whether the decision to deport the appellant is proportionate.

         Section 117D

         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
         a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
             sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence
             or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);

             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
             period of imprisonment of that length of time only  by  virtue
             of being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences  amounting  in
             aggregate to that length of time;

             (c)  include a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  detention,  or
             ordered or directed to be detained, in  an  institution  other
             than a prison (including, in  particular,  a  hospital  or  an
             institution for young offenders) for that length of time; and

             (d)  include a person who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
             detention, or ordered or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
             indeterminate period, provided that it may last for  at  least
             that length of time.

17. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision at  [5]  that
    when the appellant was convicted of two sexual offences, one of  sexual
    assault and one of attempted rape of a female on 29th January 2007  the
    sentencing judge imposed a hospital order  in  respect  of  each  count
    under section 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983.  The judge  noted  that
    there was imposed a restriction order under section 41 of the same  Act
    without  limit  of  time.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   did   not
    specifically allude to the time the appellant was  detained  under  the
    Mental Health Act as constituting imprisonment for the purposes of  the
    Immigration Rules and Section 117, but I am not  persuaded  as  to  the
    first ground of the appellant's challenge.  There is no doubt that  the
    judge was aware that he needed to direct himself to whether there  were
    very compelling circumstances  justifying  the  appellant  being  given
    leave to remain and this he refers to at paragraph 126.

18. The real question is whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge was alive to
    the weight that is now placed on the  public  interest  in  deportation
    cases and whether exceptional circumstances were so found.  Putting  it
    a different way and in line with the Immigration Rules very  compelling
    reasons  will  be  required  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
    deportation. These compelling reasons are set out  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544 and Lord Dyson  MR,  giving
    the judgment of the court, said this at paragraphs 40 to 44:

         "40. Does it follow that the new  rules  have  effected  no  change
         other than to spell  out  the  circumstances  in  which  a  foreign
         criminal's claim that deportation would breach his article 8 rights
         will succeed? At this point,  it  is  necessary  to  focus  on  the
         statement that it will only be 'in exceptional  circumstances  that
         the public interest in deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors'. Ms Giovannetti submits that the reference to  exceptional
         circumstances serves  the  purpose  of  emphasising  that,  in  the
         balancing exercise, great weight should  be  given  to  the  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals who do  not  satisfy  paras
         398 and 399 or 399A. It is only  exceptionally  that  such  foreign
         criminals will succeed in showing that their rights  under  article
         8(1) trump the public interest in their deportation.

         41.  We accept this submission. In view of the strictures contained
         at para 20 of Huang [2007] 2 AC 167, it would have been  surprising
         if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  intended  to   reintroduce   an
         exceptionality test, thereby flouting the Strasbourg jurisprudence.
         At  first  sight,  the  choice  of  the  phrase   'in   exceptional
         circumstances' might suggest that this is what she purported to do.
         But the phrase has been used in a way which  was  not  intended  to
         have this effect in all cases where a  state  wishes  to  remove  a
         foreign national who relies on family life which he established  at
         a time when he knew it to be 'precarious' (because he had no  right
         to remain in the UK). The cases were helpfully reviewed by Sales  J
         in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
         EWHC 720 (Admin). The fact that Nagre  was  not  a  case  involving
         deportation of a foreign criminal is immaterial.  The  significance
         of the case law lies in the repeated use by the European  Court  of
         the phrase 'exceptional circumstances'.

         42.  At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement in  the  case  law
         that, in 'precarious' cases, 'it is likely to be only in  the  most
         exceptional circumstances that  the  removal  of  the  non-national
         family member will constitute a violation of article 8'.  This  has
         been repeated and adopted by the European Court in  near  identical
         terms in many cases.  At  paras  41  and  42  he  said  that  in  a
         'precarious' family life case, it is only in 'exceptional' or  'the
         most exceptional circumstances' that removal  of  the  non-national
         family member will constitute a violation  of  article  8.  In  our
         view, that is not to say that a test  of  exceptionality  is  being
         applied. Rather it is that, in approaching the question of  whether
         removal  is  a  proportionate  interference  with  an  individual's
         article 8 rights, the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
         deportation  and  something  very   compelling   (which   will   be
         'exceptional') is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         removal. In  our  view,  it  is  no  coincidence  that  the  phrase
         'exceptional circumstances' is used in the new rules in the context
         of weighing the competing factors for and  against  deportation  of
         foreign criminals.

         43.  The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
         from a general rule. The general rule in  the  present  context  is
         that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and  399A
         do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required to  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation. These  compelling  reasons  are
         the 'exceptional circumstances'.

         44.  We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
         code and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered in the
         balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  We  accordingly
         respectfully do not agree with the UT that  the  decision-maker  is
         not 'mandated or directed' to  take  all  the  relevant  article  8
         criteria into account (para 38)."

19. Section  117C  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  has
    relevance  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Rules   in   relation   to
    proportionality albeit that  the  rules  regarding  deportation  are  a
    'complete code'.

         Section  117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations   in   cases
         involving foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

20. Statute has established that the deportation is construed to be in  the
    public good and where a foreign  criminal  has  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for four years the appellant cannot, because of the  length  of
    his sentence, rely on the exceptions set out under  Paragraphs  399  or
    399A   (with  reference  to  Paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)),  that  is   a
    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years, the fact  that  he
    has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life  and  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK and there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  it
    is proposed he is deported. Any compelling reasons must  be  'over  and
    above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A'.  Section  117C(2)
    confirms that the more serious the offence committed  the  greater  the
    public interest in deportation. Section 117C (6)  again  sets  out  the
    test to be applied in respect of those sentenced to more than  4  years
    in prison or in this case hospital detention.

21. CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA 488 emphasises that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation must be outweighed by factors over and above those set  out
    at paragraph 399 and 399A of the Rules and only where they give rise to
    very compelling circumstances.

22. There is no doubt throughout the determination that the judge was fully
    aware that the scales weighed heavily in support of deportation and for
    example at paragraph 35 the judge recorded

         "It is in the public interest that  foreign  criminals  who  commit
         such offences are deported.  The public will rightly have  a  sense
         of revulsion at the commencement of such offences. The more serious
         the crime, the greater  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   I
         remind myself that deportation also serves to  discourage  other  s
         from committing such offences."

    and at paragraph 115 the judge states:

         "The  offences  that  the  Appellant  committed  were,  as  I  have
         acknowledged more than once above, very serious.  I reiterate  that
         I have very much borne in mind the public interest in  deportation.
         The public is entitled to feel revulsion at the type of offence the
         Appellant committed."

    The judge,  however,  considers  the  circumstances  of  the  offending
    including the appellant's illness and  his  period  of  offending  when
    arriving at his conclusions in relation  to  compelling  circumstances.
    The judge continues at paragraph 116:

         "However, I must also bear in mind the very important fact that the
         Appellant was suffering from psychosis, a  severe  mental  illness,
         when he committed the index offences.  His evidence as  to  how  he
         felt at the time he committed the  offences,  as  recorded  by  Dr.
         Anderson,  would  indicate  he  was  delusional.   The  Appellant's
         evidence  was  not  challenged  by  the  Respondent.   Indeed,  the
         Respondent acknowledges that the Appellant's mental illness  was  a
         factor in his offending.  The evidence I had would indicate that it
         was a very important factor in his offending."

    And at 117:

         "I find that the Appellant's illness significantly ameliorates  the
         gravity of his offences.  The offences took place over  a  two  day
         period.  The medical  evidence  I  had  shows  that  his  psychosis
         started in 2005.  He has not been psychotic since he  came  out  of
         hospital on day release in 2011."

    And at 118:

         "I have already recorded what I found to be the Appellant's genuine
         contrition for what he had done."

23. The judge does not place over emphasis on the lack of  offending  since
    release which would, as indicated in CT be an  expectation  of  society
    rather than a positive factor. The judge  did  make  reference  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision dated 15th April  2013  and  there  it  is
    clearly found that

    'the documentation on  file  clearly  indicates  that  the  appellant's
    criminal conduct derived from his mental health problems.   It  is  not
    suggested otherwise by the respondent'.

24. In other words it was the health problems and the circumstances of  the
    appellant's  ill  health  which  contributed  to  the   assessment   of
    compelling circumstances.  MM Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ  279  recognised
    that where  evidence  suggested  (despite  not  guaranteeing)  that  an
    appellant would not have offended but for his  mental  health  problems
    and would not re-offend in the future, this can have a bearing  on  the
    weight given to the pubic interest in deportation. Moses LJ  opined  at
    [28] that all the circumstances should be taken into account

         "28. But there does remain the question of proportionality  in  the
         light of the unchallenged factual finding that  the  appellant  has
         established a strong private life in the United  Kingdom  based  on
         his family ties, his illness, his dependency on his clinicians  and
         his medication, and the obligation under the Mental Health Act 1983
         to provide him with community care after discharge (as recorded  at
         paragraph 11(vi) and [71]  of  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Jarvis's
         determination). Normally, as this court explained in JO  and  JT  v
         SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 [29] the need to  protect  society  against
         serious crime is even more  important  and  can  be  given  greater
         weight than the need to maintain effective immigration control. But
         as the Court of Appeal recognised, the weight to be placed  on  the
         criminal offending will depend on the seriousness of  the  offences
         and all the other circumstances of the case."

    And albeit  that  the  regime  has  changed  since  2012  in  that  the
    Immigration Rules are a complete code that does not  preclude  all  the
    relevant facts from being addressed.

         "32.  It  was  open  to  Senior   Immigration   Judge   Jarvis   on
         reconsideration to reach the conclusion that it was not established
         that the sole reason the appellant committed the crimes was because
         of his schizophrenia.  But  the  evidence  was  all  one  way,  and
         unchallenged by the  Secretary  of  State,  that  his  illness  was
         pivotal or a central cause of his offending. Because of the way the
         case was argued, Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis did not go  on  to
         consider the impact of that evidence on the proportionality of  his
         deportation for  the  purposes  of  the  balancing  exercise  under
         Article 8(2). Whilst there was  no  guarantee  that  the  appellant
         would not have offended but  for  his  schizophrenia  and  thus  no
         guarantee that he would never offend again,  when  considering  the
         risk to the public of his continued presence in this country it was
         of great  importance  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  continued
         medication and support would remove the risk of further  offending.
         If the correct conclusion was that although the risk could never be
         said to  have  been  entirely  removed,  it  would,  for  practical
         purposes, be minimal, that was a powerful factor in considering the
         proportionality of the deportation order."

25. It has been asserted that the judge has thus failed  to  identify  very
    compelling circumstances because of his  concentration  on  the  unduly
    harsh nature of the separation between the appellant and  V  and/or  Ms
    Tshibola.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  [73]  that  the
    appellant has a genuine relationship and regular  unsupervised  contact
    with his daughter, who lives with her step sister and whose mother  had
    abandoned her.  Under S55 of the Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 the best  interests  of  the  child  are  relevant,  and  when
    considering them, the judge is obliged to make a consideration of those
    interests.  The judge recorded with respect to the  appellant  and  his
    daughter at paragraph 120:

         "The Appellant and  V  would  undergo  renewed  separation  on  the
         Appellant's deportation.  It would be separation for  a  very  long
         time.  The Appellant could not return to the United Kingdom  before
         ten years had elapsed.  The evidence before me did not lead  me  to
         conclude that there would be  funds  readily  available  for  V  to
         travel on a regular basis to the DRC to see her father or for  both
         the Appellant and V to travel to a third country to meet."

    And at paragraph 121:

         "What points strongly to the conclusion that  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for V to remain in the United Kingdom without her  father  is
         the fact that V's other biological parent has abandoned  her  (with
         all the attendant hurt), that she is vulnerable, that she is  at  a
         difficult age and that it is only in the last four years  that  the
         fractured relationship she had with her father has been  healed  to
         the extent that closeness and love have  been  restored.   The  re-
         fracturing might  have  extremely  severe  consequences  for  V  as
         identified by Mr Horrocks."

26. It is important that the judge did set out the  exceptions  which  were
    said to apply in relation to paragraph 399(a) and (b) in  order  to  be
    able to show what over and above those specific factors  needed  to  be
    shown in relation to the appellant and further to set the context.    I
    do not find that the judge misdirected himself.  He referred at [26] to
    Part 13 of the Rules as being a complete code for considering Article 8
    claims by those to be deported.  The judge also identified  MF  Nigeria
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and the requirement to consider  'very  compelling
    circumstances'.  Clearly at [27] the judge identified that he appellant
    must 'demonstrate 'very compelling circumstances justifying  his  being
    given leave to remain here'.  The judge  further  directed  himself  in
    relation to relevant case law including SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
    317.

27. A factor found relevant and this is in relation to the exception  under
    paragraph 399(a) is that the appellant's partner could  not  return  to
    the Democratic Republic of Congo as she had been granted refugee status
    by reference to that country.  This the judge recorded at paragraph 130
    and at 131.  The judge took into account the  wider  circumstances  and
    specifically noted both the decision of MAB (para 399; "unduly  harsh")
    USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) and KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  Nigeria
    [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC). It is clear that  at  paragraph  135  the  judge
    found that there was suitable medication available for the appellant in
    the  DRC  but  also  noted  specifically  at  paragraph  136  that  the
    appellant's deportation in the circumstances  would  almost  inevitably
    have an adverse effect on his mental health.  There is  no  doubt  that
    the separation from his partner would have the effect of  reducing  his
    'care' and support in relation to his illness.

28. The judge stated that he had taken the above  additional  matters  into
    account when addressing proportionality and further, at paragraph  138,
    the judge states,

         "After full and lengthy deliberation, I have come to the conclusion
         that there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  in  this  appeal,
         justifying the Appellant being given leave to remain."

29. Although the judge states "it would unlawfully  infringe  his  and  his
    family  members'  qualified  protected  rights  to  enjoy  family  life
    together in the United Kingdom" there is no doubt that  the  judge  has
    taken into account all factors including that the appellant's offending
    was  such  that  it  stemmed  from  his  psychosis  which   was   being
    appropriately treated.  The judge also identified between paragraph  77
    and 81 that the appellant's current mental state was that he  had  been
    complying with his medication and  the  latest  report  on  his  mental
    health  was  that  his  consultant  psychiatrist,  on  10  March  2015,
    confirmed that he "remains free of any psychotic  symptoms"  and  there
    was  "no  evidence  of  anhedonia  or  negative   thoughts   or   self-
    harm/suicidal ideas".  He  noted  that  the  appellant  did  not  drink
    alcohol and did not use illicit drugs and he was aware of the need  for
    his  continued  abstinence.   Overall  the  appellant  remained  stable
    despite the stress generated by the advent of the new  baby.   He  also
    stated that the consultant psychiatrist recorded that the "appellant is
    able to self-diagnose when he is at risk of becoming ill-treatment  and
    is therefore able to take steps to prevent his actually  becoming  ill-
    treatment".

30. The judge also identified that he had considered paragraph 117C,  which
    applies to foreign criminals, and noted with no doubt Section  117B  in
    mind that the appellant had obtained qualifications in engineering  and
    IT from the College of North East  London  and  that  if  permitted  to
    remain he would find  himself  gainful  employment.   In  addition,  at
    paragraph 82, the  judge  recorded  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer conceded that there was no evidence to show that  there  was  a
    real risk that the appellant would reoffend.  There  is  no  indication
    that the appellant has re-offended up until the time of  the  decision.
    The judge, however, did not place an over emphasis on this such  as  to
    reduce the weight of the sentence and public interest but did place the
    offending behaviour in the context of the appellant's illness which  in
    turn  affected  the  weight  attached  to  the   public   interest   in
    deportation. The judge, nonetheless, has taken into account  the  index
    offences and also taken into account offences other than the index ones
    which were peripheral to the decision.  It  was  clear  throughout  the
    determination that the judge took into account that the  appellant  was
    psychotic when he committed those very serious offences  but  that  his
    mental health was now good and that he  had  been  stable  since  being
    released in February 2012 and indeed noted that the appellant had  been
    on day release.

31. In sum it is not just the relationships between the appellant  and  his
    daughter V or his current wife and child that drew the judge to finding
    compelling circumstances, noting that the appellant had a family  court
    order in his favour granting him regular contact with V since 2013  but
    of specific importance is that the appellant was mentally ill  when  he
    undertook the offence and it is in the light of  that  that  the  judge
    made the decision.

32. There was further criticism that the judge had failed to  consider  the
    evidence as at the date of the decision and the judge at paragraph  111
    stated,

         "I attach great weight to what Mr Horrocks says as  to  the  effect
         the Appellant's deportation would have on V.  What he said  in  his
         report holds good today."

    It was asserted that there was no up-to-date evidence specifically with
    regard V, but the appellant attended court and was subject  to  lengthy
    cross-examination and gave extensive evidence at  court  together  with
    his witnesses.  The judge found him a truthful and  impressive  witness
    [74] and it was open to the judge to treat and accept  the  appellant's
    own oral evidence as relevant  and  up  to  date  evidence.  There  was
    evidence from the daughter and although she did not attend the  hearing
    it is relevant that she is still a minor.  There  was  relevant  up  to
    date oral and written evidence from the appellant and  the  appellant's
    partner with respect to his relationship with  V  on  which  the  judge
    placed reliance [74]-[76].  It was open to the judge  and  in  my  view
    correct to place the evidence in historical context.

33. The judge also noted a  letter  dated  5th  January  2015  from  Thomas
    Maguire, the Appellant's Mental Health  Social  Worker.  The  appellant
    gave evidence and the judge noted at [44]

         "the appellant told me that at present his mental state is  stable.
         He feels well.  He has access  to  his  supervisory  team.   He  is
         taking his medication as required.  He takes 15mg of Olanzapine per
         day.  He sees his doctor once every three  months  and  his  Mental
         Health Social Worker every two weeks as a matter of course.  He can
         see him whenever he wishes"

34. The judge and took into account the variety of reports over  the  years
    from 2011 onwards.  There was a psychiatric  report  dated  March  2011
    detailing the appellant's illness and progress and  a report  and  from
    Ms Mapp, Forensic Social Worker dated April 2014 which  confirmed  that
    the appellant was discharged from hospital on 15th February 2015  under
    the Mental Health Act 1983, had been 'very  well  mentally  since'  and
    there had  been  no  incidents  of  concern.  In  fact,  as  the  judge
    identified the appellant had had unescorted leave from  hospital  since
    March 2010 and was discharged from the Mental  Unit  in  February  2012
    [82].  The judge also placed reliance on a report from Mr Horrocks,  an
    independent social worker, dated 21st March 2013  and  a  report  dated
    10th March 2015 from  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr  Previtera  which
    confirmed the appellant was free of any psychotic symptoms and on which
    the judge placed reliance. At [83] the judge stated that there had been
    nothing but improvement in the appellant's mental state since 2012  and
    that he had now been released for four years and  was  on  day  release
    before that.

35. The appellant was unrepresented and  it  is  not  always  uppermost  in
    unrepresented litigants minds that new reports are required or  of  the
    importance of having V  at  court.   This  is  not  recorded  as  being
    challenged during the hearing such  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
    counter the suggestion that because his elder daughter was not at court
    their relationship was no longer of the strength he claimed.  There was
    no indication that the evidence regarding his  illness  or  improvement
    had changed.  It was not challenged by the  respondent  and  the  judge
    took into account all of the evidence before him.

36. An overall reading of the decision discloses that  the  judge  and  was
    under no illusions that the public interest weighed heavily  in  favour
    of the appellant's deportation but found  compelling  circumstances  in
    his favour of the appellant.  Although the  court  was  criticised  for
    applying the wrong test the First-tier Tribunal Judge in my  view  made
    findings of fact  which  brought  the  case  into  the  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances category. It was open to the judge to make up-
    to-date findings on the evidence that was before him.

37.  I find there is no material error in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Helen Rimington
Signed   Date Signed 29th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
