
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08182/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 9th April 2019 On 21st May 2019




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                               MR BASANT SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Chuna, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by Victorimax
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. It is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these proceedings.
      However, for convenience I will continue to refer to the parties
      hereinafter as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a national of India born on 3 June 1939. Over the
      years he was granted numerous visas to enter as a visitor. The refusal
      letter refers to an entry clearance being valid from 6 December 1998
      until 6 June 1999. Thereafter, he was granted various leaves as a
      visitor, the last of which ended on 10 December 2015. He last entered
      the United Kingdom on this Visa on 10 June 2015 and then on 9 December
      2015 he applied for leave to remain outside the rules. The application
      was refused and certified on 9 September 2016.

   3. A further application was made outside the rules on 22 December
      2016.In his application he referred to health issues. A decision was
      not made on his claim until 19 March 2018, when it was refused. Regard
      was had to paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules and his private
      life. It was felt he did not satisfy these requirements. The decision
      maker referred to a consideration of any exceptional circumstances.
      The appellant had indicated he suffered from amongst other things
      asthma, coronary heart and a disorder which could lead to excessive
      bruising or bleeding as well as depression and anxiety. However, the
      respondent did not see the health issues as reaching the necessary
      threshold to justify the grant of leave.

   4. The grounds of appeal refer to the appellant's age and that he has a
      married son here and is dependent on him. It suggests that his
      application should be considered in relation to appendix FM and the
      adult dependent relative rule.

   5. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge D Barker at Hatton
      Cross on 11 January 2019. The parties were represented. The judge
      heard from the appellant's son and daughter in law. His son, the
      sponsor, said he has been living here since 2004 and became a British
      citizen in 2011. He said he was the appellant's only son and that his
      mother had died in 1993. He referred to cultural expectations that the
      family would live together.

   6. The judge sets out the evidence and the findings made. Reference was
      made to the section 117 B factors. The conclusion was that the appeal
      should be allowed.

The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge did not properly consider the public interest factors in
      allowing the appeal. In particular, it was arguable the judge failed
      to take account of the fact that his family and private life was
      established at a time when his immigration status was precarious.

   8. At the outset of the is provided with a copy of the decision of the
      Supreme Court in Rhuppiah -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 58. The Court gave
      guidance on the meaning in section 117B(5) of someone with a
      precarious immigration status as being everyone who has leave to
      reside here other than indefinitely. There was no need to consider
      degrees of precariousness. Section 117B(5) nevertheless permits a
      limited degree of flexibility, both by reference to "little weight"
      and by virtue of section 117A(2)(a) via the phrase "must (in
      particular) have regard". This guidance may be overridden in an
      exceptional case by particularly strong features of the private life.
      It is important to note that section 117 B(5) is dealing with private
      life as opposed to family life when the person is here lawfully.

   9. The presenting officer submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 33
      in stating that his article 8 rights had not developed when he was
      either in the country illegally or with a precarious status. She
      pointed out that the appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2015 on a
      visit Visa and then overstayed. He had no settled status. She
      submitted that the judge did not adequately considered the public
      interest factors.

  10. In response, Mr Walsh, who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal,
      submitted that the judge's decision was comprehensive. I was referred
      to the rule 24 response which he had submitted and which he adopted.
      He pointed out at paragraph 8 that the most important element in the
      application was the appellant's family life with his son and his
      family.

Consideration

  11. I find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Barker clearly
      demonstrates the considerable care which has been taken by the judge
      in dealing with the appeal. The reasons for refusal letter is
      relatively brief. It does not consider family life nor as a comparator
      the adult dependent relative rules in appendix FM. Rather, the focus
      was upon private life as set out in paragraph 276 ADE. I find to look
      at the matter so in this way distorts the issues arising and deals
      with the claim in an artificial way. This point was noted by the
      appellant's representatives who raised the adult dependent relative
      provisions in the grounds of appeal.

  12. At paragraph 10 the judge records the evidence as being that the
      appellant's son, his sponsor, has visited India every year since
      2004.His evidence was that he has more recently been visiting his
      father several times a year, despite having substantial business
      commitments. His children also visit. The judge recorded the sponsor's
      evidence that if his father had to return to India he could afford to
      pay for his care. Whilst his material needs may be catered for, his
      sponsor said the appellant would miss the love and care of his family.
      The sponsor said the issue had arisen out of necessity rather than any
      preference. He explained that he was an only son and that his mother
      died in 1993. He referred to the Indian tradition whereby the elderly
      are cared for within the family. He then refers to the appellant's
      needs and refers to a deterioration since 2015. The sponsor said that
      he has respected the law and before the appellant's visit visa expired
      he took advice and made an application. It was only when this was
      refused that the family were placed in a dilemma. They did not simply
      ignore the issue but made a subsequent application.

  13. In submissions, at paragraph 16 the judge refers to being addressed by
      the presenting officer on the public interest factors in section 117
      B. Mr Walsh, in response, accepted that the appeal was not being
      argued on the basis of the article 3 threshold being met because of
      the appellant's medical needs. He emphasised the fact the family had
      visited the appellant regularly since 2004.He in turn had visited the
      United Kingdom and had complied with the terms of his leave until the
      very end. He referred to the leading decision of BRICITS -v- SSHD
      [2017] EWCA Civ 368. Paragraph 18 records there was no suggestion the
      appellant relies on public funds and commented on the sponsor's
      achievements.

  14. In the Finding section, the judge clearly analyses the various issues
      arising and the evidence. At paragraph 22 the judge refers to the
      appellant's good immigration history. At paragraph 24 the judge
      considered the medical evidence about the appellant's mental state and
      concluded that was a degree of cognitive impairment and further
      assessment was required in relation to a possible diagnoses of
      dementia.

  15. At paragraph 27 the judge addresses the adult dependent relative rules
      and makes the point that the principal obstacle for the appellant is
      that he is in country. The judge dealt with the relevant
      considerations in those rules. This would be relevant to the
      proportionality assessment. The judge was satisfied that he fulfilled
      E-ECDR 2.4 in that he needed long-term help with day-to-day tasks. The
      judge then faces up to the issue of alternative care and the
      possibility of the appellant living in a care home in India. The judge
      concluded that his physical needs could be met in this way. The judge
      also correctly said it was for the appellant to establish he met the
      rules and referred to a lack of evidence about the care facilities
      available. The judge concluded that it had not been established the
      required standard of care was unavailable in India. Clearly, the judge
      has addressed the background information submitted and was prepared to
      reach a clear conclusion on a difficult issue. This illustrated the
      even handed approach taken by the judge to the issues arising and a
      willingness to make difficult decisions. The judge did acknowledge
      that this proposition would have enormous impact upon the appellant.

  16. At paragraph 31, having dealt with the relevant immigration rules the
      judge made the point that the respondent had considered his article 8
      rights in the context solely of his private life. At paragraph 33 the
      judge found the circumstances were such that there was a need to
      consider the situation outside the rules. The judge referred to the
      totality of the circumstances and the impact of removal. The judge
      then referred to weighing this against the public interest and the
      need for effective immigration control. The judge commented that the
      appellant has demonstrated he had complied with the law and that there
      is a close relationship within the family. Most significantly, the
      judge refers to there being a private and family life. Consequently,
      the judge is not restricting the scope of enquiry to the confines of
      private life.

  17. In BRITCITS the Master of the Rolls said at 61:

             61.   Nor do I accept the submission that there is always
             family life which engages Article 8 of the Convention whenever
             a UK citizen with an elderly parent resident outside the UK
             wishes to bring the parent to the UK to look after the parent.
             Whether or not there is family life at the moment of the
             application will depend on all the facts as to the
             relationship between parent and adult child and its history:
             Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]
             EWCA Civ 170, [2003] INLR170, at [19], [25]


             74.... I reject the appellant's submission that there is
             family life which engages Article 8 in every case where a UK
             sponsor wishes to bring their elderly parent to the UK to look
             after them. As Sedley LJ said in Kugathas at [18], [24] and
             [25] with regard to an adult, neither blood ties nor the
             concern and affection that ordinarily go with them are, by
             themselves or together, enough to constitute family life;
             there is no presumption that a person has a family life, even
             with the members of a person's immediate family. The court has
             to scrutinise all the relevant factors. There must be
             something more than normal emotional ties. As Lord Bingham
             said in Huang at [18]:

                       "Matters such as the age, health and vulnerability of
                       the applicant, the closeness and previous history of
                       the family, the applicant's dependence on the
                       financial and emotional support of the family, the
                       prevailing cultural tradition and conditions in the
                       country of origin and many other factors may all be
                       relevant."

  18. Based on the history recorded, the finding of the existence of family
      life in the circumstance was one open to the judge on the evidence.
      The point made by the judge was that this family life did not suddenly
      come into existence during the short time when the appellant
      overstayed but had developed over many years. The judge refers to the
      ties developing in the course of visits in the United Kingdom and in
      India and Dubai. The judge referred to the sponsor having lived with
      the appellant from childhood until he came to the United Kingdom in
      2004.Clearly, the judge was setting out the factors for the finding of
      family life in the circumstance.

  19. At paragraph 33 the judge refers to public interest considerations in
      section 117 B. The judge acknowledges that effective immigration
      control is always in the public interest and that little weight should
      be given to a private life established when the person's immigration
      status is precarious. The judge then goes on to make the point that
      the relationships have not been developed when he was in the country
      illegally or when his status was precarious because family
      relationships developed over a large number of years. I see nothing
      wrong with this statement .

  20. The judge had earlier noted the sponsor's financial position,
      indicating the appellant could be adequately maintained. Given his
      age, he would be exempt from the English language requirement. The
      judge set out his immigration history and the period of overstaying
      was brief and the judge set out that the family have always tried to
      comply with the immigration rules.

  21. I find this to be a carefully analysed decision in which the judge had
      due regard not only to the interests of the appellant but also the
      public interest considerations. In conclusion, I find no material
      error of law demonstrated.

Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge D Barker. Consequently, that decision allowing the appeal
shall stand.

                                                         Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge Farrelly.
                                                         Date: 19 May 2018

