
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08604/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2019                       |On 5 August 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                             mr Surendra gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Revill, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr Surendra Gurung against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  to  dismiss  his  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision to dismiss the application under Article 8.

Background

2.   The appellant's parents first came to the UK in 2005.  The  appellant's
    father was a distinguished soldier in the Gurkha regiment  and  had  an
    exemplary service record.  The sponsor was given  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in 2006 but returned to  Nepal  in  2007  and  stayed  with  the
    appellant until 2010.  According to the documents produced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, money began to be transferred from father  to  son
    in Nepal in about 2017.  On 15 November 2017 an application  for  entry
    clearance was made as a dependent adult of the  father  (the  sponsor).
    The son having been born on 10 June  1979  is  now  40  years  of  age.
    However, the application was rejected by the Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    On a subsequent review by the Entry Clearance Manager, on  30  December
    2018, the ECM upheld the decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    refuse entry  clearance.   The  subsequent  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal came before Judge Widdup  on  12  March  2019.   Judge  Widdup
    decided that the appellant had  failed  to  meet  the  requirement  for
    dependency  in  the  Immigration   Rules.    Furthermore,   there   was
    insufficient emotional or financial support to amount  to  family  life
    within Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   However,
    the appellant appealed that decision  and  it  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford. Judge Ford decided  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
    Widdup had approached the  issue  of  dependency  incorrectly  and  had
    considered proportionality, when in fact proportionality under  article
    8 of the ECHR did not arise.  The judge appeared to look for  necessity
    or dependency when he was required to ask whether there was a real  and
    effective level of support. It was arguable that Judge  Ford  ought  to
    have had regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Rai  v  The
    Entry Clearance Officer - New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320.   The  issues
    before the Upper Tribunal therefore related  to  the  extent  to  which
    Judge Widdup adequately dealt with the issue of dependency. If  he  did
    not, would he have reached the same decision or was that  error  likely
    to have been material? Was Judge Widdup right to consider the issue  of
    proportionality when considering the requirements of Article 8?

The hearing

3.   Miss Revill referred to the background summarised above  and  submitted
    that in Gurkha cases the focus of the Tribunal's enquiry is whether  or
    not family life  had  been  established,  rather  than  whether  it  is
    necessary and proportionate for the respondent to remove the appellant.
     As a result of the Court of Appeal's decision in Rai the burden on the
    appellant was to show a real effective  and  committed  support.  Judge
    Widdup had therefore erred in approaching the  appeal  like  any  other
    human rights appeal.  Secondly, she said, the judge had  taken  account
    of irrelevant matters by looking at the question of dependency.   There
    clearly had been financial payments over the years from the sponsor  to
    the appellant in Nepal.  She said that paragraph 40(ix) of the decision
    amounted to an acceptance that financial assistance had occurred but 41
    of the same decision found that the evidence was insufficient to  allow
    Judge Widdup to make a finding of family life.  Miss Revill argued that
    that Judge Widdup had  been  wrong  in  law.   She  drew  attention  to
    paragraph 43 of the decision, where  Judge  Widdup  gave  a  number  of
    examples of contact between the appellant and the  sponsor.   She  said
    that the appellant could undertake an MBA and there was a  prospect  he
    might be able to obtain employment in Nepal, although the appellant was
    at the time of the hearing unemployed.

Discussion

4.   As I pointed out, at paragraph 44 of his decision  Judge  Widdup  found
    that the relationship between the parents and their adult  son  changed
    significantly when the former came to the UK. Judge Widdup  found  that
    it could be inferred that the appellant was old enough to live  without
    them.  Such emotional dependency as then existed  was  likely  to  have
    declined in the years since the appellant's parents  have  left  Nepal,
    the judge thought.  There was, however, an acceptance by the judge that
    the appellant and his parents continued to enjoy a close  relationship,
    which involved assisting the appellant financially  and  providing  him
    with encouragement. However, Judge Widdup concluded that those features
    were not unusual in themselves. A parent whose adult son is in  a  poor
    financial position may well receive support but having  regard  to  all
    the facts and having applied the test in Rai, the judge concluded there
    was not sufficient to amount to family life.

5.   Mr Bramble for the respondent said that the judge  clearly  had  regard
    to the test in Rai.  He had referred to it in detail at  paragraphs  35
    to 38.  He made more than adequate findings at paragraphs 40 onwards in
    his decision.  The decision was not irrational or perverse and  it  was
    not for the Upper Tribunal, to gainsay findings of fact made by a First-
    tier fact-finding tribunal.  Bearing in mind the case law, the decision
    was fully in line with Rai and it should be held.

6.   Miss Revill, in reply, accepted that the  decision  was  not  perverse.
    She accepted that the fact-findings of the First-tier could  stand  but
    she did say that the judge had confused dependency  with  the  test  of
    financial support. Financial support  had  to  be  real  and  effective
    support. Bearing in mind that test, I needed to set aside the  decision
    and remake the decision leaving the fact-findings in place.

Conclusions

7.   Despite Miss Revill's cogent  submissions,  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    Judge Widdup's decision contained an error of law.  The case was  fully
    argued before him by experienced representatives and he had in mind the
    case of Rai making clear reference to it.  It is true,  as  Mr  Bramble
    says, that other judges might have reached a different decision in this
    case, but it was probably finely balanced.   The  circumstances  before
    the First-tier Tribunal were unusual (an adult son living in Nepal with
    parents living in the UK).  Judge Widdup found emotional dependency but
    the lack of evidence of material financial support caused him to decide
    against the appellant. I am not satisfied,  that  as  Miss  Revill  has
    suggested, the judge confused dependency with real  and  effective  and
    committed financial support.

8.   These were no more than the actions of a parent who simply sends  money
    to a child abroad to help them from time to time and they do not amount
    to real effective and committed support. In any event, it  is  not  for
    the Upper Tribunal to substitute its assessment of the facts  for  that
    of the First-Tier Tribunal, which  heard  the  evidence.  Judge  Widdup
    reached  a  decision  which  he  was  entitled  to  reach  in  all  the
    circumstances.

Decision

9.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  to
    refuse the appeal against the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  therefore
    remains.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 23rd July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 23rd July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

