
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08282/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th March 2019                         |On 15th March 2019                |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                             Neeraj Kumar Kunwar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl of Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Rayner (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born 30th October 1979.  He applied
    for entry clearance to the UK to join his spouse  Indu  Rai  who  is  a
    British citizen.  His application was refused on 17th July  2017.   The
    Respondent accepted that the  Appellant  satisfied  the  financial  and
    English language requirements of the Immigration Rules but refused  the
    application with reference to paragraph 320(11).  This was on the basis
    that the Appellant had previously contrived in  a  significant  way  to
    frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules by  overstaying,  and
    there were other aggravating circumstances,  which  in  this  case  the
    Respondent contended amounted to making frivolous applications.

 3. In brief summary it was contended that on 30th April  2014,  while  the
    Appellant was in the UK, his application for leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds was refused with a right
    of appeal.  His appeal was dismissed on 15th May 2015 and he thereafter
    applied for permission to appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That
    application was refused on 31st July 2015 and a further application for
    permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  on  11th
    September 2015.  The Appellant became appeal rights exhausted  and  had
    no leave to remain.

 4. On 6th October 2015 he made a further application for leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules on compassionate  grounds  and  this  was
    refused on 3rd May 2016.  There was no right of appeal so the Appellant
    submitted a pre-action Protocol letter on 12th May 2016 but the refusal
    decision was maintained on 16th April  2016.   On  6th July  2016  the
    Appellant lodged a judicial review application.  This was withdrawn  on
    2nd November 2016 and on  15th  November  2016  the  Appellant  made  a
    voluntary departure from the UK.

 5. The Respondent contended that the frivolous application was  that  made
    on  6th  October  2015,  and  thereafter  making  a   judicial   review
    application.  On this basis it was said that paragraph 320(11)  applied
    and the entry clearance application was refused.   The  Respondent  did
    not consider that the application raised any exceptional  circumstances
    which would justify granting leave to remain pursuant to Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeal was  heard  on  1st  August  2018.   The  judge  found  that
    paragraph 320(11) was satisfied  in  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been an overstayer between 11th September 2015  and  15th
    November 2016.  The judge found that the Appellant had  made  frivolous
    applications, although at paragraph 16 the judge in fact found that "at
    most, Mr Kunwar has made a single application."  The judge  found  that
    this sufficed, as the paragraph should be read as making "one or  more"
    frivolous applications.  The appeal was dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had erred  in  finding  that
    frivolous applications had been made  and  therefore  should  not  have
    found that paragraph 320(11) was applicable.  The  judge  had  accepted
    that the Respondent had the burden of proof and it was  contended  that
    there was no evidence provided  to  show  that  the  application  dated
    6th October 2015 was frivolous.  There was no copy of the application,
    and in the absence of any evidence in relation to the  application,  it
    was not properly  open  to  the  judge  to  make  a  finding  that  the
    application was frivolous.

Permission to Appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin in  the
    following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in finding that an application
         the  Appellant  made  in  October  2015  was  frivolous  such  that
         paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules applied in  the  absence
         of any evidence from  the  Respondent  as  to  the  nature  of  the
         application.  It is also arguable that paragraph  320(11)  required
         there to be more than one frivolous application."

 9. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

10. At the oral hearing Miss Faryl relied and  expanded  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.   On  behalf
    of the Respondent Mr Diwnycz did not concede a material error  of  law,
    but did not oppose the application, and submitted that it was a  matter
    for the Tribunal to decide.

11. I find that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  concluding  that
    paragraph 320(11) applied.  The judge found that the  application  made
    on 6th October 2015 and  refused  on  3rd  May  2016  was  a  frivolous
    application.  The error of law is that there was insufficient  evidence
    to prove that this application was frivolous.  There was no copy of the
    application before the judge, and no copy of the refusal.

12. The judge accepted at  paragraph  18  that  the  ground  on  which  the
    application was made could not be  ascertained.   The  judge  found  at
    paragraph 15 that the fact that the decision did not carry a  right  of
    appeal indicates that it  was  certified  as  clearly  unfounded  under
    section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The
    judge found at paragraph 18 that the  decision  had  been  refused  and
    certified.  It was an error of law to make these findings as there  was
    insufficient evidence to reach such conclusions. It is in fact  section
    94 that certifies as clearly unfounded.

13. In fact, Mr Diwnycz had obtained a copy of the refusal  decision  dated
    3rd May 2016 and confirmed that it had not been  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

14. The judge,  with  respect,  did  not  have  sufficient  information  to
    conclude that the application dated 6th  October  2015  was  completely
    without merit, which  was  a  finding  made  in  paragraph  18  of  the
    decision.

15. In my view the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  16  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant had made a single application, as it  would  appear  that  in
    addition to the application dated 6th October 2015, the Respondent was
    relying upon a subsequent judicial review application.

16. As I conclude  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  a  frivolous
    application had been made in the absence of evidence proving that,  the
    decision of the FtT is unsafe and is set aside.

17. Both representatives suggested it was appropriate to remit  the  appeal
    back to the FtT to be heard afresh.  I indicated that this  would  only
    be appropriate  if  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements,  at
    paragraph 7.2 applied and remittal would only  be  appropriate  if  the
    hearing was to be heard afresh.  Miss Faryl confirmed that she did  not
    suggest  that  any  findings  be  preserved,  and  that  it  would   be
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to be heard afresh.

18. I was therefore persuaded that the appropriate course of action  is  to
    remit the appeal to the FtT.  The parties will be advised of  the  time
    and date of the hearing in due course.  The appeal is to be heard by an
    FtT Judge other than Judge Rayner.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

There was no application for  anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 6th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 6th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


