
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/08856/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 4th March 2019                        |On 16th April 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     N J
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R H Rashid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on 13th September 2017, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 23rd August 2017.  In the determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and  was  born  on  7th
    January 1982.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    14th March 2016, refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of his family life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has a wife  and  a  daughter  in  this
    country.  He had entered with entry clearance as  a  spouse  from  12th
    January 2010 until 12th April 2012.  He was granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a spouse until 16th  May  2015.   He  had  then  applied  for
    permanent leave to remain with his wife in mid-April  2015.   This  had
    been rejected on the basis that the Appellant had  exercised  deception
    when sitting for an ETS test.  He maintains that  he  is  not  in  fact
    engaged in fraudulent behaviour.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, in a careful, detailed and comprehensive determination,  set
    out the Appellant's explanation with regard to the  allegation  against
    him.  It was noted that the Appellant had  approached  the  college  in
    Alum Rock, where the  test  centre  was  based,  with  respect  to  the
    allegation against him, but he had not directly contacted the ETS.   He
    had gone to London to  take  the  test.   He  had  studied  for  it  in
    Birmingham.  The judge also heard evidence from the  Appellant's  wife.
    She stated that only her husband could help her  with  their  daughter,
    who needed extensive medical attention because of her ill  health,  "as
    he is the only one who knows how to look after her and has been trained
    how to do so".  The daughter does not eat much  although  she  has  had
    surgery.  The Appellant's wife  herself  could  not  live  in  Pakistan
    because she had lived in the UK for seventeen years and it was too  hot
    there.  Their daughter could not live there  either  because  she  gets
    sores on her stomach (see paragraph 11).

 5. The judge went on to consider the aspect of deception in this case.  On
    the day that the Appellant took the test the overall  rate  of  invalid
    tests was 84% (paragraph 15).  The Appellant had said that he was  told
    of the college in London when he  had  made  inquiries  of  family  and
    friends (paragraph 17).  However, there was a discrepancy  in  how  the
    Appellant got to the test centre in London,  which  led  the  judge  to
    conclude that he did not take the  tests  in  April  2012.   The  judge
    observed that, "his suggestion in  evidence  that  he  was  unaware  of
    anything wrong does not sit well with the numbers  involved  in  taking
    the tests that day at that centre  and  the  level  of  tests  declared
    invalid."  (See paragraph 18).

 6. However, ultimately, despite this finding, the judge concluded that the
    appeal should be allowed because

         "There are a number of medical reports concerning  the  Appellant's
         daughter who was born with a blind  oesophagus,  i.e.  it  had  not
         formed fully and did not form a functioning tube  to  her  stomach.
         That had developed mental issues neonatally and for her development
         as she grows older".

    The judge went on to say that there have  been  a  number  of  surgical
    procedures, and this "resulted in the unintended removal of her  spleen
    as explained in the doctor's letter of 19th  May  2017."   Indeed,  the
    judge observed that "further surgery may be needed to  avoid  a  spinal
    deformity" (paragraph 21).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had allowed the  appeal
    on human  rights  grounds,  despite  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    exercised deception in seeking to obtain leave using a falsely obtained
    ETS, TOEIC, certificate.  In so doing, the  judge  failed  to  consider
    that the Appellant had a poor immigration history.  Obtaining leave  to
    remain  by  deception  is  a  criminal  offence  and  is  evidence   of
    criminality.  Had the judge not misdirected himself in law, he may well
    have come to a different conclusion.  As for the  Appellant's  daughter
    needing medical treatment,  there  would  be  no  requirement  for  the
    daughter to leave the UK,  and  the  judge  has  failed  to  adequately
    consider that 95% of settlement applications in  Pakistan  are  decided
    within twelve weeks,  during  which  time  alternative  care  could  be
    provided for the Appellant's  daughter,  whilst  he  was  in  Pakistan,
    awaiting a decision on his application to return.

 9. On 5th March 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 4th March 2019, Mrs Aboni, representing the
    Respondent Secretary of State as  the  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, relied upon the grounds of  application.   She  in  particular
    emphasised that the judge (at paragraph 19) had referred to the Section
    117B consideration with  respect  to  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control, but did  not  explain  why  it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to go back to Pakistan.

11. For his part, Mr Rashid submitted that it was not the case at all  that
    the judge had not taken into account the fact that the Appellant had  a
    poor immigration history or that deception had been used,  because  the
    judge expressly  draws  attention  to  this  at  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination,  observing  that  "the  Appellant's  conduct  could   be
    characterised as involving criminality", because "there is  nothing  in
    the guidance to say that actual conviction is required".   Furthermore,
    the judge noted how "the  doctor's  view  was  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her [the child] to live  in  Pakistan"  (paragraph
    22).  It was not the case at all that the judge had not considered  all
    that needed to be considered before arriving at his decision.

12. In reply, Mrs Aboni stated that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that
    alternative care may still be found for the Appellant's daughter during
    the time when he was  awaiting  the  outcome  of  his  entry  clearance
    application to return to the UK, and this would mean that the  decision
    on proportionality reached by the judge was wrong.



No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to
    be set aside (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. First, the Grounds of  Appeal  state  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    adequately consider the Appellant's poor immigration history  and  that
    deception had been used.  In fact, nothing could be  further  from  the
    truth.  The judge repeatedly states that, "were it not for the position
    of the Appellant's daughter the Appellant would have little to complain
    at being removed.  He is in a situation of his own making.  The case in
    reality turns on the position of their daughter".  The evidence  before
    the judge was that it was the Appellant  who  was  looking  after  this
    severely disabled child, and in these circumstances, the judge observed
    that he had to consider "the impact on the remaining parent as this may
    affect the remaining parent's ability to work and therefore to care for
    any child affected" (paragraph 20).  This clearly shows that the  judge
    took a very nuanced and careful account of the facts before him.

15. Second, in the same way, the judge had regard to the medical  evidence,
    observing that "the doctor's view was that it would not  be  reasonable
    to  expect  her  to  live  in  Pakistan".   The  judge  did  so  whilst
    recognising that it was not clear what knowledge the doctor  had  about
    the  medical  system  in  Pakistan.    However,   also   deserving   of
    consideration was the fact that

         "If she were to go to Pakistan medical treatment would have  to  be
         paid for and she would lose the benefit of the NHS  care  that  she
         has and there would be a break in the continuity of her care.   She
         is a British citizen and clearly  receiving  considerable  benefits
         from that fact in the UK.  She could not be expected to  leave  the
         UK and it is not suggested that she will have to" (paragraph 22).

16. Having said all this, the judge still returned to emphasise that, "were
    it not  for  the  significant  and  continuing  medical  needs  of  the
    Appellant's daughter I would have had no hesitation in dismissing  this
    appeal ..." (paragraph 24).




17. The final concluding paragraph of the determination is that, "given his
    daughter's profound and continuing medical  needs,  the  role  that  he
    plays in her care and facilitating his wife's ability  to  provide  for
    them financially, I find  that  their  circumstances  are  sufficiently
    compelling ........... ..." (paragraph 25).  The Judge was entitled  to
    conclude as he did.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

19. An anonymity Order is made.



20. This appeal by the Secretary of State is refused.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019






