
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08705/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 6 November 2019                 |On 11 November 2019                     |
|                                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                               CHINYERE NWARU
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel, instructed by Sunrise
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Abebrese (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on  11
         July  2019,  dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
         respondent's decision of 29 April 2019  to  refuse  her  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain (ILR) human rights claim.


Background


      2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 21  June  1985.  She
         entered the UK on 6 October 2006 as  a  student.  She  was  granted
         further leave to remain in the same capacity, the last period being
         valid until 14 October 2013.


      3. On that date she applied for further leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
         (General) Student.  Thereafter  the  chronology  of  decisions  and
         applications becomes complex. It is not necessary for the  purposes
         of this 'error of law' decision to set out the  chronology  in  any
         detail. It is sufficient to  note  that  the  respondent  initially
         refused the application  on  5  December  2013  but  withdrew  that
         decision a day prior to an appeal hearing listed  in  August  2014.
         The respondent thereafter decided to remove the  appellant  because
         she purportedly used a proxy  tester  to  obtain  a  TOEIC  English
         language  certificate.  The  appellant   lodged   judicial   review
         proceedings and made a human rights claim  and  an  appeal  to  the
         Court of Appeal was ultimately dismissed by  consent  in  an  order
         sealed on 27 March 2019 following the  decision  in  Ahsan  v  SSHD
         [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 as a certificate  issued  under  s.94  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  relation  to  the
         human rights claim was withdrawn by the Secretary  of  State.  Both
         the appellant (in Mr Jorro's helpful  skeleton  argument  dated  30
         October 2019) and the respondent have produced useful chronologies.
         There is a dispute between the parties as to when, if at  all,  the
         appellant's leave to remain under s.3C of the Immigration Act  1971
         expired (the appellant maintains that it has not expired since  her
         application for further leave was made  on  14  October  2013;  the
         respondent contends that the appellant's s.3C leave came to an  end
         by way of a decision dated 3  October  2014  [which  has  not  been
         provided to the appellant] or possibly a decision dated 15 December
         2014 taken under s.10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
         [although there is  an  issue  as  to  whether  this  decision  was
         lawfully taken under the iteration of s.10 prior to  the  amendment
         wrought by the Immigration Act 2014]). As will become apparent from
         this decision it will be for the First-tier Tribunal, if necessary,
         to  determine  whether  the  appellant  has  accumulated  10  years
         continuous lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph  276B  of
         the immigration rules in light of its assessment as to whether  the
         appellant used a proxy test taker in obtaining a TOEIC certificate.


      4. Central to the respondent's decision under  appeal  is  the  belief
         that the appellant fraudulently obtained a TOEIC  test  certificate
         from Educational Testing Service (ETS) and used that certificate in
         her application for leave to remain submitted on 14  October  2013.
         The respondent refused the  ILR/human  rights  claim,  inter  alia,
         under paragraph 322(5) of  the  immigration  rules.  The  appellant
         appealed the refusal of her human rights claim pursuant to s.82  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The appeal was on a float list and  the  judge  did  not  have  the
         benefit of a Presenting Officer. Crucially, the respondent's bundle
         of documents prepared for the appeal did not contain the  'generic'
         witness  statements  of  Rebecca  Collings,  Peter  Millington  and
         Michael Sartorius that usually accompanied ETS  appeals  and  there
         was no ETS lookup tool relating  to  the  appellant's  actual  test
         results. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and
         submissions from her legal representatives to the effect  that  the
         appellant had not exercised deception and had accumulated 10  years
         continuous lawful residence.


      6. In the section of his decision headed 'Evidence and  Findings'  the
         judge, in a confused and inadequately  reasoned  manner,  concluded
         that the appellant's leave had not been extended by  s.3C  after  3
         October 2014. Then, at [16], the judge stated,

             "I am of the view that the respondents have provided  evidence
             to establish their evidential burden I find  the  evidence  of
             ETS to be credible and consistent with  the  appellant  having
             acted fraudulently. ETS has a record of speaking  test,  voice
             verification software and they  are  able  to  detect  when  a
             single person is undertaking multiple test. I do not find that
             the appellant has provided an innocent  explanation  based  on
             his [sic] oral and documentary evidence. I also find that  the
             appellant has not provided sufficient evidence in  respect  of
             Article 3 of the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  the
             appellant in my view provided letters from the NHS  but  there
             are no medical reports. I am also of the  view  that  she  has
             provided the letters after the refusal of her  application  in
             order to bolster  her  application/appeal.  The  threshold  in
             respect of Article 3 is high and the  evidence  provided  does
             not meet the standard required."

      7. At [17], and in light of his findings in respect of  the  paragraph
         322(5) issue, the judge found that the appellant did not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules and  that
         there were no exceptional  circumstances  outside  the  immigration
         rules such that the appeal could be allowed on  a  'free  standing'
         Article 8 basis. The appeal was dismissed.

Challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

      8. The grounds of appeal took issue with the judge's  assessment  that
         the appellant failed to accrue 10 years continuous lawful residence
         and his conclusions on the TOEIC  certificate  issue.  In  granting
         permission the First-tier Tribunal found it was arguable that there
         was no evidential basis for the judge's finding that the respondent
         had discharged the initial burden in relation to the allegation  of
         deception regarding the appellant's TOEIC certificate, and that  it
         was arguable that the judge provided inadequate reasons as  to  why
         the appellant's innocent explanation had not been accepted.


      9. At the outset of the 'error of law'  hearing  Mr  Melvin  confirmed
         that the respondent's bundle of documents lodged  with  the  First-
         tier  Tribunal  had  not  included  any  of  the  genetic   witness
         statements and had not included the ETS look-up  tool  relating  to
         the appellant's test results. Mr Melvin submitted that the  generic
         statements were so well known that it was not necessary for them to
         have been provided. Mr Melvin indicated that he had  with  him  the
         generic witness statements and the ETS look-up tool relating to the
         appellant. Mr Jorro drew my attention to a request dated 21  August
         2014 from the appellant's then  legal  representatives  seeking  to
         obtain evidence of the use of deception  from  the  respondent.  He
         submitted that it was open to the respondent to have provided  this
         evidence earlier and that it was too late for the Upper Tribunal to
         now accept the evidence and that it would be procedurally unfair to
         do so.

     10. I indicated to  the  parties  that  I  was  satisfied  the  judge's
         decision contained serious and material legal errors  and  that  it
         had to be set aside. I rejected Mr Jorro's submission that it would
         be procedurally unfair to accept the further  evidence  upon  which
         the respondent now sought to rely in remaking the  decision.  There
         is no time limit for applying to admit fresh evidence  pursuant  to
         rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         and, although the generic witness statements and  the  ETS  look-up
         tool should have been provided much earlier,  they  were  important
         items of evidence. Both parties were agreed that, in light  of  the
         absence of any proper assessment of the  appellant's  evidence,  it
         was appropriate for the matter to be remitted back  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

Discussion

     11. The judge did not have any of the witness statements upon which the
         respondent relied to support her assertion that the appellant  used
         a proxy-test taker to  obtain  her  TOEIC  certificate.  Even  more
         significantly, the judge did not have an ETS look-up tool  relating
         to the appellant which would give details of the test she undertook
         (date, place, etc) and whether the test result  was  determined  by
         ETS to be 'valid', 'invalid' or 'questionable'. All the  judge  had
         before him was a bold assertion in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
         that ETS undertook a check of the appellant's test and informed the
         respondent that there was significant evidence that her certificate
         was fraudulently obtained  by  the  use  of  a  proxy  test  taker.
         Following the decision in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department (ETS - Evidence -  Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
         00229 (IAC) this unsupported  assertion  was  a  wholly  inadequate
         basis for concluding that the respondent had discharged the initial
         evidential burden of  proving  the  alleged  fraud.  There  was  no
         specific evidence at all to link the appellant to an 'invalid' test
         result.


     12. The judge's unlawful approach was  then  further  compounded  by  a
         complete  failure  to  give  coherent  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's  'innocent'  explanation.  Whilst  the  judge  was  not
         obliged to accept the explanation advanced by the appellant he was,
         at the very least, obliged to  engage  with  that  explanation  and
         given comprehensible reasons for rejecting that explanation.  Given
         the terms of the consent order from the Court  of  Appeal  and  the
         scope of the decision in Ahsan v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009  it
         cannot be said that, had the judge not erred in law,  the  decision
         on the human rights claim would inevitably have been the same. I am
         consequently satisfied that the judge's errors of law  require  the
         decision to be set aside.

     13. Given that there  has  been  no  significant  engagement  with  the
         evidence provided by the appellant, including  her  explanation  in
         respect of her TOEIC certificate, it is appropriate for the  matter
         to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
         afresh by a judge other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Abebrese).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and requires the decision to be set aside.

The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
hearing  before  a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Abebrese.


Directions

   1. The respondent is to provide all evidence in her  possession  relating
      to the alleged use of a proxy test-taker in respect of the appellant's
      TOEIC certificate, to be served on the appellant  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal within two weeks of the date this decision is sent.


   2. The respondent is  to  serve  on  the  appellant  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, within 4 weeks of the date this decision is sent, copies  of
      all relevant decisions relating to the appellant's immigration  status
      following her application made  on  14  October  2013,  including  the
      decision dated 3 October 2014.


D.Blum                                  8 November 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
