
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08626/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th September 2017                    |On 3rd October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                            Mr Leighton Jay Harry
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi, Counsel, instructed by Rehoboth Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Jamaica,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 14th  March
    2016 to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his private and family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-
    Harry dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 23rd  May  2017
    and the Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker on 13th July 2017.

 2. The issue in this appeal is whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in her approach to the appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   It  is
    contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge erred in her approach
    to the evidence and to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 3. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker considered that
    there are arguable errors of law in the decision as the judge  did  not
    follow the correct procedure or applied the correct legal tests.  Judge
    parker considered that it is arguable that the judge failed to consider
    the Appellant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules under Appendix FM
    and paragraph 276ADE, which are human rights compliant and relevant  to
    the proportionality exercise, before going on  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules if  the  circumstances  permitted.   The  test  under
    Appendix FM as to whether there are "insurmountable obstacles to family
    life" continuing in Jamaica and under 276ADE as to  whether  there  are
    "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration in  Jamaica
    were not applied.  Instead it  appears  that  the  judge  undertook  an
    assessment under Article 8 without reference to these Rules.

 4. In the Rule 24 notice dated 1st August  2017  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that she does not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal.  At the hearing before me Mr Duffy said  that  he
    accepted that there was an error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to her approach to the  consideration  of  Article  8  in  the
    context of the relevant Immigration Rules.  The parties agreed that  in
    light of the judge's approach there were little findings  of  fact  and
    that nothing in the decision could be preserved.

    Discussion and Conclusions

 5. I accept the position taken by the Secretary of State that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in her approach to the  assessment
    of the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.

 6. The judge failed to identify the appropriate  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  and  failed  to   give   any
    consideration as to whether the Appellant met the requirements of these
    Rules.  In these circumstances the judge  was  unable  to  undertake  a
    proper analysis of  the  public  interest  in  this  case  which  is  a
    significant factor in the proportionality assessment.

 7. Accordingly the judge made a  material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

 8. I agree with the parties that the remaking of  this  decision  requires
    fresh findings of fact. Therefore, in line  with  paragraph  7  of  the
    Tribunal Practice statement, in light if the nature or  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding required in order to re-make the decision, having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 2nd October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




