
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08679/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2019                     |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 EGERTON [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Walsh of counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. He  was  born  in  Germany  and
    entered the United Kingdom with his mother in 1993, at the age of  nine
    months. He then remained here and started primary school in  1996.  His
    mother applied for asylum on 16 April  1998  but  her  application  was
    refused on 16 July 1998. His mother then applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain under the seven-year concession  policy  on  15  April  2002,
    naming him as her dependent, but her application was refused on 5  July
    2006. On 22 November 2004 his mother applied for settlement  under  the
    Family ILR exercise, naming  the  Appellant  was  her  dependent.  This
    application was refused but on 3 July 2008 the Appellant and his mother
    were granted indefinite leave to remain under the Legacy Programme.

2.   On 24 October  2015  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to
    inflict grievous bodily harm and manslaughter, on the  basis  of  joint
    enterprise, and sentenced to  eleven  years  imprisonment  in  a  Young
    Offenders' Institution.

3.   On 17 July  2014  he  was  served  with  notice  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation and on 7 August 2014 he claimed that  deportation
    would breach his rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights. Subsequently, on 8 October 2015, his human  rights  claim
    was refused  and  certified  under  section  94B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He lodged a claim for judicial review
    against the latter part of this decision and,  on  14  June  2017,  the
    Respondent withdrew the certification and the decision  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.

4.   A further decision to refuse his human rights  claim  was  made  on  31
    July 2017 but his claim was not certified.  He  appealed  against  this
    decision and in a decision, promulgated on 10 January 2018,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan allowed his appeal on human rights grounds.

5.   The Respondent appealed against this decision and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly granted the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    permission to appeal on 29 January 2019 on a very limited basis. In his
    grounds of appeal the Respondent had attempted to rely on a  number  of
    Court of Appeal cases but First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  found  that
    "comparison of the factual matrix of the instant appeal with that of  a
    reported  decision  will  not  assist  the  Secretary   of   State   in
    demonstrating that the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error  of  law.
    Decisions are reported for their legal principles rather than  for  the
    purpose of making factual comparisons". He also found that  "given  the
    Tribunal's extensive reference to authority concerning the  meaning  of
    "very compelling circumstances", it is not arguable that  the  Tribunal
    ultimately misdirected itself in this regard". (The Respondent has  not
    filed and served any Rule 24 response in relation to these findings.)

6.   Instead, First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly found that  it  was  "arguable
    that the Tribunal ultimately failed to  identify  any  very  compelling
    circumstances that were "over and above" those falling within  the  two
    exceptions to deportation.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   The  appeal  is  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, but I have continued to refer to the parties  as  Appellant
    and Respondent, as described by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Callaghan,
    to avoid any confusion when referring back to his  decision,  which  is
    the one under challenge.

8.    The  basis  upon  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Kelly   granted
    permission to appeal was not to be found in the wording of the  grounds
    of appeal advanced  by  the  Appellant.  Rule  19(4)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 ("the Procedure Rules") states that the notice of appeal must  set
    out the grounds of appeal. However, Rule 2(1) of  the  Procedure  Rules
    also states that the overriding objective of these Rules is  to  enable
    the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly. Rule 2(2)(d)  states
    that this may include using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Tribunal
    effectively.

9.   The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  the  grounds  relied
    upon by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  to  grant  permission  were
    implicitly contained within the grounds filed by the Secretary of State
    in so far as the question  as  to  whether  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Callaghan had identified  any  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    falling within the two exceptions to deportation were part of the wider
    test as to whether there were any very exceptional  circumstances  over
    and above these exceptions. Counsel for the Appellant  did  not  submit
    that it was impossible to read the further ground into those previously
    submitted and stated that he was  prepared  to  respond  to  the  newly
    articulated ground. Therefore, I deem the new ground to have  been  one
    which can be said to be Robinson obvious when First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Kelly was exercising his special expertise under the Procedure Rules.

10.  Both counsel for the Appellant and he Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    then made oral submissions and I have referred to the content of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

11.  The Appellant had been sentenced  to  eleven  years  imprisonment  and,
    therefore, section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  applied  and  he  was
    subject to automatic deportation unless he  could  establish  that  his
    deportation would amount to a breach  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights. The sentencing remarks confirm  that  the  Appellant  was
    found guilty of being part of a gang of young people who had  conspired
    to inflict grievous bodily harm on members of another gang. He had also
    been part of a group who attacked and killed an unarmed  young  man  in
    Victoria Station and this led to him being convicted  of  manslaughter.
    He was sentenced to eleven years in a young offenders' institution.

12.   At  paragraph  114  of  his  decision,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    O'Callaghan clearly understood the egregious  nature  of  the  offences
    committed by the Appellant, as he stated:

         "The appellant has committed a very  serious  offence.  I  have  no
         doubt that [S] experienced considerable fear and pain in  the  last
         minutes of his life; left by his friends,  alone,  on  the  ground,
         surrounded by a mob of violent youths  and  subjected  to  a  knife
         attack. His last moments can only have been ones of  great  anguish
         ... His death has adversely impacted not only upon his  family  but
         also upon his friends who have to deal with his sudden and  violent
         loss".

13.   In  paragraph  101  of  his  decision,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    O'Callaghan also reminded himself that the  more  serious  the  offence
    committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest  in
    the deportation  of  the  criminal.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    refused the Secretary of State permission to appeal in relation to  the
    grounds relating  to  the  weight  given  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    Appellant's offence.

14.  The basis upon which permission was granted was very narrow but  it  is
    necessary to place it in the context of the relevant Immigration  Rules
    and statute.

15.  Paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules states that:

         "A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention..."

16.  However, this statement is qualified by the contents of paragraphs  398
    and 399 of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 398 states that:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less
         than four years but at least 12 months...

         (c)  ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those listed in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

17.  Paragraph 399 states that:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if-

         (a)  ...

         (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen..., and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported".

18.  Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules states:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if-

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
         his life"; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported".

19.  Paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules states that:

         "This paragraph applies if

         ...

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen ... and there are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the UK".

20.  Paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules states that:

         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1. (b) "insurmountable obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

21.  Section 117A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that:

         "(1) This part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result, would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals
             to the considerations listed in section 117C".

22.  Section 117C states:

         "Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1)  The deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         that greater is the interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life'

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh".

23.  Therefore, even if the length of  the  Appellant's  sentence  precludes
    him from relying on the exceptions alone to avoid deportation, they are
    part of the factual matrix which must be  considered  when  considering
    whether there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  the
    content of these exceptions, which would entitle him to leave.

24.  When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    explicitly found that it was  not  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Callaghan had misdirected himself in relation to the meaning of
    "very compelling circumstances". He also noted that First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  O'Callaghan  had  made  extensive  reference  to  the   relevant
    authorities as to its meaning and this has not been challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State. For example, in paragraph 107 of his  decision,  he
    found:

         "As to 'very compelling  circumstances',  Nicol  J  held  in  Chege
         (section 117D: Article 8: approach) [2015] UKUT 165  (IAC);  [2016]
         Imm AR 833  that  'compelling'  as  an  adjective  means  having  a
         powerful and irresistible effect  and  the  annexing  of  the  word
         'very' indicates that very high threshold that has to be passed  to
         meet this requirement of the Rules".

25.  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan had also reminded  himself  that,
    in paragraph 38 of Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60, Lord Reed had observed  that  the  cases  in
    which the public  interest  in  deportation  of  those  who  have  been
    sentence to more than four years in prison "are likely  to  be  a  very
    small minority".

26.  The only ground of appeal on which permission to appeal was granted  to
    the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  was  that  ultimately
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan  had  failed  to  identify  any
    circumstances  which  were  'over  and  above'  those  falling   within
    exception one and two.

27.  In my view, it is clear from paragraph 120 of his decision, that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan understood that he needed  to  identify
    such circumstances, as he stated:

         "Turning to the appellant's personal facts I initially consider the
         exceptions identified by section 117(4) and (5)  of  the  2002,  as
         very compelling circumstances require more than  the  establishment
         of one or both of these exceptions".

28.  Previously, in paragraph  107  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Callaghan had also noted that "since the present  appeal  falls
    within section 117C [(5)], the  public  interest  requires  deportation
    unless there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in "Exceptions 1 and 2".

29.  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan then gave detailed  consideration
    to whether there were very exceptional circumstances 'over  and  above'
    the exception established in section 117C (4) and paragraph 399A of the
    Rules in paragraphs 121 to 125 of his decision.

30.  In paragraph 121 he found that:

         "There are three elements to the exception established  by  section
         117C (4) and paragraph 399A of the Rules which are  concerned  with
         'private life' rights: a) the offender has been 'lawfully resident'
         in the United Kingdom for most of his life, b) they  are  'socially
         and culturally integrated' into United Kingdom society and c) there
         would be 'very significant obstacles to integration in the  society
         of the proposed country of removal. The  elements  are  conjunctive
         and so all three must be satisfied before  this  exception  can  be
         relied upon".

31.  In paragraph 122, he noted that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  in
    relation to the first requirement, as he had only had lawful status  in
    the United Kingdom since the age of 15 and, therefore, he had not  been
    lawfully present for most of his life.

32.  In paragraph 123, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan found,  to  the
    appropriate standard, that the Appellant had been fully integrated into
    United Kingdom society. He gave cogent and detailed  reasons  for  this
    decision and the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  has  not
    sought to challenge the adequacy of these reasons.

33   In paragraphs 124 and 125 of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Callaghan gave cogent and detailed reasons  for  finding  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into
    Nigerian society, if he were to be deported there. Again, the Secretary
    of State has not challenged the adequacy of this reasoning.

34.  The Home Office Presenting Officer made the bare submission that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances over and above the factors considered
    in these paragraphs which  related  to  the  Appellant's  private  life
    rights. However, in my view there were a significant number of  factors
    which were referred  to  in  detail  in  paragraph  131  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan's decision. These included the fact that the
    Appellant had shown genuine remorse from soon after the  index  offence
    and continues to do so and that he exhibited a proper understanding  of
    his serious wrongdoing. He also noted that the Appellant's behaviour in
    prison, both before and after his conviction  had  been  exemplary.  In
    addition, he found that the evidence of Lord Hastings, Ms Rice  and  Ms
    Burge establish with some strength that the Appellant's  rehabilitation
    is remarkable and that he enjoys a very  good  work  record.   He  also
    noted that  Dr.  Misch's  evidence  was  that  the  Appellant  was  'an
    exceptional individual who is highly  self-motivated  and  displays  no
    area of forensic concern at all". In addition, between paragraphs 75  -
    84 and 86 - 91 of his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan
    had detailed the evidence provided by  these  witnesses,  who  had  all
    attended the adjourned oral hearing in order to give  evidence  and  be
    cross-examined. I note that First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Callaghan  had
    the benefit of hearing such oral evidence and it is not suggested  that
    the weight he gave to it was misplaced or irrational.

35.  In my view, this evidence did refer  to  additional  factors  over  and
    above those referred to in exception one.

36.  In paragraph 126 and 127 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    also gave detailed and cogent consideration to whether there were  very
    exceptional circumstances over and above those  relevant  to  paragraph
    399(b)(i) of the  Rules  and  section  117C  (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  He  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his wife started after he had  been  granted  settled
    status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  therefore,  at  that  time  his
    immigration status  was  not  precarious.  He  also  found  that  their
    relationship was genuine and subsisting and that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for his wife to join him  in  Nigeria.  But  he  also  identified
    factors which were over and above those contained in exception two. For
    example, he found that the Appellant's deportation  would  be  a  final
    blow to their marriage and would be an emotional body blow to his  wife
    who had suffered various vicissitudes in life and that she  had  placed
    her emotional attachment to the Appellant as the core  element  in  her
    own life.

37.   In  paragraph  128  of  his  decision,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    O'Callaghan then considers whether any of the factors identified are of
    such force, whether by themselves, or taken in conjunction  with  other
    relevant factors not covered by the 'exceptions' to satisfy  the  test"
    in of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662. The Respondent has not challenged the manner in which  he
    considered  this  part  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Callagahan's
    decision.

38.  In reply to the submission by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  that
    the Appellant  had  sought  to  rely  on  factors  which  were  already
    mentioned in the two exceptions, Counsel for the  Appellant  relied  on
    paragraph 19 of NA (Pakistan) in which Lord Justice Jackson found that:

         "A third question which arose under the 2012 rules  was  whether  a
         foreign criminal seeking to establish  "exceptional  circumstances"
         could rely upon any matters of the kind referred to in  paras.  399
         or 399A...The answer is that a foreign criminal is entitled to rely
         on such matters, but he would need to be able to point to  features
         of his case of a kind mentioned in paras. 399 or 399A,  or  falling
         outside the circumstances described in these paragraphs, which made
         his claim based on Article 8 especially strong".

39.  Counsel noted that submissions  similar  to  those  made  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer had been discussed and  not  accepted  in  NA
    (Pakistan). In particular, in paragraph 20 it was said that:

         "Jackson LJ, giving the lead judgment in this court in Secretary of
         State for the Home Department v JZ (Zambia) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  116,
         explained the reasons as follows:

             "28. Mr. Pilgerstorfer submits that  the  first  task  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal in a case such  as  this  is  to  consider
             whether the claimant can bring himself  within  rules  399  or
             399A. If he cannot, then matters of the character described in
             those two rules drop out of the picture. Thus, matters such as
             length of residence in the UK and lack  of  ties  with  Zambia
             cannot  form  part  of  the  aggregation  of   matters   which
             collectively constitute "exceptional circumstances" within the
             meaning of rule 398".

             29.  I do not accept this argument for two reasons. First,  as
             a matter of construction, rules  398,  399  and  399A  do  not
             either  expressly  or  impliedly  "ring  fence"  the  399.399A
             factors in the way that Mr. Pilgerstorfer suggests.  Rule  398
             first requires the Secretary  of  State  to  see  whether  the
             proposed deportee falls into the safety net  of  rule  399  or
             399A. If he/she does not, then rule 398 requires the Secretary
             of  State  to   consider   whether   there   are   exceptional
             circumstances  which   outweigh   the   public   interest   in
             deportation...it would be bizarre if the  Secretary  of  State
             were  required  to  ignore  such   matters   altogether   when
             considering whether there were "exceptional circumstances".

             30.  In my view, rule 398 requires the Secretary of State (and
             on appeal the First-tier Tribunal) to  consider  all  relevant
             matters   in   deciding   whether   there   are   "exceptional
             circumstances"  which  outweigh  the   public   interests   in
             deportation...But  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  take   a
             shortcut  to  arrive  at  that  answer   by   ignoring   every
             circumstance of the  character  mentioned  in  rules  399  and
             399A".

40.  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan correctly  adopted  the  approach
    taken in JZ (Zambia) and approved in NA (Pakistan).

41.  For all of  these  reasons,  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Callaghan did not make any errors of law in his decision.

Decision

(1)  The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  As a consequence,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan's  decision
    stands.



Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 21 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
