
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08239/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2018                  |On 03 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                KARNAIL KAUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE,
                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi of Counsel instructed by Qualified
Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mathews promulgated on 10  May  2018  allowing  the  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 4 July 2017 refusing  entry  clearance
    as an adult dependant relative.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant and  Ms
    Kaur  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with   the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Ms Kaur as the Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 8 July 1934. In March  2017
    she applied for entry clearance  to  the  UK  as  the  adult  dependent
    relative of her son Mr Balbir Singh Brar, a British citizen.

4.    The application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision  ('NoID')  dated  4  July  2017,  with  particular
    reference to paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the   suitability
    requirements for entry clearance, and also the financial  requirements.
    The basis of the refusal under the Immigration Rules was  expressed  in
    these terms in the NoID:

         "Although you have provided medical letters regarding your  medical
         condition. I am not satisfied that you are  unable  to  obtain  the
         required level of care in India. As  you  are  currently  attending
         hospital and receiving the relevant  care  required."  (unnecessary
         punctuation as per the original).

5.   The NoID also purported to record that  the  decision-maker  had  given
    consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR outside the requirements of  the
    Rules, but set out no reasons in respect of the adverse  conclusion  in
    this regard.

6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC on human rights grounds.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal for reasons set out  in  the
    decision of Judge Mathews promulgated on 10 May 2018.

8.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted  on  3  August  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro.

9.   The Appellant has filed a Rule 24 response under cover of letter  dated
    7 September 2018 resisting the challenge to the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

10.  In the premises it is to be noted that  paragraphs  E-ECDR.2.4  and  E-
    ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM are, so far as is relevant to the instant case,
    in the following terms:

         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant... must as a result of age,  illness  or
         disability require long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
         tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5.  The  applicant...  must  be  unable,  even  with   the
         practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required
         level of care in the country where they are living, because-

               a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
                  who can reasonably provide it; or

               b) it is not affordable."

11.   Further  to  this,  Appendix  FM-SE  sets  out  'specified   evidence'
    requirements - see paragraphs 33-37.  Paragraph  34  and  35  in  these
    terms:

         "34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
         applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:

          a) Independent medical evidence that the applicant's physical  or
             mental condition  means  that  they  cannot  perform  everyday
             tasks; and

          b) this must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
         the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor  in  the  UK,  to
         obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they  are
         living should be from:

             (a)  a central or local health authority;

             (b)  a local authority; or

             (c)  a doctor or other health professional."

12.  It is to be acknowledged that the  available  grounds  of  appeal  were
    human rights grounds, and not grounds based directly on breach  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Nonetheless the Rules are a  relevant  part  of  the
    overall consideration of the Article 8 issues in the appeal:  this  was
    recognised and acknowledged  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (see
    paragraph 22). Indeed it is be noted that  the  Judge  concluded  first
    that the Respondent satisfied the  requirements  of  the  Rules  before
    going on to consider human rights grounds: see paragraph 21.

13.  In my judgement it is manifestly the case that the  Judge's  conclusion
    in respect of the Immigration Rules was also considered by the Judge to
    be essentially determinative of the issues under Article 8.  The  Judge
    restated that the Appellant met the Rules  at  paragraphs  23  and  26.
    Uncontroversially, the  Judge  stated  that  this  indicated  that  the
    Appellant could be maintained and accommodated by her  son  in  the  UK
    (paragraphs  26  and  29).  In  the  context  of  the  public  interest
    consideration in maintaining effective immigration control the Judge  -
    again it seems  to  me  uncontroversially  -  observed  that  effective
    control requires the proper and fair  application  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which are generally Article 8 compliant (paragraph 28). The Judge
    considered that it followed that effective control did not require  the
    refusal of an application if someone met the Rules - "indeed  effective
    control suggests the contrary" (paragraph 28).

14.  The Judge then stated:

         "In assessing the balance of interests in this  case  I  note  that
         there is no public interest in the refusal of the  application  for
         the reasons set out above, and that the appellant has  an  accepted
         family life in the UK with her son upon  whom  she  is  financially
         dependent. She meets the rules that set a  proportionate  threshold
         for the admission of such a dependant relative." (paragraph 30)

15.  It seems to me that the Judge's reasoning  in  this  regard  encounters
    the following difficulties:

         (i)  In respect of the Immigration Rules the Judge had no regard to
         the requirements of Appendix FM-SE. She does not direct herself  to
         the requirements of such Rules, and does not identify in  the  body
         of the decision any evidence  of  the  sort  required  pursuant  to
         paragraph 34 and 35 of Appendix FM-SE (quoted above).

         (ii) The Judge has not explained on what premise  it  is  suggested
         that the Appellant "has an accepted family life in the UK with  her
         son". The evidence recorded by the Judge at  paragraph  10  of  the
         decision is to the effect that whilst the Appellant entered the  UK
         in May 2004 with her husband and lived with her son,  she  and  her
         husband returned to India  in  November  2005,  and  she  had  then
         remained  in  India  with  her  husband  until  he  died  in  2016.
         Thereafter she had continued to live in India as a  widow.  On  its
         face, there was no evidential foundation for  concluding  that  the
         Appellant  enjoyed  a  family  life  with  her   son   within   the
         contemplation of Article 8 at all, and far less so in the UK.

16.  The Respondent's grounds of challenge are pleaded  on  the  basis  that
    the Judge appears to accept that necessary care  is  available  to  the
    Appellant but she declines to avail herself of it in so far as some  of
    her needs are in respect of "intimate care"  (paragraph  15),  and  the
    Appellant "is a traditional lady and will not accept intimate care from
    outside of the family... her culture and beliefs stand in  the  way  of
    such care".

17.  I note the following:

         (i)  The Judge does not expressly articulate what is the nature  of
         any  required  "intimate  care",  or  relate  it  to  any  specific
         underlying diagnosis.

         (ii) It is not identified what is specific  about  the  Appellant's
         culture and beliefs that would prevent her from accepting care from
         a suitably qualified and experienced caregiver. Whilst it is to  be
         accepted that some societies, and/or some individuals in societies,
         may have a more conservative approach to  issues  of  intimacy,  it
         rarely follows that there  is  any  form  of  genuinely  principled
         objection on such grounds to  receiving  medical  attention  and/or
         care from a non-family member when a genuine need arises.

18.  I accept the submission of the Respondent to the effect that the  Judge
    has done no more  than  identify  a  preference  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant. Moreover, in my judgement that preference cannot be  dressed
    up as a matter of conscience or belief, or  otherwise  asserted  as  an
    element of self-identity protected by Article 8, such that it would  be
    disproportionate to expect the Appellant to permit others  to  help  in
    the event of genuine need.

19.  Further in this context  I  note  the  observations  of  the  Court  in
    Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368 at paragraph 59. The focus  of  the
    Rules is on whether care required by an adult dependent relative can be
    reasonably provided and to the required level in their home country. In
    so far as there may be some emotional  or  psychological  element  that
    would mean that care could  not  reasonably  be  provided,  this  would
    require to be verified  by  expert  medical  opinion.  No  such  expert
    medical opinion has been provided herein.

20.  I also note the passages from the decision in Ribeli  v  ECO,  Pretoria
    [2018] EWCA Civ 611 at paragraphs 69-71, referenced by Judge O'Garro in
    the grant of permission to appeal, together  with  paragraph  67  which
    commences "However, it is important  to  recall  that  the  test  under
    Article 8 is an objective one, whatever the subjective  feelings  of  a
    person may be". Although the facts and context in Ribelli are different
    from the instant case, there is an exploration of  matters  of  choice,
    and the role of such choice when considering proportionality.

21.  In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to recognise  that
    what was in play in this case was  in  significant  part  a  choice  or
    preference on the part of the Appellant as to the nature  of  the  care
    she would wish to receive. There was no medical  evidence  to  indicate
    that the Appellant  had  an  emotional  or  mental  health  issue  that
    inhibited her from receiving care from  anybody  other  than  a  family
    member, and there was no evidence as to the nature of any 'culture  and
    belief' that would provide an obstacle to the receipt of  care  from  a
    person other than a family member.

22.  In all such circumstances I accept the substance  of  the  Respondent's
    grounds of challenge.

23.  For the avoidance of any doubt,  in  reaching  my  conclusion   I  have
    noted the substance of the Rule 24 response, and the  reliance  therein
    upon an unreported case (ref OA/18244/2012) in which it  was  commented
    that  the  "required  level  of  care"  (E-ECDR.2.5)  may  need  to  be
    determined taking into account cultural factors. I  do  not  completely
    foreclose such a possibility: however, just as when  emotional  and  or
    mental health factors may impact upon the required level of care it  is
    to be supported by evidence, so it  must  be  in  respect  of  cultural
    factors. Evidence was lacking herein.

24.  My acceptance  of  the  substance  of  the  Respondent's  challenge  is
    sufficient to warrant the setting aside of the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In such circumstances it is  not  necessary  for  me  to
    consider in the context of the 'error of law' stage how to approach the
    Judge's unreasoned finding in respect of the existence of  family  life
    in the UK - a matter that was not expressly pleaded in the Respondent's
    grounds of appeal.

25.  I turn to a consideration of how the decision in the appeal  is  to  be
    remade.

26.  On balance, I am just persuaded that the matter is  most  appropriately
    remade by way of a further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  with
    all issues at large. I  have  some  reservations  in  this  regard:  it
    remains unclear as to what basis Article 8 is engaged at all. Moreover,
    it is clear that the application for entry clearance was  made  without
    any due regard to the requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  and  to  that
    extent the matter has not been greatly remedied by way of the materials
    filed in support of the appeal. In terms of  identifying  any  evidence
    from a doctor or other health professional as to the Appellant's  long-
    term personal care,  Ms  Bayoumi  acknowledged  during  the  course  of
    submissions that the 'high point' of the evidence  was  the  letter  at
    page 54 of the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal  which
    referred to the Appellant suffering  from  hypertension  and  ischaemic
    heart disease, and that she "needs care by somebody regularly". Plainly
    this is inadequate in terms of the requirements of  the  Rules.  It  is
    unclear to me on what basis the matter may be improved by  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. However, it is to be hoped  in  light  of  the
    discussion at the hearing, reflected in the matters set out above,  the
    Appellant and her sponsor may now seek to avail themselves of a further
    opportunity of putting the case in order before the  Tribunal.  Whether
    or not they wish to do so, or upon reflection might prefer to  withdraw
    the appeal and make a further application for entry clearance,  or  not
    to pursue entry clearance at all, is now a matter from them.

27.  No particular Direction  are  required.  Standard  Directions  will  be
    issued in due course.

Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  is
    set aside.

29.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews with
    all issues at large.

30.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:  Date: 1 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
