
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08479/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a Hearing    |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                            |Promulgated                     |
|On 1st October 2020                         |     On 6th October 2020        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  Ejoye [A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 21 July 2020  indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside without a hearing;  the  parties  did  not
    raise any objections and the Respondent made written submissions on the
    issues raised in the appeal, upon which  there  was  agreement  by  the
    Appellant.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and where the parties  have  made  written
    submissions; with agreement that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal; it is in the interests of  justice
    to proceed to determine the error of law issues on the papers in  light
    of the written submission available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated on 4 November 2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights
    claim dated 26 April 2019  was  dismissed  on  Article  3  grounds  and
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 11 September  1948  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on  24  December  2015  with  entry
    clearance as  a  visitor  to  10  April  2018.   She  made  a  previous
    application for leave to remain on compassionate  and  medical  grounds
    which was refused on 11 May 2017  and  most  recently  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds  on  13  July
    2017.  It is the refusal of that application which is  the  subject  of
    this appeal.

 5. Judge Beg allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds on the basis that the
    Appellant  met  the  requirement  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules that she would face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration on return to  Nigeria,  primarily  because  of  her  poor
    mental health and the withdrawal of family  support  available  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. Judge Beg dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds on the  basis  that
    the Appellant's medical condition did not meet  he  high  threshold  of
    Article 3 and that whilst it was accepted that she had a serious mental
    illness, her condition had not reached such a critical  stage  that  it
    would be inhuman to deprive her of the treatment that she is  currently
    receiving and send her home to an early death.  However,  in  paragraph
    32 of the decision, the following is stated:

         "... In conclusion, I find that even if the appellant  is  able  to
         access accommodation and  medical  treatment  in  Nigeria,  in  the
         absence of a stable family environment, she  will  be  at  risk  of
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  her
         state of health which may result in intense suffering.  I find that
         whilst she has relatives in Nigeria; there is no credible  evidence
         before me that any of them would be prepared  to  look  after  her.
         Her only child is in the United Kingdom.  Consequently I find  that
         any interference in  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  will  be
         disproportionate.  I find that  the  interference  will  result  in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant."

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to consider  the  risk
    of suicide in  accordance  with  Articles  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Secondly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in failing to give adequate reasons as  to  the
    findings on the threshold of Article 3 in  light  of  the  decision  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867.

 8. Further to the directions of the Upper Tribunal sent on 21  July  2020,
    written  submissions  were  received  on  behalf  of   the   Respondent
    indicating that the appeal was not  opposed.   The  Respondent  accepts
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in dismissing the Appellant's
    claim under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  given
    the finding in paragraph 32 that the Appellant was  at  risk  of  being
    exposed to a serious, rapid and  irreversible  decline  in  her  health
    which may result in intense suffering.  In light of this  finding,  the
    Respondent invites the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 3 and to remake the decision
    to allow the appeal on this additional ground.

 9. In light of the Respondent's written submissions, no  further  detailed
    written submissions were made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant;  who  is
    entirely in agreement with the Respondent's position.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Respondent's concession in this appeal on both the error of law  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and as to  the  re-making  of  this  appeal  on
    Article 3 grounds is entirely appropriate on the findings of fact  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  As the Supreme Court have confirmed in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17,
    the decision in Paposhvili should  be  followed  and  the  findings  in
    paragraph 32  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  follow  almost
    identically the formulation set out in that case.  On this finding, the
    Appellant has established that her removal to Nigeria would be a breach
    of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law dismissing the appeal  on  this  basis  such
    that that part of the decision must be  set  aside  and  for  the  same
    reasons, the decision on appeal is remade to  allow  it  on  Article  3
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law in relation to Article 3 of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.  As such  it  is  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision dismissing the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  Article  3  grounds
and substitute it with the following:

The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.

The decision allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds  is  unchallenged  and
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      G    Jackson                                                Date
    1st October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
