
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/08794/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/08792/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 1 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              BASNET & MAHARJAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. FtT Judge Roots dismissed the appellants' appeals  by  a  determination
    promulgated on 14 November 2019.

 2. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds of  (1)
    failure to  take  account  of  a  health  issue  regarding  the  second
    appellant (2) failure to take  account  of  submissions  on  the  first
    appellant's voluntary contribution to UK society and on the appellants'
    inter-caste marriage and (3) disregarding the  appellants'  evidence-in
    chief.

 3. On 3 July 2020, Judge Zucker granted permission  on  grounds  1  and  2
    only.

 4. On 24 September 2020, the UT issued directions with a view to  deciding
    without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in  law  and  (b),  if  so,
    whether its decision should be set aside.

 5. Neither party seeks a hearing on  those  questions.   The  UT  may  now
    decide them under rules 2 and 34 without a hearing.

 6. In a submission dated 15 October 2020, the SSHD "does  not  oppose  the
    appellants' application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the
    tribunal to set aside the determination of the FtT and remit to the FtT
    for a fresh (de novo) hearing".

 7. That is badly put.  The application for  permission  has  already  been
    granted.  However, I take the submission as a concession that  the  FtT
    erred in law, to such an extent that its decision should not stand.

 8. In a submission dated 27 October 2020, the appellant  agrees  with  the
    proposal for a remit, but says that "the issue of  the  TOEIC  finding"
    should not be disturbed.

 9. The decision of the FtT is set aside for error of law, as disclosed  by
    grounds 1 and 2, and as conceded.  The case is  remitted  to  the  FtT.
    The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Roots.

10. The SSHD has not contended  that  there  is  any  error  in  the  FtT's
    findings on the "TOEIC" issue, so those remain, and form  the  starting
    point in further decision-making.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    23 November 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

