
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08652/2019
                                                               HU/08659/2019
                                                               HU/08670/2019
                                                               HU/08662/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|on 29 October 2020                   |on 17 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MARIJANA [P]
                                MOHAMMAD [K]
                                    [Z K]
                                   [M H K]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Solanki of One Pump Court Chambers.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellants' appeal  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Shore ('the Judge'), promulgated on  the  17  December
       2019, in which the Judge dismissed the appeals of this family unit on
       human rights grounds.
    2. Permissions to appeal was refused by another judge of the  First-tier
       Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by the Upper  Tribunal,
       the operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

           "2.    In broad  terms(as  the  grounds  are  lengthy,  arguable
           unnecessarily so), the grounds assert that: (1)  the  FtT  erred
           applying the test in Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A  -
           compelling  circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT   00013(IAC)   in
           analysing very significant obstacles to integration; (2)  failed
           to consider the separation of the family and the impact of  that
           on the minor  appellants;  (3)  failed  adequately  to  analysis
           objective  evidence  on  the   obstacles   to   integration   to
           integration in Serbia and India; (4) and erred in his assessment
           of the appellants' credibility.


           3. The FtT arguable erred in law in  failing  to  consider  very
           significant obstacles by applying the authority of SSHD v Kamara
           [2016] EWCA Civ 813 (ground  1).  While  the  remainder  of  the
           grounds appear to be weaker, as the FtT carried out  a  detailed
           analysis of both the country evidence, produced on  the  morning
           of the hearing, in relation to Serbia and India at [85] to [86];
           and explained in detail his credibility concerns ([77] to  [84])
           and analysed the impact on the family  at  [88]  and  [89],  the
           grant of permission is not limited in its scope  and  permission
           is granted on all grounds."


Error of law

    3. Ground 1 asserts the Judge applied the wrong test when assessing  the
       claim under paragraph 276ADE by failing to apply or even mention  the
       decision in Kamara.
    4. In SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it was held that the concept  of
       integration into a country was a broad one.  It was not  confined  to
       the mere ability to find a job or sustain life whilst living  in  the
       other country.  It  would  usually  be  sufficient  for  a  court  or
       tribunal to direct itself in the terms Parliament had chosen to  use.
       The idea of "integration" called for a broad evaluative  judgment  to
       be made as to whether the individual would be enough of an insider in
       terms of understanding how life in the society in that other  country
       was carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have  a
       reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on
       a day-to-day  basis  in  that  society  and  to  build  up  within  a
       reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give substance to
       the individual's private and family life.
    5. In the case of Sanambar v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1284  the  Court  of
       Appeal  said  that  consideration  of  the  issue  of  obstacles   to
       integration requires consideration of all relevant  factors  some  of
       which might be described as generic.  Factors such  as  intelligence,
       employability and general robustness of character  could  clearly  be
       relevant to that issue.  The broad  evaluation  required  could  also
       include the extent  to  which  a  parent's  ties  might  assist  with
       integration.
    6. Although there is no  mention  of  the  decision  in  Kamara  in  the
       determination that of itself is not a material  legal  error  if  the
       Judge applied the correct test when assessing the evidence.
    7. At [23] the Judge writes:

           "23.   Ms Lambert commented that the Appellant  appeared  to  be
           making a back-door Article 3 claim.  I  disagreed.   The  issues
           raised were part of the necessary assessment  of  whether  there
           were very significant obstacles to re-integration into India  or
           Serbia and/or the proportionality of removal under Article 8.  I
           advised Ms Lambert that I would hear the evidence and would then
           give her time to read the supplementary bundle before  she  made
           her closing submissions."

    8. This demonstrated the fact the Judge understood the need to  consider
       the evidence as a whole and to make  a  holistic  assessment  of  the
       whether integration was feasible, as required in Kamara.
    9. Both advocates also referred to [91] in which the Judge writes:

           "91.   I dismiss the First and Second Appellant's appeals  under
                paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  as  they  have  not  shown   very
                significant obstacles to their integration into  India.  The
                Third and Fourth  Appellants  cannot  succeed  on  paragraph
                276ADE (1). The reason I make these decision is  that  "Mere
                hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere  upheaval  and
                mere inconvenience, even where multiplied, are  unlikely  to
                satisfy the test of "very significant hurdles" in  paragraph
                276ADE of the Immigration  Rules."  I  have  no  doubt  that
                relocating to India and/or  Serbia  will  involve  hardship,
                difficulty, hurdles and inconvenience  for  the  Appellants,
                but the points made in the reasons for refusal on  paragraph
                276ADE(1)(vi) are correct. I have no doubt the lives in  one
                or both of their countries of origin will not be the same as
                their lives in the United Kingdom, but they have  not  shown
                on the evidence that they face very significant obstacles."

   10. The provision of the refusal letter referred to and accepted  by  the
       Judge in his findings are as follows:

           "We do not accept that there would be very significant obstacles
           to your integration into Serbia if you were  required  to  leave
           the UK because it is considered that you do not have  to  return
           to the same area that your family live  in.   You  have  clearly
           shown tenacity and resourcefulness to build a life for  yourself
           in a country that was foreign to you without support  form  your
           family.  There is nothing to  suggest  you  cannot  do  this  by
           relocating to a different area of Serbia. Your claimed  partner,
           [Mohammed K] can, if he wishes apply for a visa to visit you  in
           Serbia and take steps to join you there, where you can  continue
           your family and private life as a family unit.  Any private life
           you have established in the UK has been done in  full  knowledge
           that you had a precarious immigration status."

   11. It is not made out the Judge failed to consider all relevant  aspects
       of the claim in coming to the conclusion  the  appellants  could  not
       succeed under the Immigration Rules.
   12. Ground 2 asserts the Judge failed to deal with the best interests  of
       the children and the question of family separation. Reliance  on  the
       wording of the Refusal Letter  by  the  appelanst  is  misleading  in
       relation to this issue.  It was submitted on  the  appellants  behalf
       that the Judge found there is a subsisting marriage and  relationship
       and at [88.8] that it was in the best interests of the children,  the
       third and fourth appellants, to  remain  with  both  parents  and  at
       [88.9] that it would be reasonable for the children to  follow  their
       appelanst to their country of origin. The submission that  makes  the
       decision wrong is incorrect, for even if the refusal infers the first
       appelanst mother will be removed to Serbia and the children's  father
       to India, as Mr Tan pointed out in his  submissions  in  the  refusal
       letter it was not accepted the appellant and Mr [K] were in a genuine
       and subsisting relationship, hence the decision to split the  family.
       The Judge finds this made out and considered the merits of the appeal
       by refence the family unit as a whole.
   13. When consideration is given to any removal the respondent  will  have
       to seek the advice of the Returns Panel in relation to the  issue  of
       splitting the family or any other outcome  in  light  of  the  Judges
       findings.
   14. Ground 3 assets the Judge erred in failing to consider the  objective
       evidence. The Judge records at [19] that the appellant had produced a
       bundle of 222 pages and also produced a bundle of further submissions
       including a series of documents of location evidence  for  India  and
       Serbia. This evidence was filed late necessitating the comment by the
       Judge at [23] of the need to grant further  time  to  the  Presenting
       Officer before she made her submissions.
   15. At [85] the  Judge  comments  on  the  material  and  makes  specific
       findings in relation to the location/country evidence. It is not made
       out the Judge failed  to  understand  the  country  material  or  the
       context in which it  was  presented.  The  Judge  was  aware  of  the
       reference to Islamophobia  in  Serbia.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to
       comment upon the quality of the material provided. The Judge was  not
       required to set out each and every aspect of the  evidence  and  even
       though the country material suggested some difficulty  for  those  of
       Kashmiri ethnicity in India,  if  the  second  appellant  travels  to
       Serbia with the first appellant he will not return to India.  In  any
       event, it was not made out the extent of any difficulties the  second
       appellant may  experience  was  sufficient  to  warrant  a  grant  of
       international protection or  find  it  disproportionate  in  all  the
       circumstances for him to return to his home state.
   16. Whilst there is an examples in the bundle of a mosque being destroyed
       in 2017 the material before the Judge was insufficient to  warrant  a
       finding first appellant is  entitled  to  a  grant  of  international
       protection on the basis of any risk of persecution  or  ill-treatment
       arising  from  her  faith  or  that  any  difficulties  by   way   of
       discrimination  or  otherwise   was   sufficient   to   make   return
       disproportionate, or make  it  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
       children to return their with their mother.
   17. Ground 4 asserts the Judge erred in assessing  credibility;  claiming
       the  findings  made  regarding  the   appellant's   credibility   are
       irrational for the reasons set out in the grounds seeking  permission
       to appeal.
   18. The Judge noted the foundation of the claim related to  a  disconnect
       from family and claimed risk that may arise on return which the Judge
       did not find had been made out.
   19. The Judge sets out his core findings of fact in [88] and  [89]  which
       have not been shown to be outside the range of findings open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence.
   20. The Judge, in addition to the documentary evidence, had  the  benefit
       of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given and the weight to  be
       given to that evidence and the perception created in the mind of  the
       Judge when considering the evidence in the round has not  been  shown
       to be irrational. It is not made out the findings  made  are  outside
       the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.
   21. Similarly, the  assertion  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  material
       evidence is not made out when the decision is read as a whole.
   22. This is a human rights appeal. At [94] the Judge writes:

           "94.   I have taken into account the five-step process in Razgar
                [2004] UKHL  27 and also the consideration of the  House  of
                Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11. I  have  made  the  following
                findings on the Razgar test:


                94.1   I find that the refusal amounts to an interference by
                a public authority with  the  exercise  of  the  Appellants'
                rights to respect for his private or family life:


                94.2   I find that such  interference  has  consequences  of
                such gravity as  potentially  to  engage  the  operation  of
                Article 8;


                94.3   I find that such interference is in  accordance  with
                the law;


                94.4    Such  interference  is  necessary  in  a  democratic
                society in the interest of the economic  well-being  of  the
                country, and;


                94.5   Such interference is proportionate to the  legitimate
                public end sought to be achieved because when I balance  the
                legitimate  public  interest,  to   which   I   have   given
                considerable  weight,  the  lack  of   evidence   from   the
                Appellants and my findings set out above, the best interests
                of the children and the test under section 117B of the  2002
                Act against the private and family life established  by  the
                Appellants , the balance falls in favour of the  Respondent.
                That is so when taking each appellant individually and  then
                assessing them as a family unit.  I do  not  hold  the  poor
                immigration  history  of  the  First  and  Second  Appellant
                against the Third and Fourth  Appellants  in  the  balancing
                exercise.  My  findings   do   not   establish   exceptional
                circumstances for the Appellants

   23. It is clear the appellants disagree with the Judges findings and wish
       to remain in the United Kingdom, but Article  8  does  not  permit  a
       person to choose where they wish to live, per se.
   24. This is a detailed decision in which the Judge makes  clear  findings
       supported by adequate reasons. The weight given to the  evidence  has
       not been shown to be irrational and neither has  it  been  shown  the
       findings made are outside the range of those reasonably available  to
       the Judge on the evidence. Whilst the appellant attempts to challenge
       the steppingstones used by the  Judge  on  his  journey  between  the
       evidence and final decision, it is not made out the Judge  has  erred
       in law in a manner material to that decision  sufficient  to  warrant
       the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in relation to this matter
       in his conclusions. Whilst the appellants representative may  believe
       that alternative findings could have been  made  and/or  should  have
       been made, that is not the applicable test as  the  Court  of  Appeal
       have recently reminded us in KB (Jamaica) [2020] EWCA Civ 1385.




Decision

   25. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   26. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 November 2020












