
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08385/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 20th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  ANDY [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A W Khan, promulgated on 18th November 2016, following a  hearing
    at Harmondsworth on 26th October 2016.  In the determination, the judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, who was born on 7th August
    1978.

 3. The refusal letter of 30th  September  2015  rejected  the  Appellant's
    human  rights  claims  on  the  basis  that  he  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of Appendix FM, given his claimed relationship with  [VA],
    who was a national of Ghana, and who herself only had limited leave  to
    remain until 13th November 2017.  She was not a British  citizen.   She
    was not settled in the UK.  She had no refugee status in this  country.
    Although there were children of the relationship, they were not British
    citizens, and they had not lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least
    seven years immediately preceding the date  of  the  application.   One
    child, was  a  British  citizen,  but  her  biological  father  had  an
    involvement in her upbringing (see paragraph 2 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge gave close consideration to the fact that, although  not  his
    biological daughter, the Appellant claimed to  perform  certain  duties
    with respect to the British citizen child of [VA], who had  been  borne
    to her on account of a relationship with another person, by the name of
    [FA], and these duties consisted of  the  Appellant,  as  her  stepdad,
    taking her to school as well as to church every Sunday, and also taking
    her to the park or the funfair.  The judge in  this  respect  concluded
    that, "I find that he may very well perform some kind of  role  in  her
    life but it is not exclusive and that she also maintains a relationship
    with her real father" (paragraph 17).

 5. The judge went on to conclude that, apart from this one child who was a
    British citizen daughter of a [FA], the other three children  of  [VA],
    were not British citizens, and their mother only had limited  leave  to
    remain in this country, and the children were in any event very  young.
    The judge concluded that, "there is no valid reason why they could  not
    relocate to Ghana if the mother wishes to do so" (paragraph 20).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    "inadequate" in respect of his finding that the  Appellant's  partner's
    British child could  accompany  the  Appellant,  her  mother,  and  the
    children to Ghana.  This  is  because  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the best interests of  the  child  concerned.   Moreover,  the
    judge erred in considering whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect
    the child to relocate to Ghana.

 8. On 2nd June 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me on 18th August 2017, Mr Sharma,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there was only  one  Ground  of
    Appeal, namely, whether in applying the  principles  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] 2 AC 166, the judge  had  failed  to  give  due  regard  to  the
    position of the single British citizen child.  He made two  submissions
    in this respect.

10. First, the judge had only given consideration to the Appellant  himself
    (see  paragraph  19).   He  had  referred  to  there  being   no  "very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria" because  he  had
    lived there for the first 24 years of his life, and could return  there
    (paragraph 19).

11. Second, insofar as consideration was given to the position "outside the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8" the reference was to the  fact  that
    the "Appellant has now fathered three  children",  none  of  whom  were
    British citizens, and where their mother also only had limited leave to
    remain.  The judge had said that there was "no valid  reason  why  they
    could not relocate to Ghana if the mother wishes to do so".  The  judge
    had then also considered the position of  the  British  citizen  child,
    aged now 11 years, but had only been in  full-time  education  for  the
    last six years.  Her father was a British citizen, who had stated  that
    it was not possible for his British citizen  child  to  live  with  him
    because his present partner objected to this, and that  "the  Appellant
    played a father role" in her life, but there was "no  mention  made  of
    any possible objection to" this child "living elsewhere than in the UK"
    (paragraph 20).  On this basis, the judge had concluded that there were
    no "compelling circumstances" showing that the Appellant could  succeed
    under Article 8 outside the Rules (paragraph 21).

12. Mr Sharma submitted that such a conclusion was not tenable because  one
    was dealing with a British citizen  child  with  respect  to  whom  the
    Appellant was performing a fatherly role.

13. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the position with respect to  the
    British citizen child's mother, [VA], had  changed,  in  that,  on  the
    basis of the fact that she was the mother of a British citizen, she had
    now been granted further leave to  remain.   Even  so,  the  judge  had
    referred to the  fact  that  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had
    rejected his application on the basis that he was the partner of  [VA],
    because "the parties were living at different addresses" (see paragraph
    13).

14. The judge's firm conclusion was that, "I in fact do not accept that the
    parties are in a  genuine relationship as partners as there is  a  lack
    of evidence of this" and that

         "There is little credible evidence to support the claim  that  they
         are in a relationship with each other as partners.   There  are  no
         witnesses to support such a relationship.  The letters written,  as
         contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle,  concern  the  Appellant's
         relationship with his  three  children  and  other  than  what  the
         Appellant and [VA] had to say in evidence, there is nothing else to
         support their claim that they are  in  a  relationship"  (paragraph
         13).

    Even so, Mr Tufan submitted that, given that the judge had then gone on
    to say that the Appellant "may very well perform some kind of role"  in
    the life of the British citizen child  (see  paragraph  17),  may  have
    tipped the balance in favour of the Appellant, such that, if  an  error
    of law could be found at this hearing, the matter  should  be  remitted
    back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  for  a  further  appraisal  of  the
    situation before this Tribunal.

15. Finally, he submitted that with respect to the consideration of Section
    55 BCIA 2009 and the  best  interests  of  a  child,  being  a  primary
    consideration, the case of Tinizaray [2011] EWHC 1850  had  established
    that this should not be  regarded  as  "establishing  anything  in  the
    nature of a general principle" about Section 1 of the Children Act (see
    the affirmation of this principle in AA (Iran) [2013] EWCA Civ 1523.

16. In reply, Mr Sharma submitted that it was not true that  the  Appellant
    and [VA] were not in a genuine and stable  relationship  because  there
    was evidence of an ongoing relationship, and an explanation  was  given
    for why the two of them were living separately.   The  British  citizen
    child's father had given evidence why he could  not  have  his  British
    citizen child  living  with  him,  namely,  that  his  present  partner
    objected to the child coming to live with them.  The  judge's  findings
    were such that an error of law should be found and the matter  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  I come to this conclusion because whatever errors there  may
    be in the determination, as alleged before me today,  they  are  simply
    not material errors with respect to the decision made.  This is a  case
    where the Appellant has a most unenviable  immigration  record.   There
    has been a determined effort on his part to  remain  in  this  country.
    The material findings of the judge were clear.  These were that, on the
    evidence before him, the Appellant and [VA] were living  separately  at
    different addresses.  Mr  Sharma  may  very  well  submit  before  this
    Tribunal  that  evidence  was  given  for  why  that  was   the   case.
    Nevertheless, the judge's conclusions were clear that he did not accept
    that the parties were in a genuine relationship as partners  "as  there
    is a lack of evidence of this", and even if there was evidence,  "there
    is little credible evidence to support the claim that  they  are  in  a
    relationship with each other as partners" (paragraph  13).   The  judge
    gave detailed reasons for why he came to this conclusion.

18. Secondly, much has been made of the fact that the  judge  had  accepted
    that the Appellant, whose immigration history as I  have  indicated  is
    far from creditworthy, had concluded that the Appellant "may very  well
    perform some kind of role in her life"  (paragraph  17)  such  that  it
    would be in this child's "best  interests"  for  this  relationship  to
    continue, such that it would make it untenable to expect the  Appellant
    to return to his country, with or without this British  citizen  child.
    This is an incorrect reading of what the judge said  at  paragraph  17.
    First, against the background of the judge having made it  quite  clear
    that he did not accept that the Appellant and [VA] were  in  a  genuine
    relationship, the judge noted the letter of 19th October 2016 from  the
    British citizen father of the British citizen child, which stated  that
    he comes to see her once a month  and  sometimes  buys  a  present  and
    sometimes she goes to his house and spends time there.  The letter said
    that the Appellant is the person who takes this British  citizen  child
    to church every Sunday and also takes her to the park or  the  funfair.
    It was against this  background  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant "may very well perform some kind of a role in her  life"  but
    the full sentence goes on to also read that, "but it is  not  exclusive
    and that she also maintains a relationship with her  real  father"  and
    that "the Appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules under E-LTRPT.2.3 notwithstanding that he  may  have  established
    some kind of relationship with this particular child"  (paragraph  17).
    It is clear from this that the judge is only stating that the Appellant
    "may very well perform some kind of  role".   It  is  also  clear  that
    whatever this role may be, whether contrived or real, is one that  does
    not lead the judge to conclude that the Appellant  succeeds  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

19. Third, the issue therefore boils down to this, namely,  that  with  the
    Appellant's natural mother, [VA], now having been granted further leave
    to remain in the UK, and with her natural father, [FA], still remaining
    in contact with his natural child, it is inevitably the case that  this
    British citizen child will have to accompany the Appellant to  Nigeria.
    This is not so.  Nothing in her  "best  interests"  indicates  that  it
    should be so.  The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   His  alleged
    partner, [VA], is a citizen of Ghana.  The judge had already found that
    there was no genuine relationship between [VA] and the Appellant.   The
    judge dealt with the other three children on the basis that  they  were
    very young and were not British citizens.  The judge held  that  "there
    is no valid reason why they could not relocate to Ghana if  the  mother
    wishes to do so" (paragraph 20).

20. If the mother now has further leave to remain in the UK, then she  may,
    or she may not, choose to relocate to Ghana.  If she does not, then her
    three non-British citizen children remain with her.  This is  also  the
    case with her British citizen child, borne  of  her  relationship  with
    [FA].  It was open, as the  judge  held  (at  paragraph  19),  for  the
    Appellant himself to return to Nigeria.  He is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.
    He would face "'no' very significant obstacles to his integration  into
    Nigeria".  There is no relationship  established  as  the  judge  found
    between the Appellant and [VA].  His only relationship with respect  to
    the British citizen child is that "he may very well perform  some  kind
    of role in her life" (paragraph 17).

21.  Nevertheless, this is not exclusive, and this  British  citizen  child
    also has a relationship with her real father, and one which,  according
    to the letter of 19th October  2016  from  the  real  father,  is  only
    hampered by the fact that his current partner  objects  to  having  his
    child live with him.  In the circumstances, all things considered,  the
    conclusion reached by the judge was entirely open to him.

22. This is particularly so,  lest  it  be  overlooked,  that  in  applying
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act the judge was clear that, "the fact of the
    matter is that the Appellant has indeed shown a complete disregard  for
    UK immigration law", in circumstances where  the  Appellant  started  a
    relationship with [VA] when he had no right to remain  in  the  UK  and
    then went on to father three children  with  her  "notwithstanding  any
    relationship that he may have established with [I]".

23. Even so, the judge was not unmindful of the fact that, "there  is  very
    little independent evidence to support the role that it is claimed  the
    Appellant plays in" the British  citizen  child's  life,  because  "the
    letters in support in the bundle are of a  general  nature  and  mainly
    refer to the Appellant's church activities" and "it has not been  shown
    that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the child" (paragraph 23).

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017



