
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08829/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 17 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      0. In this decision I remake L's appeal against a decision dated 2
         August 2017 to refuse to revoke a signed deportation order dated 23
         September 2009.

Error of law decision

      0. In a decision sent on 12 September 2018 I outlined the reasons for
         concluding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT')
         dated 28 March 2018, allowing L's appeal, contains an error of law
         such that it should be remade in the Upper Tribunal.  It is to be
         noted that judgment in KO Nigeria v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 was handed
         down after I decided the FTT committed errors of law.  Although KO
         Nigeria calls into question the first error of law I identified at
         [11] of my decision, the second error of law identified at [12] is
         entirely consistent with the guidance given by the Supreme Court in
         KO Nigeria.  Ms Mair accepted that analysis.

Background facts

      0. L is a citizen of Angola who came to the UK in 1990 when he was
         just 10 years old, with his uncle.  L was granted refugee status as
         a dependent of his uncle in 2002.  L has a history of criminal
         offending dating between 1998 and 2008, which has resulted in 23
         convictions for 34 offences.  These include six custodial
         sentences.  The most recent criminal conviction related to an
         offence of attempted robbery for which he was sentenced to two
         years' imprisonment on 12 November 2008.   It follows that there
         has been a lengthy period, in excess of 10 years, during which time
         L has not offended.  On 22 September 2009 a deportation order was
         signed against L.  On 23 September 2009 a decision was made to
         cease his refugee status.  Appeals against these decisions were
         ultimately unsuccessful and L became appeals rights exhausted in
         June 2010.

      0. L's application to revoke the 2009 deportation order, focused upon
         the family life he has with his partner ('E') and her two children
         ('A' who was born in 2005, and is 13 years old; 'B' who was born in
         2011, and is 7 years old), and the submission that he meets the
         requirements of paragraphs 399(a) and (b) of the Immigration Rules.



Issues in dispute

      0. It was undisputed before the FTT that all the requirements of
         399(a) and (b) were met save in one respect each.  The SSHD did not
         accept that it would be unduly harsh for A and B (for the purposes
         of 399(a)) or E (for the purposes of 399(b)) to remain in the UK
         without L.

      0. In my error of law decision, I made it clear that the FTT's
         comprehensive findings of fact as set out in bullet points taking
         up some five pages of the decision at [44] are preserved, and the
         decision shall be remade in light of those findings but subject to
         any changes in the factual matrix, as at the date of hearing.   In
         summary, the FTT accepted the evidence that E has medical
         difficulties and requires L to be her caregiver; and that because
         of those medical difficulties and the lack of any meaningful
         contact with the children's respective biological fathers, L is to
         all intents and purposes the children's primary carer.

Hearing

      0. At the hearing before me there was initially no Portuguese
         interpreter, but we were able to begin the evidence later on in the
         day with the benefit of an interpreter for E.  L did not require an
         interpreter.

      0. At the beginning of the hearing, the parties agreed with my summary
         of the issues set out at [5] and [6]. L relied upon two forms of
         updated evidence, not available to the FTT: (i) letters dictated on
         10 October and 16 October 2018 from Dr Sussman, E's treating
         Consultant Neurologist, together with a letter dictated on 16
         October 2018 to E's GP from Dr Sussman; and (ii) an updated report
         dated 27 November 2018 from an independent social worker ('ISW'),
         Ms Brown.

      0. The more up to date medical evidence from Dr Sussman cast a very
         different light on E's medical condition.  In the letter dictated
         on 10 October, Dr Sussman described E as having been seen in clinic
         in May 2018 when it was recorded that "she has been doing very well
         and has no symptoms of myasthenia".  Dr Sussman then said this:

             "The likelihood is that her condition will remain in good
             control.  In view of her stable condition I have no reason to
             believe that she requires support in activities of daily
             living from her partner at present.  Myasthenia tends to be a
             very treatable condition, with a vast majority of patients
             doing extremely well..."

      0. In the second letter dictated on 16 October, Dr Sussman said that
         he reviewed E in clinic that day when she was reporting symptoms
         that require help from her partner getting the children to school
         and bathing.  Dr Sussman made it clear that patients stable on E's
         medication (Azathioprine) do not relapse and it was therefore
         unclear why her symptoms have deteriorated.  For this reason,
         further investigations were recommended.  In his letter to the GP,
         Dr Sussman set out the symptoms E was now describing as follows:

             "She can get diplopia, but without ptosis, at the time of her
             periods.  On those occasions she can have difficulty to the
             point where she can't take her children to school and can't
             bathe them.  Her partner has to do this for her."

      0. In her most recent ISW report Ms Brown observed L at the family
         home with A and B.  At the time, E was visiting family in Portugal
         for a 5-week stay.  Ms Brown was able to observe a growing
         closeness between the children and L over the four times she met
         them between June 2015 and November 2018.  Ms Brown described L as
         having brought "settlement, continuity, consistency and
         importantly, a calmness to the family unit".

      0. Ms Mair asked L and E to confirm the truth of the statements before
         the FTT.  These statements did not address the medical evidence
         from Dr Sussman post-dating the FTT's decision.  Mr Tan therefore
         squarely focussed his cross-examination upon the inconsistencies to
         emerge regarding the impact of E's medical condition upon her daily
         life and need for care.

      0. Having heard from both L and E, I then heard submissions from the
         representatives.

      0. Mr Tan relied upon the decision letter and an updated position
         statement dated 5 December 2018. He invited me to find that Dr
         Sussman's updated evidence is such that L and E did not tell the
         truth either before me or before the FTT.  Dr Sussman's evidence
         was entirely different to the evidence provided by L and E and they
         completely failed to provide any explanation for this.

      0. Ms Mair relied upon her skeleton argument.  Ms Mair submitted that
         L has become the father figure and primary caregiver for A and B.
         She placed particular reliance upon Ms Brown's reports and the GP
         assessment from 2017 that without L's help, E would not be able to
         manage and invited me to find that although E's medical condition
         improved earlier in 2018, it has since worsened. Ms Mair submitted
         there was no real change in the medical evidence because E
         continued to have day to day difficulties, that peaked in
         seriousness from time to time.  Ms Mair submitted that the high
         threshold required by the unduly harsh test was met in this case.
         Alternatively, L's very strong private life in the UK extending
         back to his childhood was such that he met the requirements of 399A
         of the Immigration Rules.  Further in the alternative, Ms Mair
         invited me to find that when all the circumstances are viewed
         cumulatively, there are very compelling circumstances going beyond
         the statutory exceptions, such that the appeal should be allowed on
         Article 8 grounds.

      0. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Legal framework

      0. The Immigration Rules apply where a person applies for a revocation
         of a deportation order made against him - see paragraphs 390 to
         399A.   In so doing they make provision for the application of
         Article 8 of the ECHR. This will arise if a foreign criminal
         contends that the maintenance of the deportation order will
         constitute a disproportionate interference with his right to
         respect for his family or private life.  Paragraph 391A states
         that:

             "revocation of the order will not normally be authorised
             unless the situation has been materially altered, either by a
             change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
             information coming to light which was not before the appellate
             authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time
             since the person was deported may also in itself amount to
             such a change of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the
             order."

      0. Paragraphs 399 and 399A are reflected within section 117C of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This states:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2."

      0. It is to be noted however that the question whether "the effect" of
         C's deportation would be "unduly harsh" is broken down into two
         parts in paragraph 399, so that it applies where:

             "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
             UK without the person who is to be deported."

      0. In the instant case it is not in dispute that there has been a
         change in circumstances since the 2009 deportation order or that it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to live in Angola.  As such,
         it is only the second limb of 399 set out at (b) above, as
         reflected in section 117C(5) that requires consideration, as far as
         the children are concerned.

      0. The correct approach to paragraphs 399(b) and section 117C of the
         2002 Act has recently been considered by the Supreme Court in KO
         Nigeria.   In the only judgment, Lord Carnwath said this at [23]:

             "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what
             would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view
             (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent in the distinction
             drawn by the section itself by reference to length of
             sentence."

      0. Lord Carnwath also approved of the following guidance relevant to
         the term "unduly harsh" at [27]:

             "Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in
             this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J
             President and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15 April
             2015. They referred to the "evaluative assessment" required of
             the tribunal:

                       "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that
                  'unduly harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable,
                  inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it
                  poses a considerably more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in
                  this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It is
                  the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore,
                  the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already
                  elevated standard still higher."

      0. It is therefore now clear from KO Nigeria that the assessment of
         "unduly harsh" does not require a balancing of the relative level
         of severity of the parent's offence.   The assessment solely
         requires a careful consideration of whether the elevated threshold
         is reached from the point of view of ether the child or partner.
         If that threshold is met then deportation would be a breach of
         Article 8 of the ECHR and no further analysis is required.

      0. In BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357 the Court of Appeal
         concluded that the Tribunal did not undertake a sufficient inquiry
         into whether there was any other family member who could be able to
         care for his children and emphasised the need to consider the
         extent to which social services would be able to assist in reducing
         the adverse impact of the children losing their father to
         deportation at [53].

             "What the UT did in the course of their detailed and no doubt
             conscientious decision was to accept KS's son's evidence that
             KS could not manage her money and drank more that was good for
             her and made the inference that without BL the family would
             descend into poverty and require the support of social
             services. As against this, however, KS had looked after the
             family while BL was in prison or immigration detention and the
             UT had not made any findings that the family had then
             descended into poverty or required the support of social
             services, or that if that were to happen, there would not be
             adequate support services for these children. The UT were
             entitled to work on the basis that the social services would
             perform their duties under the law and, contrary to the
             submission of Mr Rudd, the UT was not bound in these
             circumstances to regard the role of the social services as
             irrelevant. The Secretary of State had made the point in the
             decision letter that there was no satisfactory evidence that
             KS had not coped with the children's upbringing in BL's
             absence and so the UT were aware that this point was in issue.
             KS's son's evidence was an insufficient evidential basis for
             the UT's conclusion on this point. His evidence was in reality
             uncorroborated and self-serving hearsay on this issue."

Findings

      0. In reaching my findings, I have used applied the preserved factual
         findings made by the FTT, but updated these findings in the light
         of the significant new medical evidence available to me, but not
         the FTT.

E's medical condition

      0. The FTT completely accepted the evidence from L and E and a GP's
         letter dated 4 August 2017, in relation to the impact of E's
         medical condition on her day to day activities at [44]. The FTT
         therefore accepted that E felt weak and tired all the time and
         required L's help on a day to day basis, to assist her personally,
         do the household chores and look after the children.  The GP's
         conclusion that without L's support, E would find it difficult to
         cope at home appears to be largely based upon reporting from L and
         E.   It is important to note that the FTT's findings are not based
         upon evidence from a Consultant Neurologist.  The FTT considered
         that a letter dated 7 April 2015 from E's treating Consultant
         Neurologist, Dr Sussman did not advance the case to any significant
         degree because it was nearly three years old and Dr Sussman
         indicated back then that E was improving and he was optimistic
         there would be further improvement.

      0. There can be no doubt that E suffers from a serious condition of a
         long-standing nature.  She has been treated with medication and is
         under the care of a Consultant Neurologist.

      0. When the FTT's findings are considered in the round with the
         updated evidence, I am satisfied that the medical evidence before
         me paints an entirely different picture to that before the FTT.
         In his first October 2018 letter Dr Sussman clearly stated there
         was "no reason to believe that [E] requires support in activities
         of daily living from her partner at this point".  This was based
         upon her presentation in clinic in May 2018.  Dr Sussman's optimism
         in 2015 that there would be further improvement appears to have
         been proven correct and is consistent with the objective evidence
         that "Myasthenia tends to be a very treatable condition, with a
         vast majority of patients doing extremely well."  Whilst a second
         October 2018 letter from Dr Sussman records E as "now describing
         symptoms", it is clear that Dr Sussman was not convinced this
         related to the diagnosed condition of myasthenia.  It is
         significant that there was no change proposed for her treatment,
         rather further investigation recommended.  When describing the
         symptoms to the GP in October 2018, Dr Sussman solely recounts
         difficulties at the time of E's periods i.e. only for a few days
         each month.  During her evidence E confirmed that this lasts for
         four days per month.

      0. Both L and E were unable or unwilling to explain why Dr Lilliker
         recorded at a clinic in May 2018 that E was doing very well and had
         no symptoms of myasthenia.  E explained that she did say that
         things were "so-so" but did not go into detail regarding the
         reality of her difficulties.  E's evidence regarding the practical
         impact of her medical condition was vague, evasive and inconsistent
         with the evidence provided by Dr Sussman.   E explained that her
         condition worsened in 2017 and appointments moved from being 3 to 6
         months apart then.  She was wholly unable to resolve this with her
         symptom-free presentation at clinic in May 2018.  Dr Sussman
         appears to regard the claimed deterioration in symptoms to be
         inconsistent with the objective evidence to the effect that the
         condition is managed by medication.

      0. I am satisfied that L and E have exaggerated E's symptoms and the
         FTT's findings must be revisited in the light of Dr Sussman's
         evidence.  I note that E claims to receive lower rate DLA, and ESA,
         but when asked by Mr Tan was quite unable to answer any questions
         to clarify the basis of this.  E gave evidence that her condition
         fluctuates from day to day and sometimes she can be in bed for a
         week.  This is of course entirely inconsistent with what she said
         in clinic in May 2018 and October 2018.  Even when reporting an
         increase in symptoms this was limited and specific to when she is
         on her period, which she clarified as lasting for four days.  E was
         plainly well enough to travel abroad recently for an extended five-
         week period without her partner to provide her with any care and
         support.

      0. I am prepared to accept only those symptoms E has reported to Dr
         Sussman i.e. an increase in symptoms for four days per month when
         she has her period.  I reject the oral evidence provided by E and
         L, that E requires L to act as a carer.  Their evidence was
         inconsistent with Dr Sussman's evidence.  They were unable to refer
         to any documentary evidence to support their claims.  There was no
         updated GP evidence.  There was no documentary evidence relating to
         E's benefits.  I accept that E may currently need help and support
         for four days a month.  Given the limited time when she needs
         support, and the ability to predict and plan for this, it seems to
         me that E's sister together with the statutory agencies would be
         able to provide that support.  I appreciate that E's sister has her
         own commitments and children to look after.  However, she is still
         able and willing to assist from time to time.  By way of example, I
         was told that she left the hearing to collect A and B from school.
         It is important to note that A and B are no longer toddlers.  It is
         very difficult to see why as E maintains they require assistance
         with bathing.  It is also difficult to see why A cannot be
         responsible for getting himself to and from school as he is 13.

Family life and children's best interests

      0. I entirely accept that L has a very close relationship with A and B
         that has strengthened over time, in the light of Ms Brown's
         observations over the course of a number of years. I am not
         prepared to accept that L is the primary carer for the children.
         This aspect of Ms Brown's assessment is in part based upon L and
         E's account of L having to provide care for E on a day to day
         basis.  That is inconsistent with the updated medical evidence.
         The children are jointly cared for by both E and L.

      0. The children's best interests clearly support the continued
         presence of L in their lives in the UK.  These are to be treated as
         a primary consideration.  A and B have been living with L since the
         beginning of 2014 when they were 8 and 3 respectfully.  They have
         not had any other father figure for any significant sustained
         period in their lives and L has been a positive influence in their
         lives.  L's deportation will adversely impact their best interests,
         but I do not accept that it would involve a degree of harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child face
         with deportation of a parent.  There are no particularly compelling
         or compassionate circumstances.  Contrary to her evidence, E is
         able to adequately care for the children.  For a few days a month,
         she may require support, but she can obtain this from her sister in
         combination with planning in advance.  In addition, she can pre-
         plan for those days by making meals in advance and organising for A
         to take on additional responsibilities.  Although A has had
         behavioural concerns in the past, these have been resolved. L may
         have played a role in this but there is insufficient evidence that
         L's deportation would lead to a resurgence in A's behavioural
         difficulties.  A has matured and will have the support of his
         mother and aunt.  The updated ISW report makes no suggestion the
         children have any significant current health, developmental or
         behavioural difficulties.  The children will be deprived of the
         only meaningful father-figure in their lives, having each already
         lost contact with their biological fathers.  They will undoubtedly
         find this difficult and painful.  However, the family members have
         each demonstrated a degree of resilience in the past.  I
         acknowledge that L has played an important role in family life over
         recent years. I do not however accept that the effect of L's
         deportation will be unduly harsh on the children.

      0. There is no dispute that E and L have a genuine and subsisting
         relationship.  However L is not her carer, and she has no genuine
         need for a carer albeit she requires additional support for four
         days a month.  I do not accept that the effect of L's deportation
         on E would be unduly harsh in these circumstances.  Ms Mair
         focussed her submissions on the effect of deportation on the
         children rather than E.

Private life

      0. The consideration of 399A and section 117C(4) involves three
         elements.  The SSHD accepted the first two but disputed the third.



      0. L has been removable from the time he became appeals rights
         exhausted in 2010.  Removal directions have been set on numerous
         occasions - see [44] to [74] of the decision letter.  L was
         lawfully present when he was granted refugee status as a dependent
         in October 2002.  L most probably had temporary admission in the
         period before this, and as leave was subsequently granted can be
         taken to have been lawfully resident at the time - see SC (Jamaica)
         v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 and Tirabi (Deportation: "Lawfully
         Resident": S.5(1)) [2018] UKUT 199 (IAC).  That means L was
         lawfully present from 21 August 1990 when he arrived until the date
         he became appeals rights exhausted on 14 June 2010: just short of
         20 years.  L is 39 and he has therefore been lawfully present in
         the UK for most of his life.

      0. There was no dispute before me that L is social and culturally
         integrated into the UK.

      0. The dispute therefore turns on the third element.  On his own
         account, L has no nuclear family in Angola, and it is of course
         fair to say that he has no real life experience of being there,
         having left as a young child.  L's uncle returned to Angola. Even
         if they have not been in contact in recent years they have a long
         history and it is difficult to see why contact cannot be resumed.

      0. Having undertaken a broad evaluative judgement (see SSHD v Kamara
         [2016] EWCA Civ 813), I do not accept that L has established that
         there would be serious obstacles to his integrating himself in
         Angola.  It is undeniable that L has been resident in the UK for a
         lengthy period and this began when he was still a young child.
         After a lengthy period of criminal offending and the abuse of
         illegal drugs, L has demonstrated resilience and a sustained
         ability to completely turn his life around.  Those traits and that
         experience can be applied to his advantage in Angola.  There is no
         suggestion that he cannot easily make friends. There is no reason
         why, initially at least, he should not be supported by his
         relatives in the UK.  His brothers have supported him in the past
         and L has described an extensive family network in the UK.

      0. Ms Mair placed reliance upon L's account of his early life in
         Angola and his fears for return.  I acknowledge that life was
         probably very difficult for L in Angola given the conflict at the
         time and associated family and other difficulties with this.  Life
         in Angola is likely to be very different from the UK and there will
         be initial challenges.  However, the civil war in place during L's
         childhood has ceased.  I do not accept that L's family in the UK
         will completely abandon all support of him such that he will be
         homeless.  L accepts that he speaks some Portuguese.  It is likely
         that he speaks this well.  This is the language that L and E speak
         to each other in.  E required a Portuguese interpreter before me.
         It is also likely that L grew up speaking Portuguese in Angola and
         that continued when living with his uncle.  This together with his
         English skills and proven resilience will put in a decent position
         to obtain employment.

      0. In order for the exception in paragraph 399A or section 117C to
         apply, L would need to establish all three elements. In my
         judgement he fulfilled the requirements of the first two, but not
         of the third. The exception therefore does not apply to him.  Ms
         Mair clarified that she did not rely on private life aspects over
         and above the exception on their own but did rely on these to
         support her submission that there are very compelling circumstances
         over and above the statutory exceptions.

Very compelling circumstances

      0. L has been unable to meet any of the statutory exceptions.  I have
         gone on to consider all matters in the round and whether viewed
         cumulatively, these are sufficient to give rise to very compelling
         circumstances - see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and KE
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1382.

      0. L came to the UK at a young age and has spent most of his life
         lawfully in the UK.   He had a troubled youth and began offending
         when he was young but has not re-offended in over 10 years. The
         evidence demonstrates that the risk of L reoffending is low. There
         are also protective factors to assist in the maintenance of the low
         risk of offending.    He has demonstrated resilience and rebuilding
         his life.  He is clearly committed to and has a close relationship
         with E and her children.  They will find his deportation difficult.
          These are matters that demonstrate L's clear commitment to living
         a good and law-abiding life in the UK.  Even when viewed
         cumulatively, they do not amount to very compelling circumstances.
         Whilst E and the children will find L's deportation difficult, its
         effect does not come close to meeting the threshold to be unduly
         harsh.  They will cope with time and support.  L will find life in
         Angola initially difficult but has the requisite skills and
         resilience to integrate into Angola.  L has demonstrated over time
         that he has rehabilitated, and his risk of reoffending may be low,
         but he has a lengthy and serious criminal record in the UK.  The
         public interest in his deportation may have lessened over time but
         it still remains.

Decision

      0. I remake the decision by dismissing L's appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     10 December 2018

