
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08647/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    [P M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Alfred James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 2011 and
    the adopted child of the sponsor.   The  appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance as the dependent child of her adopted  mother,  [JM].   There
    have been  a  number  of  applications  in  this  case.   The  original
    application lodged by the sponsor was refused  and  an  appeal  lodged.
    This  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21  April  2015.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused.   However,  the
    sponsor  misunderstood  the  process  and  reapplied  and  her  further
    application was refused in a decision dated  2  February  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 4 August 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Fletcher Hill dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. This was despite the case that the  judge  had  found  all  the  issues
    relating to the genuineness of the adoption  and  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation had already been dealt with on  previous  occasions  (and
    had been allowed) and that the  only  outstanding  issue  before  Judge
    Fletcher Hill was the issue in relation to the TB certificate which had
    not been raised in earlier refusals, but  appeared  to  be  outstanding
    from the ECM review of July 2016.

 3. On the totality of  evidence  before  her  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proof because of the absence
    of a  current  TB  certificate  and  that  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent justified the refusal.  This was despite the fact  that  the
    sponsor had by the date of the hearing obtained a TB certificate  which
    was dated 26 July 2016 expiring on 26 January 2017.  Although the judge
    went on to consider the appellant's rights under Article  8  she  found
    that "I do not find that this article  is  engaged  to  an  appropriate
    standard".

 4. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds  that  the  judge
    erred in wrongly ruling that Article 8 was not engaged  and/or  failing
    to properly assess Article 8 ECHR and/or  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.

Error of Law

 5. Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent indicated that although he  could
    not formally concede  the  substantive  appeal  (as  it  was  an  entry
    clearance case) he did not oppose the grounds and agreed fully with the
    permission granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boyes  including
    it was arguable  that  as  the  appellant  met  the  Rules,  Article  8
    considerations would, almost assuredly, fall in favour  of  her  entry.
    Mr Walker took into consideration the appellant's  previous  successful
    appeal and therefore conceded that there was an error of law.

 6. The Tribunal's finding that Article 8 is not "engaged in an appropriate
    standard" is puzzling.  There are no adequate reasons why,  given  that
    the appellant could clearly meet all  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  was
    disproportionate for her to continue to be refused entry.

 7. I therefore find an error of law to the extent that the conclusions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal are set aside, whilst preserving  the  findings
    of fact.

 8. In remaking the decision I have taken into consideration Section 117 of
    the 2014 Act and that maintenance of effective immigration  control  is
    in the public interest.   This includes that, although not specifically
    raised by the respondent ECO/ECM, the appellant had failed  to  provide
    specified documents with her case (although equally I note there was no
    consideration of whether evidential flexibility applied).   However,  I
    have given weight to Mr Walker's submissions, including  his  agreement
    that given that the appellant met the Rules, Article  8  considerations
    would most assuredly fall in favour of the appellant.  That must be the
    case.

 9. Issues in this case have been aired extensively  including  before  the
    First tier Tribunal  in  a  previous  appeal  in  which  the  appellant
    succeeded and the issue of the TB certificate is a  belated  one.   The
    appellant has now  produced  that  TB  certificate  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I am satisfied under Section  85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that this is a matter that can be taken
    into consideration by the Tribunal given that it is a  matter  that  is
    relevant to the substance of the decision,  i.e.  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had TB at the time of the decision which, subsequent  to  the
    TB certificate would indicate she did not.

10. I am satisfied that the circumstances in  this  case  are  sufficiently
    compelling that they justify a grant of leave outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I have taken into consideration all the factors, including  the
    age of the child, the importance that she is reunited with her adoptive
    mother, and the fact that she has already been successful in an  appeal
    on  the  substantive  issues,  over  3  years  ago.   Given   all   the
    circumstances and that it is now accepted by the  respondent  that  the
    appellant can meet all the requirements of the Immigration Rules, I  am
    satisfied that it  would  be  disproportionate,  under  Article  8,  to
    continue to refuse the appellant entry  to  the  UK.   The  appellant's
    appeal is therefore allowed.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  10 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make a full fee award.  I further accept  the  submissions  of  Mr  Singer
that  although  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  allowed  the
appellant's appeal in 2015 also made a full fee award,  this  has  not  been
paid.  There are therefore now two outstanding payments of two separate  fee
awards due to the appellant.


Signed                                  Date:  10 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
