
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08986/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KHALED AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Physass instructed by Deen & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Majid) allowing the  respondent's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision taken on 14  March  2016  to  refuse  the
    respondent leave to remain based upon Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge A D  Baker)  granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal on number  of  grounds,  including  lack  of
    reasoning and procedural unfairness.

 3. The appeal was listed for hearing before me on 18 April 2018.  Prior to
    the  hearing,  the  respondent's  legal  representatives,  Deen  &   Co
    Solicitors, acknowledged in a rule 24  response  dated  11  April  2018
    that, based upon the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, there were
    material errors of law in the judge's determination, in particular that
    the judge had failed to  make  clear  findings  on  key  issues.   They
    accepted that the judge's decision should be set aside and  the  matter
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  They requested that
    the appeal listed for 18 April be vacated.

 4. The Secretary of State acknowledged in an e-mail dated 16  April  2018,
    that the appeal hearing should be vacated and the judge's decision  set
    aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. On 16 April 2018, the Upper Tribunal Duty Judge, informed  the  parties
    that the appeal would remain listed "for mention" although the  parties
    need not attend.  In fact, both parties' representatives  attended  the
    hearing.  Ms Physaas (on behalf of the respondent)  and  Mr  Kotas  (on
    behalf of the Secretary of State) adopted  the  concessions  previously
    made that the decision was legally flawed and should be set aside.

 6.  In  the  light  of  the   concession   by   the   respondent's   legal
    representatives, I am satisfied that Judge Majid  materially  erred  in
    law in allowing the respondent's appeal.

 7. The decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Majid.






                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               25 April 2018

