
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08566/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 26th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                         mrs Andila Iftikhar hashmi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd promulgated on 18th May 2017 allowing  the  appeal
    of the Appellant on the basis of her human rights in respect of Article
    8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  The Secretary  of  State
    was granted permission to appeal by Designated  Judge  Woodcraft.   The
    grounds upon which permission to appeal were granted may be  summarised
    as follows:

         "The Judge allowed under Article 8 the Appellant's  appeal  against
         refusal  to  grant  leave  finding  that  the  Appellant  had   not
         overstayed by more than 28 days.  The case  turned  on  whether  in
         2015 the Appellant had submitted an application for leave to remain
         as a spouse in or out of time.  Her leave had expired  on  17th  of
         October 2015 but she did not make an application for further  leave
         until four days later which was rejected for non-payment  of  fees.
         The Appellant's subsequent application dated 24th of December  2015
         was outside the 28-day period if calculated from the expiry of  her
         leave.

         The rejection of the invalid application was dated 11th of December
         2015 and the Judge calculated 28 days from that date rather than 28
         days from the  expiry  of  the  Appellant's  leave.   This  as  the
         Respondent points out in her grounds was an arguable error  of  law
         and materially affected the decision to allow the appeal.  Arguably
         the Respondent is correct to say that time  could  not  be  counted
         from the rejection of an invalid application made after  leave  had
         expired.  All grounds may be argued."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply but was  addressed  by  Counsel
    for the Appellant in submissions.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  shall  now
    give.  I do find that there has been an error of law in the  making  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. As is clear from the brief grounds and grant of  permission  summarised
    above, the crux of the appeal turned upon the written submissions  from
    the Appellant's representative (not Mr  Miah)  which  relied  upon  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions on Family and Migration:  Appendix
    FM Section 1.0a: Family Life (as a Partner or Parent):  5-Year  Routes,
    which carried within it  instructions  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
    applications made during a period of overstaying by  28  days  and  the
    calculation of when that period would  start  and  end.   The  relevant
    passages of the instruction read as follows:

         "The 28 day period of overstaying is calculated from the latest of:

             The end of the last period of  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
             remain granted

             The end of any extension of leave under Sections 3C or  3D  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 or

             The point that a migrant is deemed to have received a  written
             notice of invalidity/rejection in  accordance  with  paragraph
             34C or 34CA of the Immigration Rules in relation to an in-time
             application for leave to remain."

 5. As can be seen from the above instruction, and as agreed by Mr Miah for
    the Appellant, the Appellant's case  was  pursued  and  could  only  be
    pursued, on the basis of the third alternative, namely that of  whether
    the 28 days would commence after receiving written notice of invalidity
    of the application of 21st October 2015  which  was  rejected  on  11th
    December 2015 for non-payment of a relevant fee  (which  I  note  is  a
    relevant provision under paragraph  34A(ii)  concerning  payment  of  a
    specified fee).

 6. The difficulty that the Appellant faces is that the commencement of the
    28 day period will only be in relation to the invalidity  or  rejection
    of an application which  is  made  "in-time",  as  the  third  category
    explicitly states.  In attempting to persuade me that the 28 day period
    would cover the application made on 21st October 2015 (and  was  within
    28 days of the expiry of leave on 17th October 2015) and that it was an
    application that was made "in-time", Mr Miah directed my  attention  to
    an unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal, namely Secretary of State
    for the Home Department vs Fahima Mallick  (IA/35013/2014,  unreported)
    wherein at paragraphs 9 and 10 the Home Office guidance, in relation to
    calculating the 28 day period of overstaying,  referred  to  a  passage
    which was in similar terms to the Immigration Directorate Instruction I
    have referred to above.   This  decision  however  does  not  give  any
    guidance as to whether the third category would cover a situation where
    an application was made after leave expired but within a 28 day  period
    and still be considered to be an application made "in-time".

 7. To my mind, given that the reference to an application being  made  in-
    time is not of itself in relation to a 28 day period but  refers  to  a
    preceding application which would be invalid or  rejected  which  would
    then trigger the 28 day period does not mean that the  application  can
    be made after leave has expired and what one would normally refer to as
    an 'out of time' application.  Furthermore, given that the theme of the
    three categories is linked to the periods of  applications  being  made
    before a previous grant of leave  has  ended  or  in  relation  to  the
    extensions of leave under Section 3C or 3D of the 1971 Act,  the  third
    category  cannot  logically,  or  as  a  matter  of  ots  content,   be
    interpreted as relating to an application made whilst an overstayer, as
    there is no means by  which  such  an  application  could  possibly  be
    interpreted as "in-time" unless it refers to  being  within  a  28  day
    period.  However, given that the 28 day  period  is  said  to  commence
    after that in-time application is ended, Mr Miah's argument,  brave  as
    it is, puts the "cart before the horse" because the 28  day  period  is
    what follows after the invalidity or rejection of that application  and
    so cannot form the basis for the preceding application being  made  in-
    time.

 8. Consequently, I do find that there is a material error of law  in  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misinterpreted  the  instruction   in
    question and consequently it was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge to consider whether insurmountable obstacles did or did not exist
    in respect of paragraph EX.1. which  was  not  performed,  and  without
    which the assessment of the Appellant's Article  8  appeal,  under  the
    Rules at least, is incomplete.   Consequently  the  assessment  of  the
    public interest outside the Rules, notwithstanding the  standardisation
    of that public interest  under  Section  117B(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, has not been correctly apportioned and
    therefore balanced, when considering Article 8 outside the Rules.



Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

10. The making of the previous decision involved a material  error  of  law
    and is set aside entirely.  The appeal is to be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by a differently constituted bench.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 22/03/2018l

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
