
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08107/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th February 2019                         |On 19th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     AO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ojo, Legal Representative, Law Eagles
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew promulgated on 14  September  2018,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse her human rights claim  dated  15
    March 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born in the  United  Kingdom  in
    2010, who has since birth resided with  her  mother,  also  a  Nigerian
    national, in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has never had any leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet any of the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain  set  out  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, nor did she meet the requirements
    in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that
    it would be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom  to
    return to Nigeria with her mother.  The  Respondent  did  not  consider
    that there were any exceptional circumstances to  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  particular,  there  was
    education available to her in Nigeria, a country with which  she  would
    have some familiarity through her mother and no claim had been made  on
    protection grounds in relation to the claimed threat of FGM.

 4. Judge Andrew dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    September 2018 on human rights grounds.   In  summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that it was in the Appellant's best interests to be with
    her mother and to be in Nigeria, where she had extended family members,
    where English is widely spoken, where education and  medical  care  was
    available to her and where her mother would be able to seek  employment
    and house them.  Further, that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom, returning to  Nigeria  with  her
    Nigerian mother.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant's grounds of appeal are lengthy and difficult to  follow.
    They are divided into two grounds, the first, broadly, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in its consideration of section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;  in  its  assessment  of
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002 and
    in the  proportionality  exercise  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  This appears to be on the basis  that  the
    Appellant and her mother should not  be  separated  (albeit  there  has
    never been a suggestion that they  would  be,  neither  have  leave  to
    remain and would be returned to Nigeria together as a family unit)  and
    on the basis of the Appellant's length of residence and  deep  ties  to
    the United Kingdom, where she has lived all of her life and  where  she
    is in education.  The grounds of appeal claim that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is full of contradictions which  are  arguable  and
    appealable, but none are specifically identified.

 6. The second ground of appeal is  headed  'irrationality'  and  sets  out
    grounds of challenge which are more appropriate to an  application  for
    Judicial Review than identifying any error of law in a statutory appeal
    context.  Further, within this  ground  serious  allegations  are  made
    against  the  First-tier  Judge,  including  that  the   decision   was
    'irrational and defies all logic' and claims  that  the  Judge  'should
    have exercised discretion to ensure that his decision  was  not  biased
    and prejudicial by taking into account all relevant  immigration  rules
    regarding qualifying children in the United  Kingdom'.   Further,  that
    the Judge 'ignored the laid-down rule and  cited  irrelevant  facts  to
    circumvent the rules and justify his irrational decision on  the  basis
    of the Appellants being able to simply relocate and start life again in
    Nigeria.'  and that the 'Judge  brazenly  disregarded  the  Appellant's
    legitimate claim  preventing  him  from  conducting  a  fair,  unbiased
    assessment of the facts as he did not give credence  to  the  statutory
    duty imposed on  him  to  thoroughly  consider  the  Appellant's'  best
    interests.  However, no specific examples are given as to these claimed
    errors and  instead  what  surrounds  these  passages  are  essentially
    submissions as to why the appeal should have been allowed on the facts.
     The allegations made against the Judge  are  wholly  un-particularised
    and unfounded.  This ground was rightly not pursued orally before me.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McClure on 19 October 2018 on
    the basis that it was arguable in  light  of  MT  &  ET  (Child's  best
    interests; extempore pilot) [2018] UKUT 115 (IAC) that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to consider whether there were strong  reasons  for
    removing the Appellant from the United Kingdom, considering  relocation
    of the family unit rather than the Appellant  herself.   This  decision
    post-dated the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  under  appeal  and
    also the application for permission to appeal and was at least for that
    reason not previously relied upon by the Appellant.

 8. Given the imprecise nature of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  grant  of
    permission on a specific, but different basis, I  sought  clarification
    from Mr Ojo as to the grounds of appeal being pursued by the Appellant,
    particularly in light of the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53.
    Mr Ojo was unable to do so with any greater clarity, relying broadly on
    issues under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  best
    interests of a child pursuant to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, section 117B of the Nationality,  immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and finally Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  When pressed, he stated that the  error  of  law  relied
    upon was that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take  into  account
    the range of evidence  about  the  Appellant  as  a  qualifying  child,
    specifically that she had been in the United Kingdom since  birth,  was
    in education here, had never been to Nigeria, had expressed a  fear  on
    return to Nigeria and claimed family life with friends and  members  of
    her church.  No proper assessment was said to have been  undertaken  as
    to her best interests in accordance with EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary
    of State Stayed for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  and  the
    Appellant's own evidence as to whether she wanted to go to Nigeria  was
    not given sufficient weight.

 9. In essence, Mr Ojo's submissions were  directed  more  towards  why  an
    appeal should be allowed at first instance rather than identifying  any
    error of law in the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Mr Ojo did not expressly seek to rely on the second ground of appeal on
    the basis of irrationality as set out in the application for permission
    to appeal.  He did however try to raise  challenges  on  the  basis  of
    procedural fairness (that contrary to paragraph 6 of  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant was not permitted  to  raise  or
    rely on issues of FGM and domestic violence)  and  as  to  whether  the
    correct burden of proof had been applied;  however,  he  accepted  that
    none of these points had been raised in the application for  permission
    to appeal and no grant of permission  on  any  such  grounds  had  been
    given.

11.  In  response,  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    identified any error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and referred to the relevant paragraphs in  the  decision  which  dealt
    with all of the points that Mr Ojo had said had not been considered  by
    the Judge; showing that they had in  fact  expressly  been  taken  into
    account in reaching the decision.  These were all relevant  factors  to
    be considered in accordance with the Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO
    (Nigeria).  The Appellant's claim was said to be made on the basis that
    simply being resident in the United Kingdom for seven  years  would  be
    sufficient, but this is not a trump card and overall,  the  grounds  of
    appeal amounted only to disagreement with the decision  reached  rather
    than identifying any error of law.

Findings and reasons

 1. The grounds of appeal to  challenge  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are entirely lacking in merit and this is not a case in  which
    permission to appeal should have been granted.  The Appellant has  been
    unable to identify any even arguable errors of law in the  approach  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and did not even expressly rely on the  reasons
    given for the grant of permission as to the arguable need  for  'strong
    reasons' to be identified for the removal of a  qualifying  child.   To
    the contrary, the submissions on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  primarily
    sought to reargue the claim before the First-tier Tribunal and at  best
    expressed only disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal expressly recognised in paragraphs 11 and 12 of
    the decision that the Appellant was born in  the  United  Kingdom,  had
    lived here ever since and had never been to Nigeria.  An assessment  of
    her best interests is set out in paragraphs 21 to 27  of  the  decision
    and includes  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  age,  her  education
    (including her progress at school, that she is not at a critical  stage
    of her education, for example about to take GCSEs or A-levels and  that
    education facilities are available in Nigeria), friends in  the  United
    Kingdom, the Appellant's language ability (and no  difficulties  likely
    to be faced given that English is widely spoken in Nigeria),  that  the
    Appellant is in good health and medical  facilities  are  available  in
    Nigeria, the possibility of extended family  relationships  in  Nigeria
    and that the Appellant would  be  supported  and  accommodated  by  her
    mother in  Nigeria.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    established family life with  friends  or  members  of  her  church  as
    claimed.

 3. It is clear and express  on  the  face  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision that all of the relevant factors for the  assessment  of  best
    interests set out by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV  (Philippines)  as
    recently endorsed by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), were taken into
    account.  The conclusion on the basis of that evidence is unassailable.

 4. It is further clear from paragraph 6 of the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant did not pursue her claim on  the  basis  of
    any fear on return to Nigeria  because  of  FGM  or  domestic  violence
    (against the Appellant or her mother) and reference  was  made  to  the
    rejection of  the  Appellant's  mother's  asylum  claim  (including  on
    appeal) on this basis.  There is nothing to support the suggestion made
    orally at the hearing that the Appellant  was  prevented  from  raising
    these issues, to the contrary,  the  unchallenged  record  set  out  in
    paragraph 6 of the decision was that these matters were not pursued.

 5. Although the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the
    Supreme Court's decision in KO which had not been handed down when this
    appeal was initially heard, I find that the approach of  the  Judge  in
    this case as to the question of whether it is reasonable to expect  the
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom, is entirely in  accordance  with
    that decision.  The key findings in KO are as follows:

          "16.  It is natural to begin with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to  the
         position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor DB 5/96 it  contains
         no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or  misconduct  of  a
         parent of the balancing factor.  It is impossible  in  my  view  to
         read it is importing such a requirement by implication.

         17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the substance of
         the rule without material change, but this time in the  context  of
         the right of the parent to remain.  I refer that  it  was  intended
         have the same effect.  The question again is what  is  "reasonable"
         for the child.  As Eliza LJ said in MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  one  WLR
         5093, Paris 36, there is nothing in this  subsection  to  import  a
         reference to the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B  sets  out  a
         number of factors relating to  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them.  Subsection 117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on  it  is  not  liable  to  deportation.   List  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to be wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges,  it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where  ther
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
          To that extent the record of the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to there ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain.   The  point  was
         well expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             "22.  In my opinion before one embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a case such as this
             second only be one answer: 'because the parents have no  right
             to remain in the UK'.  To approach the question any other  way
             strips  away  the  context  in   which   the   assessment   of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 854, para 58:

             "58.  In my judgement, therefore, the assessment of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on  the  basis  of  the
             facts as they are in the real world.  If  one  parent  has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow parent with no right to remain to the  country
             of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para  40,  I  would  respectfully  disagree.   There  is
         nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness"  is  to  be
         considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the  children
         find themselves."

 6. As above, the First-tier Tribunal  assessed  very  carefully  the  real
    world situation of the Appellant and expressly considered  the  factors
    required  for  the  best  interests  assessment  as  set  out  in  (EV)
    Philippines.  The Appellant  and  her  mother  are  both  nationals  of
    Nigeria and others expected to leave the United  Kingdom  as  a  family
    unit as neither have any lawful leave to remain, which is  the  correct
    background  to  the  assessment  and  against  which  the  question  of
    reasonableness must be considered.   The  approach  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses no error of law, the findings and conclusions  being
    entirely sustainable on the evidence before it and in  accordance  with
    the approach confirmed by the Supreme Court in KO.

 7. There is no separate  or  additional  requirement  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to identify strong and powerful reasons for the  finding  that
    it would be reasonable for a child who resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a period of at least seven years to  be  expected  to  leave,  even
    where those seven years occur after  the  age  of  four.   Sufficiently
    strong and powerful reasons are in any event given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on  the  facts  of  this  case,  recognising  the  real  world
    situation of the Appellant.

 8. The Appellant has not identified any other error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, despite the wide  and  varying  submissions
    made in writing and orally, these were not grounds on which  permission
    to appeal  was  sought  or  obtained  and  in  any  event  were  wholly
    unarguable.  This appeal amounts only to disagreement with the decision
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. For all of these reasons I find no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  on  any  of  the  grounds  put  forward  by   the
    Appellant's, those originally set out in writing those made  orally  at
    the hearing before me and the decision to dismiss the appeal  therefore
    stands.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date 14th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

