
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08204/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December, 2017                         |On 18th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  Anil Rana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar of Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal,  born  on  5  January  1986.   In
    August 2015, he applied for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as
    the adult dependent of a former Ghurkha soldier who was settled in  the
    United Kingdom, namely Mr Chitra Bahadur Rana.

2.   The appellant's application was refused on 18 September  2015  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First Tier  Tribunal.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered the application under the Home Office  policy  Annex
    K.  It was said that the appellant had lived apart from his parents for
    more than two years since their move to the United Kingdom.  A  concern
    was also expressed about the appellant's identity and  date  of  birth.
    Let me make it clear here those two issues  were  satisfactorily  dealt
    with by the judge.  The judge was satisfied that the appellant was born
    when he said he was born in 1986.  The judge was  also  satisfied  that
    the appellant was the son of the sponsor and that family  life  existed
    between the appellant and his parents.

3    At paragraph 36 of his determination, the judge says that there is  one
    other issue of fact and this relates to  whether  the  appellant  would
    have come to the United Kingdom in 1978 if he had had  the  opportunity
    to do so. As Counsel pointed out to me 1978 was in fact incorrect.  The
    relevant date would have been 5th  January  2004,  on  the  appellant's
    majority.  He was wrong  to  focus  on  the  date  of  the  appellant's
    father's discharge from the Gurkha regiment.

4.   The judge found that the evidence as to whether or  not  the  appellant
    would have come to the United Kingdom if he had had the opportunity  to
    do so at an earlier date was not at all clear.  The appellant's  father
    left Hong Kong after his retirement and returned with his wife to Nepal
    to find work.  He was unable to find work  and  therefore  returned  to
    Hong Kong where he could work and look after his three younger children
    who were born in Hong Kong.  He returned to Nepal in 2005.  The sponsor
    worked in Hong Kong because that was where his daughters wanted to live
    and he was able to work and be with them.   The  judge  concluded  that
    having regard to the appellant's age and the  fact  that  he  had  been
    separated from his parents since 2013, the decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse the application was proportionate.

5.   Mr Puar suggested that at paragraphs 36 to 40 of the determination  the
    judge had applied the incorrect test.  In paragraph 11 of  Ghising  and
    Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  the
    court referred to paragraph 41 of Gurung and make  it  clear  that  the
    test is:

         "If a Gurkha can show that but for the historic injustice he  would
         have settled in the UK at a time when he is dependent  (now)  adult
         child would have been able to accompany him as  a  dependent  child
         under the age of 18 that is a strong reason for holding that it  is
         proportionate to permit the child to join the family now.  To  that
         extent the Gurkha and BOC cases are similar.  That is why we cannot
         agree that, as a general Rule, the weight accorded to the injustice
         should be substantially different in the two cases."

6.   Mr Puar suggested that the relevant date  was  5th  January  2004,  and
    that the judge had been wrong to focus on the  date  when  the  sponsor
    retired from the Gurkha regiment in 1978.   The  family  at  that  time
    wanted to settle in Hong Kong.  Mr Puor suggested  that  there  was  no
    difference in reality between Hong Kong and the United Kingdom, because
    the Gurkha regiment were based in Hong Kong.   It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant's siblings wanted to live in Hong Kong, because that is where
    they were born.

7.   At paragraph 46, the judge says that the factual  background  on  which
    he assesses proportionality is that the father chose to  work  in  Hong
    Kong because his daughters wanted to live there and  he  and  his  wife
    only chose to come to the United Kingdom  when  the  opportunity  arose
    after 2008.  That, suggested Mr Puar was wrong.   The  judge  had  been
    considering what the father wanted to do in 1978, rather than as at the
    date of the appellant's majority in 2004.  He was addressing  his  mind
    as to whether the sponsor would settle in the United  Kingdom,  but  it
    makes no difference whether it is the United Kingdom or Hong Kong.

8.   Mr Melvin suggested that the findings of the judge  were  open  to  the
    judge to make on the evidence before him.  There was no evidence as  to
    the date when the appellant's father decided that he wanted to come  to
    the United Kingdom.  It had been the  appellant's  father's  choice  to
    work in Hong Kong and the historical injustice was not relevant,  given
    that there was a choice.  The sponsor  simply  wanted  to  support  his
    family and it was the appellant's siblings who wanted to remain in Hong
    Kong.  There was simply no evidence before the judge  that  as  at  the
    date of the appellant's majority to show that  the  sponsor  wanted  to
    retire to the United Kingdom.  He invited me to  uphold  the  decision.
    Addressing me in closing Mr Puar emphasised that the judge had focussed
    on the wrong date.  I reserved my determination.

9    I have read the statement of the sponsor.  In it  he  refers  to  there
    having been a lot of publicity in Nepal about the children  of  Gurkhas
    who were born in Hong Kong and whether or not they were Nepalese.  This
    was in 1996 just before Hong  Kong  was  handed  back  to  the  Chinese
    government.  It was suggested that they were not allowed to  return  to
    live in Hong Kong and that they were told to register with the  British
    Embassy to receive British national overseas passports.   This  he  did
    for his three eldest children, who wanted to live in Hong Kong, but  he
    says his wife and their Nepalese children were not allowed to  go  with
    them.  Only one parent was allowed to go and so he and his wife decided
    that if he went, he would be able to work and  earn  money  to  support
    everybody.

10.  After he retired, he was not able to obtain  work  in  Nepal  and  this
    left him with very little money, so knowing that he was able to work in
    Hong Kong, he decided to go and look after his  three  eldest  children
    and work  there.   He  stayed  in  Hong  Kong  with  his  three  eldest
    daughters, visiting his wife and younger children as often as he could.
     He stayed there until 2005, when he decided to return to Nepal  to  be
    with his wife and with the respondent.  Sadly, the respondent  was  not
    well and needed a kidney replacement.  The respondent's mother  donated
    one of her kidneys.  In 2010, the sponsor heard that Gurkhas were being
    allowed to settle in the United Kingdom.  He saved hard, so that by the
    late winter of 2013, he had sufficient monies to be able to settle with
    his wife in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
    expecting to be able to apply for the respondent to join them  quickly.



11.  I have concluded that the judge has erred in  his  determination.   The
    error stems from paragraphs 36, 37 and 38 of  the  determination.   The
    judge clearly focussed on the wrong date.  The  issue  before  him  was
    whether the  appellant  could  have  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  on
    obtaining his majority in 2004.  The sponsor makes it clear that he was
    not given the opportunity of settling in the  United  Kingdom  when  he
    left the army and returned to Nepal.  However, it is quite  clear  from
    the evidence presented  to  the  judge  and  the  appellant's  father's
    subsequent action, that he very  clearly  would  have  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom had he been able to do so on his retirement.

12.   The judge assessed the evidence of  the  sponsor  and  concluded  that
    this was not a case in which the respondent's parents  had  established
    that they would have settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  retirement.
    However, it seems to me that the judge overlooks the fact that  at  the
    earliest opportunity they took steps to ensure that they did locate  to
    the United Kingdom.  It is clear from the sponsor's statement  that  it
    was in 2010, when he heard that he might be permitted to settle in  the
    United Kingdom.  The sponsor makes it clear that he saved as hard as he
    could so that it was in 2013 that he and his  wife  would  be  able  to
    settle in the United Kingdom.  I believe that one can infer  from  that
    evidence that it is quite clear that if the sponsor had been allowed to
    settle in the United Kingdom on his retirement, he would have done  so.



13.  I believe that the judge was wrong  to  suggest,  therefore,  that  the
    historic injustice principle was of  less  importance  in  this  appeal
    because the father chose to work in Hong  Kong  because  his  daughters
    wanted to live there.  In fact,  in  reality  the  sponsor  had  little
    choice: he had no opportunity to come to the  United  Kingdom  at  that
    time and there  was  no  work  available  to  him  in  Nepal.   In  the
    circumstances, I believe that  the  historic  injustice  principle  was
    relevant and that had the judge properly considered the matter he would
    as I had been led inevitably to  conclude  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent is in all the circumstances disproportionate.  I  find  that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup does contain an  error
    on a point of law.  I set aside his decision and remake it myself.    I
    find that the decision of the  respondent  is  disproportionate  and  I
    allow the respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have
    considered making a fee award and have decided to make a fee  award  of
    any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the following reason.
     The appeal is allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

