

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU/08759/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                        |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 14 May 2019                                |On 3rd June 2019             |


                                   Before:
                       The Hon Mrs Justice WHIPPLE DBE
                                     and
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mohd. MOINUL ISLAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr M S Gill QC, instructed by Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ceridwen Griffith), sitting at Hendon
       Magistrates' Court on 28 November 2018,.  Judge Griffith allowed the
       appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh born on 9 October  1989  on  human
       rights grounds.  That appeal was in response  to  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision to deport him because he is a foreign criminal.  We
       shall continue to refer to him as the Appellant even  though  he  is
       the respondent to this appeal.

    2. The Appellant is now 29 years old.  He  is  a  single  man  with  no
       dependants.  He came to the UK on 10 July 1993, a few months  before
       his 4th birthday.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain until 7
       June 1994.

    3. The Appellant has a history of offending.  Between 2006 (when he was
       still a minor) until 2012 (when he turned 23) he was convicted on 14
       occasions of 20 offences, ranging from offences against  the  person
       to theft, carrying an offensive weapon and drug offences.  The index
       offence which triggered the automatic  deportation  proceedings  was
       committed in 2009, when the Appellant was aged 20  or  so.   He  was
       convicted on two counts of supplying cocaine, a class  A  drug,  and
       sentenced to two years'  imprisonment  of  which  he  served  twelve
       months.  He was released from prison in 2010.

    4. The Appellant applied to be naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  in
       April 2013 but that application was refused because he did not  meet
       the Good Character requirement.  A deportation order was  served  on
       him on 11 June 2015 and an application on human rights  grounds  was
       refused on 13 October 2015. The deportation  order  was  signed  the
       same day.  There were various challenges to that order.  On 14  June
       2017, the decision dated 13 October 2015 was withdrawn  as  was  the
       original deportation order.  A fresh deportation decision was  made;
       the Appellant's fresh human rights claim was  refused  on  2  August
       2017.  The Appellant had an in-country right of appeal against  that
       decision.

    5. He exercised his  right  of  appeal  to  the  FtT.   By  a  decision
       promulgated on 20 December 2018, Judge Griffith allowed that  appeal
       and declared the  deportation  decision  unlawful  on  human  rights
       grounds.

    6. The Secretary of State now appeals against that determination.





The FtT's reasons

    7. Judge Griffith recorded that the Appellant comes from a large family
       with 7 siblings, four of  whom  were  born  in  this  country.   The
       Appellant's evidence, which was accepted, was that  his  father  had
       died when he was 12, which is an event which he said  had  seriously
       affected him and had caused him to associate with a  bad  crowd;  he
       had now been free of crime for 6 years, and intended  to  stay  that
       way.  In short he had turned his life around.  He had only  been  to
       Bangladesh once, with his father in 2001 (when he was 12 years old).
        He has no family in Bangladesh and no one to  ask  for  help.    He
       lives at home with his family.  He speaks the Sylheti dialect of the
       Bangali language which is not the  same  as  the  official  language
       spoken in Bangladesh, which he can neither speak nor write.   He did
       not  know  that  he  had  a  Bangladeshi  passport  and  had  always
       considered himself to be  British.   His  appeal  was  supported  by
       evidence from his mother and two of his sisters (see  paras  [72]  -
       [75]).

    8. The Appellant advanced two bases for his appeal, both of which arise
       out of s 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which we
       set out in relevant part here:

           "(3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
           (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
           of C's life,
           (b)  C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and
           (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
           integration into the country  to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
           deported.
           (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh."


    9. First, the Appellant argued that he was in a genuine and  subsisting
       relationship with a partner in the UK who was a "qualifying partner"
       for the purposes of exception 2 (s 117C(5)). Judge Griffith rejected
       that submission on the evidence (para [70]) and there is  no  appeal
       to us against that finding.

   10. Secondly, the Appellant argued that his right to private life  under
       Article 8 outweighed the public interest in  his  deportation  as  a
       foreign criminal, relying on exception 1 (s 117C(4), read with  para
       399A of the Immigration Rules).  Judge Griffith considered  each  of
       the three limbs of exception 1.  There  was  no  dispute  that  that
       Appellant satisfied the first limb  because  he  had  been  lawfully
       resident in the UK for most of his life (para [71]).   On the second
       limb, Judge Griffith accepted that the Appellant's criminal past was
       not, on the evidence, an indication that he  was  not  socially  and
       culturally integrated in the UK - after all, the Appellant had  long
       believed he was  British  and  had  not  realised  at  the  time  of
       commission of these crimes that  he  held  a  Bangladeshi  passport.
       Judge  Griffith  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  only   visited
       Bangladesh once and had no real connection with that  country.   She
       found that the Appellant's involvement in crime was not evidence  of
       a failure of integration; the Appellant  therefore  met  the  second
       limb  of  exception  1,  because  he  was  socially  and  culturally
       integrated in the United Kingdom (paras [72]-[73]).  Judge  Griffith
       turned to limb 3.  She found that the Appellant would be a  stranger
       and an outsider were he to return to Bangladesh, in the  absence  of
       any real ties to that country.  He had only returned once for  three
       months at the age of 12, and that was insufficient to build any form
       of cultural tie to that country.  He cannot read or write  the  main
       language of the country and would be disadvantaged in  finding  work
       or accommodation.  There were no family members  in  Bangladesh  who
       could help him.  He has no real employment history  to  rely  on  to
       enable him to find employment in that  country.   He  receives  help
       from family in the UK but even if that continued, it  would  not  be
       sufficient to overcome the other difficulties he would  face  as  an
       outsider (see para [74]-[75]).

   11. Judge Griffith then reminded herself of the public interest factors.
       She recognised the significance of the Appellant's offending and the
       general public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals.   But  she
       also noted that this Appellant's offending was historic, some of  it
       committed while he was a minor in circumstances where he had  fallen
       in with a bad crowd.  She concluded that the Appellant  fell  within
       the category of individuals where the public interest in deportation
       was outweighed by  countervailing  factors  under  Article  8,  that
       category being identified by s 117C(4) (exception 1) and para  399A.
       The public interest did not require the  Appellant  to  be  deported
       (para [76]-[78]).

   12. Judge Griffith identified a further public interest  factor,  namely
       the delay in taking deportation action against the  Appellant.   The
       index offence was committed in 2010 but no deportation action  taken
       until 2015.  Further, the Appellant had now been free of  crime  for
       six years which diminished the public interest in deportation  (para
       [79]).

   13. She allowed the appeal (para [80]).



Appeal

   14. The Secretary of State advances a number of grounds of appeal (which
       we summarise):

          a. That the FtT was irrational in concluding that there were  very
             significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  reintegrating  into
             Bangladesh;

          b. That the FtT was in error in concluding that the Appellant  was
             an "outsider";

          c. That the FtT failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
             seriousness of the Appellant's criminal conduct which  was  not
             mere juvenile delinquency given that he continued to offend  as
             an adult and had been convicted of two further  offences  since
             being  released  from  prison  on  the  index  conviction   for
             supplying class A drugs.

          d. That the FtT failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
             public interest in deporting criminals, even if there  has  not
             been any recent reoffending.

          e. That the FtT had failed to give clear reasons for its decision.



   15. By a skeleton argument drafted by Mr T Lindsay of the  Secretary  of
       State's Specialist Appeals Team in advance of  the  appeal  hearing,
       the Secretary of State raised a new point  relating  to  limb  2  of
       exception 1, namely that Judge Griffith was wrong on the authorities
       to reject the Appellant's past criminality as evidence  of  lack  of
       social and cultural integration in the  UK.   However,  as  Mr  Gill
       pointed out, the grounds of appeal did  not  contain  any  challenge
       which related to Judge Griffith's findings on limb 2, and therefore,
       he argued, this point was simply not open to the Secretary of  State
       on this appeal.

   16. After hearing from Miss Isherwood, we upheld  Mr  Gill's  objection.
       The particular point of challenge on limb 2 was not heralded in  the
       Secretary of State's grounds of appeal; it had been raised  for  the
       first time in a skeleton argument served just  before  the  hearing,
       but apparently not seen by Mr Gill, for whatever reason,  before  he
       came into the hearing room to conduct the appeal.   The  ground  was
       not pleaded; the Appellant was prejudiced by this, and could not  be
       expected to deal with the point "on the hoof";  the  point  was  not
       open to the Secretary of State to advance on appeal.

   17. The essence of Miss Isherwood's remaining case before  us  was  that
       although Judge Griffith had identified the correct factors to  weigh
       in the decision, the conclusion reached was wrong in law: this was a
       case where the public interest plainly  outweighed  the  Appellant's
       article 8 right to private life; this appeal should be allowed  with
       the consequence that the Appellant should be deported to Bangladesh.



   18. Mr Gill resisted that submission on the basis  that  Judge  Griffith
       had come to a permissible conclusion on the evidence.  There was  no
       irrationality in Judge Griffith's decision in relation  to  limb  3,
       for which adequate reasons had been given (at [74]-[75]).  Once  the
       three  limbs  of  exception  1  were   satisfied,   the   conclusion
       necessarily followed that the  Appellant  should  not  be  deported,
       there was no further or additional public interest consideration  at
       that stage.  Judge Griffith had plainly  considered  the  case  with
       some care; the  determination  should  stand.   The  Upper  Tribunal
       should not interfere.



Conclusion

   19. As we indicated at the hearing,  we  dismiss  this  appeal.  Dealing
       first with Mr Gill's argument on the consequences of an  appellant's
       satisfying Exception 1, there  is  no  need  to  look  further  than
       paragraph 36 of NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA 662: "In  the  case  of  a
       medium offender, first see whether he falls within  Exception  1  or
       Exception 2. If he does, then the Article 8 claim  succeeds."   Here
       the only basis  on  which  the  original  grounds  challenged  Judge
       Griffith's conclusion on the applicability of Exception  1  referred
       to condition (c), the 'very serious obstacles' test.

   20. Judge Griffith was entitled to conclude  that  there  were,  on  the
       evidence,  "very   significant   obstacles"   to   the   Appellant's
       integration if he was returned to Bangladesh  and  accordingly  that
       the requirements of condition (c) of Exception 1 (and para  399A  of
       the Rules) were met. This was essentially a question for her on  the
       facts, on which her conclusion was rational and adequately reasoned.
        Judge Griffith was well aware of the public interest  in  deporting
       foreign criminals and weighed that interest against the  Appellant's
       right to private life: the approach was sound.  There  is  no  basis
       for us to interfere with Judge Griffith's conclusion.

Appeal dismissed


(drafted by Whipple J and signed on behalf of both of us by)
(a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                                                            DATE: 28.05.2019
