
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08516/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th March 2019                   |On 11th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nnamani of Counsel instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. CC appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey
    promulgated on 5 October 2018 in which his appeal against the  decision
    to refuse his human rights claim dated 26 July 2017, (in the context of
    a deportation order made on 25 July 2017, pursuant to section 33 of the
    UK Borders Act 2007), was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with  CC  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. For the reasons set out in the decision annexed, I found  an  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, set the decision  aside
    and listed a further hearing for the re-make of the Appellant's  appeal
    which came before me on 11 March 2019.  The error of law decision  sets
    out the factual and procedural background to this appeal which will not
    be repeated herein save as where relevant or necessary.

The appeal

Applicable law

 3. The requirements where a person claims that their deportation would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
    European convention on Human rights in so far as they are  set  out  in
    the Immigration Rules and relate to this appeal are:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

          a) ...
          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
          c) ... the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   only   be
             outweighed by other factors where there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A.


         399.     This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
applies if -

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


                i) the child is a British Citizen; or
             (ii)     the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


               a) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and
               b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
                  without the person who is to be deported; or


          b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and
               i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and
              ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and
             iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
                  UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
if -

          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and
          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

 4. By virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Part V of that Act applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

 5. Section 117A applies to the public interest considerations in all cases
    and section 117C applies additional considerations to  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  So far as relevant to  this  appeal,  section  117B
    sets out factors to be considered  in  all  cases  and  the  additional
    consideration in cases involving foreign criminals provides as follows:

    "117C. Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving  foreign
    criminals

      1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.
      4) Exception 1 applies where -
          a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,
          b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
      5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

 6. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, the Supreme Court considered the test for and  factors  to  be
    taken into account when assessing the  meaning  of  'unduly  harsh'  in
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  and  section  117C(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  paragraph  23,  Lord
    Carnworth held as follows:

          "On the other hand the expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary
         to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with the requirement  to  show
         "very compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
         the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
         sentences of four years or more."

 7. Within the Supreme Court's consideration of the specific appeal in  KO,
    further reference is made to the authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which held in paragraph 46:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  and  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

Respondent's reasons for refusal

 8. The Respondent refused the Appellant's human rights claim on the  basis
    that none of the exceptions to deportation applied in his case  and  he
    was subject to the automatic the provisions in section 32(5) of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 following his conviction for theft for  which  he  was
    sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment.  The Respondent accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  and
    children in the United Kingdom, but did not accept  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh either for the family to relocate to Nigeria (the children
    were young enough to adapt, English is spoken there  and  the  children
    could continue in education, and medical treatment  was  available)  or
    for the Appellant's wife and children to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    without him.  The family had struggled, but managed while the Appellant
    was in prison.

 9. In relation to private life, it was accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom lawfully, but had not been here for most  of
    his life and his criminal conviction shows that he was  not  culturally
    and socially integrated here.  The  Respondent  considered  that  there
    would be no very significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration
    to Nigeria.  Overall there were no  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation in this case.

The Appellant's evidence

10. In his first written statement, dated 8 July 2018, the  Appellant  sets
    out his immigration and family circumstances as well as details of  his
    criminal offence.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in  May  2005  with
    entry clearance as the spouse of a  British  Citizen  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain as such in 2009.  The Appellant states  that
    during his time in prison, his family broke down.   His  wife  was  not
    able to cope and only able to do nursing agency work when available and
    the children were devasted with problems sleeping  and  were  adversely
    affected in all areas of their lives.

11. The Appellant was the main breadwinner for his family in  the  UK,  his
    mother and his sister, both of whom passed away in Nigeria when he  was
    in prison.  The Appellant has no other family remaining in Nigeria  and
    his  family  in  the  UK  have  only  visited  there  before  when  the
    Appellant's parents and sister were alive.  The Appellant has  no  home
    or job in Nigeria and would be concerned as to  his  safety  on  return
    there.

12. During his time in the United Kingdom, the Appellant has been gainfully
    employed,   has   contributed   to   his   community   and   charitable
    organisations.  Whilst in prison he adhered to  the  prison  rules  and
    never had an  IEP.   The  Appellant  undertook  further  qualifications
    whilst in prison and has continued since release, but has not been able
    to work because he  does  not  have  the  correct  identity  documents.
    Instead, the Appellant's wife works and the Appellant  runs  the  daily
    family activities.

13. The Appellant has not reoffended, has had  positive  reports  from  the
    Probation Service and has been assessed as a low risk to the public  in
    his OASys report.

14. In his second written statement, dated 20 February 2019, the  Appellant
    refers to his children's educational attainment and emotional wellbeing
    dropping while he was in prison and absent from the  family  home,  but
    with  remarkable  improvement  since  his  release  from  prison.   The
    Appellant's wife has returned to full-time work as a nurse and  depends
    on the Appellant for child care of their children.

15. The Appellant states that if he is deported to  Nigeria,  it  would  be
    practically impossible for his wife to bring up their three children by
    herself and he would not be able to provide for them in Nigeria  as  he
    has no employment or home there.  The unemployment rate in  Nigeria  is
    over 23% and the Appellant's wife would have to register there to  work
    as a nurse which can take 6-18 months.

16. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted his written statements
    dated 8 July 2018 and 20 February 2019 and gave evidence in English.

17. In cross-examination the Appellant accepted that he  had  received  two
    cautions in the past, but neither was for ABH.  The cautions were  both
    related to issues between the Appellant and his wife, but he said  that
    these were a mistake and he had never been any threat to her.  However,
    he accepted that on the basis of these cautions,  he  was  recorded  as
    posing a medium risk of harm to a known adult in the OASys report dated
    15 May 2018.

18. The Appellant was asked about the OASys report dated 15  May  2018,  in
    which it was recorded that the Appellant did not accept guilt  for  the
    criminal offence.  The Appellant said that there have been a number  of
    OASys reports, including one before he went to prison which contained a
    number of mistakes and one completed on his release from  prison  which
    followed completion of a victim awareness course as confirmed by letter
    from his Probation Officer.  The Appellant does accept  his  guilt  for
    the criminal offence.

19. The Appellant has three children in the United  Kingdom,  two  of  whom
    have health issues  with  ongoing  treatment  and/or  planned  surgical
    procedures.  The Appellant states that his wife would not  be  able  to
    cope alone during these procedures, he would need to take his  children
    to the hospital for their operations and it would not be possible for a
    single  parent  to  do  this,  in  particular  because  of  his  wife's
    employment and her responsibility for the  mortgage.   The  Appellant's
    youngest child is also in receipt of speech therapy.

20. Whilst the Appellant was in prison, he stated that it was difficult for
    his wife who received only a  little  help  from  their  neighbours  in
    looking after the children.  Everyone was  adversely  affected  by  his
    imprisonment, his wife was very distressed when she came to  visit  him
    and the children had been adversely affected at school, which has since
    improved.

21. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant has two brothers, both of whom are
    married but neither of them assisted the family during the  Appellant's
    imprisonment.  He stated that they live too far away and have their own
    children and family issues.

22. The Appellant's wife suffers from high  blood  pressure  which  is  not
    always under control and is worse when under stress,  which  can  cause
    the need  to  attend  hospital  when  medication  doesn't  sufficiently
    address the problem.  The Appellant's wife is a nurse and  a  qualified
    solicitor and although attached to a legal firm, does  not  work  as  a
    solicitor but only refers cases from people to the firm if needed.

23. I asked the Appellant further questions about the cautions he received.
     He stated that he had forgotten about the details of these because  it
    was long time ago and only came up again in the  context  of  his  pre-
    sentence report.  He stated that he was not  aware  that  he  had  been
    formally cautioned but thought he had just been given  a  warning  from
    the police when released after being arrested, not do  anything  again.
    The cautions were in the context  of  family  arguments  and  his  wife
    called the police who asked him to leave  the  house.   On  the  second
    occasion, the Appellant stated that  that  his  wife  was  holding  him
    during a family argument with his brother, he pushed  her  away  having
    asked her to leave him alone and she said he had hit her with the  back
    of his hand.  He reiterated  that  this  was  not  a  caution,  only  a
    warning.  The Appellant was last in  Nigeria  in  2014,  his  immediate
    family in  the  United  Kingdom  last  having  visited  in  2012.   The
    Appellant has no remaining family or contacts in Nigeria.

The Appellant's wife's evidence

24. In her first written statement, dated 8 July 2018, the Appellant's wife
    sets out her immediate family relationships in the United Kingdom,  her
    employment as a nurse and her support for  the  Appellant's  appeal  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

25.  In  her  second  written  statement,  dated  20  February  2019,   the
    Appellant's wife confirms that one of her daughters has  Aplasia  Cutis
    and another has been diagnosed with temporomandibular  joint  disorder;
    and both are in the process of receiving specialist  medical  treatment
    with further surgery planned for both.   There  are  a  number  of  NHS
    letters  confirming  the  conditions,  past  treatment   and   upcoming
    appointments.

26. The Appellant's wife states that if the Appellant were to be  deported,
    she could not possibly attend all  the  medical  appointments  for  her
    daughters, work and manage her own blood pressure  at  the  same  time.
    During the Appellant's imprisonment, she relied on the help of  friends
    and neighbours, but it was very difficult and  she  does  not  want  to
    repeat that.  The Appellant's wife is concerned that if  the  Appellant
    is deported, she would not be able to continue working and  would  have
    to rely  on  public  funds,  wasting  her  years  of  study,  work  and
    experience achieved over many years in the United Kingdom.

27. The Appellant's wife attended the oral hearing, adopted her  statements
    dated 8 July 2018 and 20  February  2019  and  gave  oral  evidence  in
    English.  The Appellant's wife stated that when the  Appellant  was  in
    prison, she found it really tough to run her household.  She had worked
    and trained hard to achieve qualifications in the  United  Kingdom  and
    during this period was only able to manage her job as a nurse on  night
    shifts so that she could take the children to school  during  the  day.
    Neighbours helped look after the children at  night  but  the  children
    were not happy in this situation.  The family received no support  from
    the Appellant's brothers or their families.  She describes this  period
    as only managing to exist, not living and said that she didn't cope and
    struggled to support her children during this time.

28. The Appellant's wife suffers from high  blood  pressure  following  the
    birth of her  third  child,  which  is  not  completely  controlled  by
    medication.

29. In relation to the cautions given to  the  Appellant,  the  Appellant's
    wife stated that she blamed herself,  that  she  was  selfish  and  she
    reacted badly during an argument about religion.  She stated the police
    should never have been involved and she regretted  calling  them.   She
    was unable to recall the exact circumstances  relating  to  the  second
    caution but described it as happening after silly things and she called
    the police but stated again that she shouldn't have got  the  Appellant
    into that mess.

30. In relation to the Appellant's children, his wife confirmed the current
    medical treatment that they are under with further planned surgery  and
    treatment.

31. In cross-examination, the Appellant's wife  confirmed  further  details
    about the medical treatment in progress for children and stated that it
    was essential that the Appellant was there for the operations as he has
    always been there and is the primary carer of the children.

32. If the Appellant were to be deported, his wife stated  that  she  could
    not rely on friends and neighbours to assist her again.  In particular,
    circumstances had changed for her next door neighbour who would not  be
    able to help  now;  there  is  no  wider  family  support  and  is  not
    anticipated that social services would be able to offer  any  practical
    support either.

33. The Appellant's wife was last in Nigeria in late 2017  or  early  2018,
    when she travelled following the death of her mother-in-law and sister-
    in-law, staying for about seven days during the time when the Appellant
    was in prison.  Prior to that she last visited in 2012.

Documentary evidence

34. An Independent Social Worker report was prepared by  Stephanie  Prempeh
    dated 11 July  2018  as  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children.  The majority of the report records information given by  the
    Appellant, his wife and children in interviews with Ms  Prempah  as  to
    their views and concerns about relocating to Nigeria or remining in the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant; as well as recording  the  family
    relationships and responsibilities.

35. In terms of analysis, Ms Prempah sets out the importance of  attachment
    between children and their parents and the harm that  can  result  from
    separation, which would occur if  the  Appellant  were  deported.   The
    Appellant has significant care responsibilities for his children  while
    his wife is at work and his presence is a stable factor for the family.
     The potential for the Appellant to gain work in the future would  also
    help alleviate the  financial  burden  on  the  Appellant's  wife.   Ms
    Prempah primarily records the family view rather than  determining  for
    herself that the whole family relocating to Nigeria is not an option.

36. The final conclusion in the Independent Social Worker  report  is  that
    the Appellant's children's emotional and behavioural development  would
    be safeguarded and it would be in their best interests if the Appellant
    were not removed from the United Kingdom.

37. In her  second  report,  dated  4  February  2019,  Stephanie  Prempeh,
    Independent Social Worker, recorded details of  her  further  interview
    with the Appellant and his wife  on  16  January  2019  in  which  they
    expressed significant concern  as  to  the  family  living  in  Nigeria
    together and the position if  the  Appellant  were  deported.   In  the
    analysis section of the report,  Ms  Prempeh  describes  the  potential
    adverse effects on the children of separation  from  the  Appellant  if
    deported and that his  removal  from  the  family  may  exacerbate  the
    stressors on the Appellant's wife, including her health,  treatment  of
    the children's medical conditions and the  family  finances;  which  in
    turn my have an additional adverse impact on the children.  As  in  the
    previous report, it was recorded that it was not viable for the  family
    to relocate together to Nigeria.

38. There are a number of letters from the Appellant's  children  contained
    in the  bundle.   The  most  recent  is  from  the  Appellant's  eldest
    daughter, which describes a sad and difficult time for her, her sisters
    and her mother when the Appellant was in prison and how  this  affected
    them at school and in their day to day lives.  Since the Appellant  has
    been released from prison, she describes  a  more  positive  time  with
    improved performance and behaviour at school.  The Appellant's daughter
    separately describes being aware of bad things happening in Nigeria and
    not wanting to go there.

39. The Appellant's OASys assessment dated 15 May 2018 was available within
    the bundle.  It deals primarily with the index offence but also records
    details of two cautions received by  the  Appellant  in  2013/2014  for
    common assault and ABH against his wife.  These events  were  described
    in detail by the Appellant as domestic arguments, the first about  food
    and money in which he held on to his wife's  wrist,  witnessed  by  his
    children and the police were called.  The second incident  was  also  a
    domestic argument during which it was said that  the  Appellant  pulled
    away from his wife who was holding on to his  jacket  and  pushed  her,
    causing her to fall down the stairs.  The Appellant's wife stated  that
    these were misunderstandings and there was no domestic violence.

40. In relation to the risk  of  reoffending,  the  probability  of  proven
    reoffending was 24% in year 1 and 51% in year 2,  which  was  a  medium
    risk.  The probability of proven non-violent  reoffending  was  19%  in
    year 1 and 30% in year 2, which was a low  risk.   The  probability  of
    violent-type reoffending was 9% in year 1 and 16% in year 2, which  was
    a low risk.  The Appellant was also recorded as posing a medium risk of
    harm to a known adult - his wife, based on the  previous  cautions  for
    assault and ABH.

41. In terms of risk  of  offending,  it  was  further  recorded  that  the
    Appellant presents well with probation officers, he  has  a  pro-social
    attitude, no pro-criminal attitudes, and has been motivated  to  comply
    with his licence conditions.  However, "In regard to [the  Appellant's]
    motivation to address his offending behaviour, I have assessed this  as
    being limited.   [The  Appellant]  has  stated  that  he  has  accepted
    responsibility for his role in the offence and is motivated to  address
    how  he  went  against  company  policy  and  procedure.   However,  he
    continues to deny that he was involved in  the  offence  of  theft  and
    therefore his motivation to address offending behaviour is limited."

42. The report also contains details of employment, family  and  background
    information.  It includes reference to the Appellant's younger  brother
    in Nigeria and his wife working as a solicitor in the  United  Kingdom,
    providing the household's main income in addition  to  the  jobseeker's
    allowance the Appellant has received since his release from prison.

43.  The  bundle  also   includes   prison   visit/communication   records;
    qualification certificates; school certificates; medical  records;  and
    letters of support from the  Appellant's  local  community  and  church
    members.

Closing submissions

44. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tufan confirmed that the Respondent did
    not rely on it not being unduly harsh for the entire family to relocate
    to Nigeria with the Appellant, albeit that would be a matter of  choice
    for the family if they wish to.  The Respondent's case was  focused  on
    it not being unduly harsh for the  Appellant's  wife  and  children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without  him,  such  that  there  were  no
    exceptions  to  deportation  applicable  in  paragraph  399A   of   the
    Immigration Rules or section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

45. It was submitted that it  is  clear  that  the  test  of  unduly  harsh
    contains a very high threshold, which is simply not met on the facts of
    this case.  The medical conditions of both  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    children were considered but  treatment  is  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom and can be proceded with whether or not the Appellant is  here,
    his presence having at  its  highest  only  a  minimal  impact  on  the
    treatment.  It was  further  submitted  that  without  undermining  the
    impact of the medical conditions on those involved, they were  not  the
    most serious conditions.  Otherwise, the Appellant has  not  identified
    any circumstances beyond the  normal  effects  of  deportation  on  his
    family members and there is nothing to suggest social services wouldn't
    step in to help if needed after his deportation.  In the absence of any
    of the exceptions being satisfied, the Appellant has not identified any
    very compelling circumstances over and above them to outweigh the  very
    significant interest in public deportation in this case.

46. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Nnamani submitted that  in  the  present
    case it was clearly in the children's best interests of both parents to
    remain living together as a family in the United Kingdom  for  them  to
    continue to  receive  care  from  their  father.   This  would  promote
    consistency, stability and continuing  care,  which  has  already  been
    disrupted with a  negative  impact  on  the  children's  education  and
    behaviour when the Appellant was in prison.  There is medical  evidence
    in relation to the Appellant's eldest child that assistance was  sought
    for anxiety and upset while the Appellant was  in  prison  and  similar
    findings made in the Independent Social Worker's report.

47. It would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's family to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant given the severe and bleak set  of
    circumstances facing the family without him.  Is important to  consider
    the age of the children, the family circumstances and  how  in  reality
    the Appellant's wife would cope  as  a  single  parent.   Reliance  was
    placed on the decision in Siwak v Prosecutor General's  Office,  Poland
    [2019] EWHC 333 (Admin) which although  concerning  extradition,  shows
    the relevance of consideration of circumstances  of  children  how  the
    remaining parent would be able to cope in  the  absence  of  the  other
    parent.  In the present case there is medical evidence in  relation  to
    the Appellants wife's long-term medical conditions, anxiety and she has
    clearly expressed concern for her own future mental health.   The  loss
    of the Appellant, an active father who has always  been  involved  with
    his children and supported them  through  medical  treatment  would  be
    significant and any sporadic contact or  visits  following  deportation
    would not be comparable to the current situation with day to day direct
    contact with him.  Further, it was submitted that it was not clear what
    support social services would or could provide to this family given the
    need for emotional support, childcare  and  financial  support  if  the
    Appellant were to be deported.

48. In all the circumstances, it was submitted that the separation  of  the
    Appellant from his family would lead to negative long-term consequences
    and effects on his children, with  significant  weight  placed  on  the
    Independent Social Worker's report.

49. In the alternative, if it is not considered unduly harsh for the family
    to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant, it was submitted
    that there were in any event very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the exceptions to outweigh the public interest in deportation  in
    this case.  The Appellant's conviction and cautions must be taken  into
    account, including the circumstances of the cautions as set out in  the
    oral evidence which were given in 2013.  The Appellant  has  undertaken
    victim awareness courses and professional  training,  he  has  complied
    with his licence conditions and repaid the value  of  goods  stolen  in
    full.  There are positive letters about him from the Probation  Service
    which show no concerns  as  to  a  criminal  lifestyle  or  pattern  of
    offending, and show evidence of continuing rehabilitation.

50. In addition, the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom lawfully for
    more than 12 years, he was granted indefinite leave to remain  and  has
    fully integrated in society, working and contributing to the community.
     He has been convicted of a single offence which doesn't reflect a poor
    lifestyle or pattern of behaviour and  presents  only  a  low  risk  of
    reoffending with a low risk of harm to the public.  The  Appellant  has
    undertaken courses and further professional qualifications  to  support
    continuing rehabilitation in the United Kingdom.  He has strong  family
    life in the United Kingdom and a lack of connections to  Nigeria.   The
    impact of deportation on the Appellant's family would be  considerable.
    Overall therefore the Appellant's rights outweigh the  public  interest
    in deportation on the facts of this case.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Appellant was convicted of an offence of theft on 4  November  2016
    and sentenced to  2  years'  imprisonment,  ordered  to  pay  a  victim
    surcharge and was also subject to a confiscation order in  the  sum  of
    �16,000.  This offence triggered the automatic  deportation  provisions
    contained in section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  and  a  Deportation
    Order was made on 25 July 2017.  The Appellant appeals on human  rights
    grounds  that  his  deportation  would  breach  his  Convention  Rights
    (section 33(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007) and  that  he  falls  either
    within the family life exception in paragraph 399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and/or the first exception in section 117C(3) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The primary issue in this appeal  is,  pursuant  to  those  provisions,
    whether the effect on the Appellant's wife and children of remaining in
    the United Kingdom if he were to  be  deported  to  Nigeria,  would  be
    unduly harsh.  The Respondent is not relying on any  argument  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for the entire family to relocate to Nigeria,
    albeit it remained a matter of choice for them if they wished to do so.



 3.  In  the  alternative,  the  Appellant  submits  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh the significant public interest in
    his deportation from the United Kingdom.  There is no reliance  on  the
    private life exception to deportation set out in either paragraph  399A
    of the Immigration Rules and/or section  117C(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. As a starting point, the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  children
    need to be  determined  to  be  taken  into  account  as  part  of  the
    assessment of unduly harsh and/or very compelling circumstances.  It is
    trite to recall that the best interests of a child are normally  to  be
    with both parents in the same country and that position is affirmed  by
    the  first  Independent  Social  Worker's  report  which  reaches  that
    conclusion in relation to the Appellant's three children in this case.

 5. The Appellant's three children, now aged 8, 11 and 13, are all  British
    Citizens who were born in the United Kingdom and have  lived  here  for
    their whole lives as part of the family  unit  with  their  mother  and
    father, save for the period of the Appellant's imprisonment  when  they
    lived only with their mother.  The children are all in education and to
    a greater or lesser extent  are  receiving  specialist  therapy  and/or
    medical treatment in the United Kingdom, at present and on  an  ongoing
    basis.  The Appellant's evidence is that he normally takes the children
    to medical appointments while his wife is at work.

 6. The Appellant has  a  relatively  close  relationship  with  his  three
    children, being the day-to-day primary carer  of  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom while his wife, as the sole breadwinner for the family,  is  at
    work or sleeping during the day after a  night  shift.   He  maintained
    regular contact with his children  during  the  time  that  he  was  in
    prison, with calls and emails  to  and  from  the  family  and  regular
    visits.

 7. There is evidence  from  the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  the  children
    themselves about difficulties the children had while the Appellant  was
    in prison, including  being  upset,  suffering  from  anxiety  and  not
    performing or behaving as well at school.   This  is  repeated  in  the
    Independent Social Worker's report, in which reliance  is  placed  upon
    letters from the school, the same documents being referred  to  by  the
    Appellant in his written  statement.   However,  the  letter  from  the
    school expressly relied upon, the only  one  available  in  the  bundle
    which deals with the issue of behaviour, relates to a  period  of  time
    after the Appellant's release from prison and not  during  his  absence
    from the family home and therefore does not  provide  support  for  the
    evidence given by the family at all.   Although  there  is  a  lack  of
    supporting evidence from the schools about the impact on the children's
    education while the Appellant was in prison, it is a common  occurrence
    that the type of difficulties described in  this  case  occur  in  such
    situations and I find it more likely than not that  they  did  in  this
    case; albeit there is nothing to indicate the issues were  particularly
    serious or long-term and a repetition with behavioural issues, at least
    in respect of one of the children after the  Appellant's  release  from
    prison has resolved.

 8. In the circumstances already set out, I find that it would  be  in  the
    best interests of all three children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    with both their mother and father, continuing  with  their  established
    lives here with both parents.  As is almost always the case, separation
    from a parent is likely to have an  adverse  impact  on  the  children,
    however I return to the question below as to whether in this  case  the
    Appellant's removal would be unduly harsh on the children.

 9. The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage with his wife in light of  the  previous  grant  of
    entry clearance indefinite leave to remain on  that  basis.   There  is
    evidence of their continuing cohabitation and contact during  the  time
    the Appellant was in prison and I find  that  they  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship, albeit the strength of which is somewhat reduced for  the
    following reasons.  There was a lack of evidence as to the substance of
    the relationship before the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunal,  the  only
    aspects of which that were expressly dealt with by either the Appellant
    or his wife were the Appellant's support in terms of childcare to allow
    his wife to work and in relation to the cautions for domestic  violence
    incidents in 2013/2014.

10. As to the cautions, I do not accept that either the  Appellant  or  his
    wife gave credible evidence in relation to the cautions.  First, for  a
    caution to be given at all, a person must accept that  an  offence  was
    committed and a formal process is followed.  The Appellant's suggestion
    that he was only given a warning from the police not to do it again  is
    not credible.  Nor  is  the  suggestion  that  two  separate  incidents
    resulting in a police caution for common assault and ABH were due to  a
    misunderstanding.  The  Appellant  must  have  expressly  accepted  the
    offences were committed for a  caution  to  have  been  given  at  all.
    Secondly, the evidence as to the incidents themselves are  inconsistent
    between the explanation given by the Appellant recorded  in  the  OASys
    report, the Appellant's oral evidence and the Appellant's  wife's  oral
    evidence.  It is also of particular concern that  the  account  in  the
    OASys report records that the Appellant's children witnessed the  first
    incident of common  assault  and  that  the  police  attended  on  both
    occasions to remove the Appellant from the family home.   Thirdly,  the
    Appellant was assessed in May 2018, some four or five years  after  the
    cautions, as posing a medium risk of harm to a known adult,  his  wife;
    such that I do not accept that there was any prior misunderstanding nor
    no continuing risk or concern.

11. In terms of the family position in the United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant
    and his wife both state that they have no wider family or other support
    here and only friends and neighbours gave  limited  support  while  the
    Appellant was in prison, much of which could not be replicated  in  the
    future because of the change of circumstances  in  particular  for  the
    Appellant's next-door neighbour who is said to have  provided  most  of
    the support.

12. Although I accept that the Appellant's parents and sister are deceased,
    as is the Appellant's wife's brother, I do not accept as  credible  the
    evidence from the Appellant and his wife that they have  no  family  or
    other support in  the  United  Kingdom  nor  any  family  remaining  in
    Nigeria.  It is clear from the prison  visiting  communication  records
    that a wide range of people visited the  Appellant  whilst  he  was  in
    prison and the emails to him from his wife refer on multiple  occasions
    to contact and visits with 'Aunty' (whether or not  a  blood  relative)
    and other friends and/or family visiting the household.  There is  also
    reference in the OASys report (in May 2018) to the Appellant  having  a
    younger brother in Nigeria and from the Appellants wife's email to  the
    Appellant in January 2017, that she would  see  the  Appellant's  older
    brother at home in Nigeria.  I find that this brother  or  brothers  in
    Nigeria are in addition to  those  in  the  United  Kingdom  given  the
    Appellant's evidence and his wife's evidence of where they lived in the
    United Kingdom whilst the Appellant was in prison and now - at least in
    part to explain why they did not visit or  offer  any  support  to  the
    Appellant or his family then or now.

13. In addition, there are multiple  statements  from  friends  within  the
    community, many of whom attended the oral  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to give evidence on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  who  are
    therefore likely to have provided at least some level of emotional,  if
    not practical support to the family whilst the Appellant was in  prison
    and no reason why they would not  do  so  in  the  future.   For  these
    reasons, I do not accept the Appellant's evidence that he has no family
    remaining in Nigeria, nor the suggestion that there is no wider  family
    or community support in the United Kingdom.

14. In light of the above findings,  I  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh on his wife and children if they were
    to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  submission  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant is that his deportation would be unduly harsh on  his  family
    by reference to the context and circumstances of this  family  and  the
    likely impact on them in the event of deportation.  Particular reliance
    was placed on the children's best interests, the appellant's wife's and
    children's health conditions; the additional strain on family  finances
    and the Appellant's  wife's  practical  ability  to  continue  in  paid
    employment, including due to a lack of wider family or other support.

15. As is almost inevitable in any deportation situation, the removal of  a
    parent is likely to have an adverse effect on any  children  with  whom
    they have a genuine parental relationship.  That  is  the  natural  and
    ordinary consequence of a deportation order on  a  family  and  on  the
    children in particular, both in emotional and  relationship  terms  but
    also as a matter of practicality that a family is,  on  a  day  to  day
    basis, reduced to a single parent.  Although  following  deportation  a
    person may be able to find  employment  from  their  home  country  and
    provide some financial assistance to the family remaining in the United
    Kingdom, it is also almost inevitable that the family finances would be
    adversely affected  by  the  deportation  of  a  parent.   Further,  in
    circumstances such as the present case, where one parent is effectively
    unable to work (or not permitted to do  so  due  to  their  immigration
    status or pending deportation), it is almost always the case  that  the
    parent facing deportation  will  have  a  greater  role  in  day-to-day
    childcare than the  other  parent,  upon  whom  all  of  the  financial
    responsibility for the family then rests and who is therefore likely to
    be in employment.

16. Consequences such  as  these  for  the  family,  which  are  likely  to
    contribute in a wider way to an adverse effect  on  the  children,  are
    expressly relied upon by the Appellant. He submits  that  he  would  be
    unable to financially  support  his  family  from  Nigeria  given  poor
    employment prospects and the high rate of unemployment there  and  that
    his wife would be unable to continue in her current employment  because
    of the practical problems of childcare and financial burdens.  However,
    the Appellant has submitted no evidence at all of his  family  finances
    to show income or outgoings and it is noted that at present he is  able
    to contribute little (possibly jobseekers allowance as referred  to  in
    the OASys report) or nothing, which has been  the  position  since  his
    imprisonment in late 2016.  There is a lack of evidence  to  show  that
    the family would not be able to cope financially if  the  Appellant  is
    deported, given that  they  have  been  managing  without  any  or  any
    significant contribution from the Appellant or  anyone  else  for  some
    time, nor that childcare is not affordable such  that  the  Appellant's
    wife's employment could not continue.  The Appellant's wife is  both  a
    qualified solicitor and a qualified nurse, with  inconsistent  evidence
    as to what work she is actually undertaking but both  are  professional
    roles.  In addition, public funds would be available  if  necessary  to
    support the family, although I appreciate the  Appellant's  wife  would
    prefer to work and use her qualifications and  experience  rather  than
    rely on public funds.

17. The Appellant's wife has expressed concern about her ability to cope in
    the future, of her ability to manage on health problems and of possible
    future mental health problems if the Appellant was deported, but  there
    is no medical evidence in support of that  and  no  history  of  mental
    health problems.  It is clear that she does have friends and neighbours
    in the community who are supportive of the family, as well  as  medical
    support and treatment available for her existing condition as  well  as
    any possible future mental health problems should they arise.

18. The Independent Social Worker report goes no further  than  identifying
    the usual consequences of deportation of a parent on  children  of  the
    family, within the wider context of the potential impact on the  family
    as a whole.  No specific factors are identified  which  go  beyond  the
    generally  accepted  position  and  adverse  impact  on   children   in
    particular in deportation and there is  nothing  in  either  report  to
    identify any unduly harsh impact on any of the children.

19. As confirmed by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), what is required  by
    the expression "unduly harsh" in the exceptions  to  deportation  is  a
    degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
    any child faced with the deportation of a parent.  It is not  something
    which is uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely  difficult,
    it is a much higher threshold.  Harsh means something more than  severe
    or bleak and the  addition  of  "unduly"  raises  an  already  elevated
    standard still higher.

20. On the facts of the current case, there is little doubt that the impact
    of the Appellant's deportation  on  his  wife  and  children  would  be
    adverse, in terms of the impact on  their  emotional,  educational  and
    financial well-being.  However, the evidence does  not  show  that  the
    effect of the Appellant's deportation would reach the high threshold of
    being unduly harsh on any or all of his children or on his wife,  taken
    individually or as a whole.  The factors relied upon by the  Appellant,
    even taking into  account  the  medical  conditions  of  his  wife  and
    children and the likely family situation, do not go beyond  what  would
    reasonably be expected or necessarily be involved for any  child  faced
    with the deportation of a parent or wife faced with the deportation  of
    a husband.  The family situation after deportation would undoubtedly be
    difficult on a practical as  well  as  emotional  level,  but  that  is
    insufficient to meet the high threshold  of  deportation  being  unduly
    harsh on family members to satisfy this exception to deportation.

21.  In  the  alternative,  the  Appellant  submits  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh the significant public interest in
    his deportation, as  set  out  in  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

22.  The  following  matters  are  relevant  to  the  public  interest   in
    deportation.  The Appellant has been convicted of theft  for  which  he
    was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  of   two   years.    The
    circumstances of the offence were that he was part of a  conspiracy  to
    steal mainly computer equipment, which involved a breach of trust,  the
    offence having been carried out in the context of his employment  as  a
    Parcelforce delivery driver and the estimated value of goods was in the
    region of �130,000.  This on any view was a serious offence and one for
    which the Appellant has, at least in the past,  if  not  continuing  to
    date, not accepted full responsibility.   Although  the  Appellant  has
    undertaken  a  victim  empathy  course   and   has   obtained   further
    professional qualifications, doubts have been raised as to the limit to
    which the Appellant has addressed his offending and he has  still  been
    assessed as posing a low to medium risk of harm to the public and/or  a
    known adult (as set out above in the  relatively  recent  OASys  report
    dated 18 May 2018).  There is in addition the wider public interest  in
    deterring criminal offences and protecting the public.

23. In the Appellant's favour, the following factors  are  relied  upon  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  First, the Appellant  has
    lived in the UK lawfully  for  more  than  12  years  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in 2009.  Secondly, he is  fully  integrated
    in society has worked and contributed to the  community.   Thirdly,  he
    committed a single isolated offence and has  no  pattern  of  offending
    behaviour.  Fourthly, the Appellant has  undertaken  awareness  courses
    and  further  professional   qualifications   showing   rehabilitation.
    Fifthly, there is a low risk of reoffending.  Sixthly, the Appellant as
    a British wife and three British children and deportation would have  a
    considerable adverse impact on his  family,  their  emotional,  health,
    educational  and  financial  well-being.   Finally,   the   Appellant's
    connections Nigeria have diminished over time and he has  no  immediate
    family remaining there.

24. The strongest factor in the Appellant's favour is in  relation  to  his
    wife and family United Kingdom but I have already found that the impact
    on them, individually or cumulatively, would not be unduly harsh if the
    Appellant would be deported.  Even taking into account the current  and
    future possible health needs of members of the family  and  the  likely
    position of the family following deportation, even if, contrary  to  my
    findings above, there is a lack of family or community support  in  the
    United Kingdom; these matters, even taken together with the Appellant's
    length of time with leave in the  United  Kingdom  and  his  employment
    history here and together with only a single criminal offence; does not
    outweigh the very significant public interest in his deportation.   The
    Appellant has been unable to identify,  individually  or  cumulatively,
    any very compelling circumstances over and above the express exceptions
    to deportation contained in the Immigration Rules and in  section  117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  His appeal is therefore  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the decision annexed, the making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  a  material  error  of
law.  As such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The decision is remade as follows:
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     8th April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08516/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2019                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Cc
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nnamani of Counsel instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davey promulgated on 5 October 2018, in which  CC's
    appeal against the decision to refuse his human rights claim and make a
    deportation order pursuant to section 33 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    dated 26 July 2017 was allowed.  For ease I continue to  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with  CC  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria who  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen  on  21
    May 2005 and following a further grant of leave to remain on  the  same
    basis was granted indefinite leave to remain on 23 February 2009.  On 4
    November 2016, the Appellant  was  convicted  of  theft  (of  computers
    amounting to approximately  �81,000  from  Royal  Mail  with  whom  the
    Appellant was employed as a delivery driver) and  was  sentenced  to  2
    years'  imprisonment.   The  Appellant  did  not  appeal  against   his
    conviction or sentence.  The Appellant was  served  with  a  notice  of
    intention to make a  deportation  order  on  14  January  2017  and  he
    submitted human rights representations in response on 13 February 2017.

 3. The Respondent refused the human rights claim in a  decision  dated  26
    July  2017  and  a  Deportation  Order  was  made.   In  summary,   the
    application was refused on  the  basis  that  although  the  Respondent
    accepted that the Appellant had family life in the United Kingdom  with
    his spouse and three daughters, born in 2006, 2007  and  2010,  all  of
    whom are British citizens; it would not be unduly harsh either for  the
    family to relocate to Nigeria with the Appellant, or to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without him.  In Nigeria, it  was  considered  that  the
    children would be able to adapt with the assistance of  their  parents,
    be able to continue their education in English, and  medical  treatment
    was available to one of the  Appellant's  children  who  has  a  speech
    impediment.  If the family were to remain in the United  Kingdom,  they
    would remain a family unit with mother and children in support of  each
    other, peers and extended family; as well as being able to continue  in
    their education and maintain  a  relationship  with  the  Appellant  in
    Nigeria through modern means of communication and visits.  Overall,  it
    was not accepted that the  Appellant  met  any  of  the  exceptions  to
    deportation, on the grounds of private or family life and there were no
    exceptional circumstances to outweigh the  strong  public  interest  in
    deportation.

 4. Judge Davey allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  5  October
    2018 under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   I
    return below to the detailed reasons given in  the  decision,  but  for
    present purposes in summary, it was found that it would be in the  best
    interests of the children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    Appellant and it would be unduly harsh for them to remain  without  the
    Appellant and unduly harsh to relocate to Nigeria with him.  The second
    exception set out in section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 applied such that the Appellant's deportation would  be
    a disproportionate interference with his family life.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent originally appealed primarily  on  the  basis  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to correctly apply the  test  of  unduly
    harsh consequences in paragraphs 399(a)  and  (b)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in accordance with the Court of Appeal's decision in MM  (Uganda)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  by
    failing to adopt a holistic appraisal  of  all  the  circumstances  and
    failing to attach the requisite weight to the strong public interest in
    deportation.  It was however accepted by Mr Tufan at the  oral  hearing
    that this ground was no longer arguable following the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC  53,  however  the  remainder  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    continued to be relied upon,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  outcome
    sought.  Mr Tufan submitted that it  remains  the  case  that  even  in
    accordance with KO, the First-tier Tribunal has  failed  to  apply  the
    correct test of undue harshness.

 6. The Respondent submits that in relation to the assessment by the First-
    tier Tribunal of the circumstances of  the  Appellant's  children,  the
    Judge erred in equating the best interests of  the  children  with  the
    effect of the deportation of the Appellant being unduly harsh  on  them
    for the purposes of the exceptions set out in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The heavy reliance placed on the social work report  set  out  no  more
    than the consequences that one would usually expect from the separation
    of a parent and child and did not identify any effects that would  make
    either relocation to Nigeria or separation unduly harsh.

 7. In relation to the First-tier Tribunal's findings on the practicalities
    of separation of the family, the Respondent claims that the conclusions
    are not based on any evidence and would appear to  be  speculation,  as
    well as contrary to the family managing  while  the  Appellant  was  in
    prison.   In  any  event,  if  changes  were  required  following   the
    Appellant's  deportation,  they  could  not  amount  to  unduly   harsh
    conditions.  Similar criticisms are made of the findings  in  paragraph
    17 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision as to the families'  situation
    on return to Nigeria, being based on speculation rather than evidence.

 8. Further, the First-tier Tribunal has failed to adequately identify  and
    weigh the strong public  interest  in  deportation,  focusing  only  on
    factors such as rehabilitation and a low risk of reoffending,  relevant
    only to the prevention of crime rather than the wider  public  interest
    in deportation and  without  recognition  that  this  is  an  automatic
    deportation case  triggered  by  a  serious  offence.   Mr  Tufan  also
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had not properly  grappled  with
    the OASys report which identifies two previous cautions, one conviction
    and that the Appellant posed a medium risk of harm to adults, with  him
    displaying controlling behaviour and showing a lack of understanding of
    others and the consequences of actions.

 9. Finally, the Respondent challenges the decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    under  Article  8,  the  context  of  which  seems  to  have   been   a
    straightforward proportionality assessment by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    without any reference to the deportation context in this appeal.

10. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Nnamani submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made lawful findings on the range of evidence  before  it,
    not relying solely on the Independent Social Worker report, but also on
    the witness statements, the OASys report and evidence  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's conviction,  evidence  from  friends  and  family,  and
    letters from the Appellant's children.  Further, there was no challenge
    to the Independent Social  Worker's  report  or  its  findings  by  the
    Respondent in  the  initial  appeal  and  there  is  no  error  in  the
    assessment of the best interests of the children being to remain in the
    United Kingdom with the Appellant, where they have a  stable  life  and
    home, contrary to the situation in the real world of a family  of  five
    relocating to Nigeria  without  preparation  for  a  specific  plan  to
    establish themselves there.

11. Ms Nnamani accepted that the First-tier Tribunal did not expressly  set
    out the reasons why the consequences of deportation  or  relocation  to
    Nigeria would be unduly harsh on the family members, but in  paragraphs
    25 and 26  the  consequences  of  such  relocation  or  separation  are
    considered.

12. Although is accepted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    brief, it was submitted that all of the issues had been dealt with,  in
    paragraph 25 there was a recognition of the difference between  removal
    being unduly  harsh  and  unreasonable  and  a  lawful  proportionality
    assessment was made with regard  to  the  public  interest,  which  was
    outweighed by exceptions deportation having been met and  the  strength
    of family life.

Findings and reasons

13. In considering the grounds of  appeal,  it  is  necessary  to  turn  in
    greater detail to the reasons given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    decision allowing the appeal.  The decision itself is relatively  brief
    for an appeal of this nature and refers to  much  of  the  evidence  by
    reference rather than setting it out in any detail.  In the early parts
    of the decision, it is found  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  him,  by
    reference to their  close  parental  relationship  (save  when  he  was
    imprisoned) and the importance of that relationship, in the context  of
    settled British national children in the United Kingdom.  In paragraphs
    16 and 17 of the decision, the Judge refers to families moving to other
    countries  with  children,   but   usually   in   circumstances   where
    accommodation and employment is already organised, or where there is  a
    reasonable prospect of the same and contrast this to the  situation  of
    the  Appellant  and  his  family  who  would  be   jobseekers   without
    accommodation and the children would have to fit into  the  educational
    system available.  He concludes at the end of paragraph  17,  "Thus  it
    was not said that the family cannot relocate but rather it was  not  in
    the children's best interests and unduly harsh to do so.".

14. The second reference to unduly harsh  comes  in  paragraph  19  of  the
    decision in which it is said that this issue needs  to  be  taken  into
    account in terms of the impact of deportation on the children, but  the
    starting point for the Judge is that family life had  been  established
    for the purposes of Article 8 and there follows a consideration of  the
    statutory factors in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum  Act  2002;  recognition  that  the  Appellant  has  a   genuine
    subsisting parental relationship with three qualifying children  and  a
    qualifying partner who is a British citizen; and recognition  that  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal.

15. In paragraph 24 of the decision, the factors in  section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  set  out,  including
    exception 2 which is said to be the relevant exception which applies to
    this case.  The decision continues as follows:

         "25.  If the Appellant was not liable to deportation I  would  have
         found it would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave
         the UK (Section 117B(6)).  I conclude that unduly harsh is not  the
         same as unreasonable albeit some factors may be common to both.   I
         find the impact of  the  interference  in  their  education,  their
         development, the social life established by them,  their  ages  and
         the connections that they have  with  family  and  friends  in  the
         United Kingdom cannot be understated.

         26.  Under Section 117C Exception 2, the effect of the  deportation
         would, I find, be harsh and unduly so in terms of its impact on the
         Appellant's wife who would have to change her way of life to reduce
         the amount of work she could do  for  the  NHS  and  need  to  have
         recourse to social benefits in order to enable  her  to  make  ends
         meet.  It would also put a terrific burden on her in terms  of  the
         general care of the children who are themselves adversely  affected
         by the absence of the Appellant.   I  find  in  the  light  of  the
         independent social workers report that the adverse  effect  on  the
         children's development, given their ages 12, 11 and 7 years, of the
         absence of their father, who has played such an extensive  role  in
         their childhood and development, was unarguable.  I  conclude  that
         the impact of separation through the removal of the Appellant would
         be unduly harsh.  It would also adversely impact upon four  British
         citizens who have played  no  part  or  been  responsible  for  the
         Appellant's  criminality  in  2015/2016.   I  would  also  fail  to
         recognise his rehabilitation and the limited risk of  re-offending.
         In those circumstances it seems to me that the public interest does
         not require deportation, given the identified Exception 2.  I  have
         already concluded that it would not be the best  interests  of  the
         children for the Appellant to be separated from the children."

16. The final conclusion in relation to the appeal appears in paragraph  28
    as follows:

         "For these reasons therefore, I conclude that  not  only  does  the
         public interest not  require  it,  in  the  sense  contemplated  by
         Exception 2, but also that the impact  on  the  Appellant's  family
         would be disproportionate.  In reaching that  view,  I  have  taken
         into account the OASys assessment of  the  Appellant's  criminality
         and who might be  at  risk.   What  is  known  is  that  since  the
         Appellant has been out of prison he  has  not  reoffended  and  not
         posed a risk to third  parties,  adult  or  otherwise  and  he  has
         properly performed the probation requirements.  There is nothing to
         gainsay his  claim  that  he  has  rehabilitated  himself  and  was
         unlikely  to  reoffend.   The  point  seemed  to  be  an  important
         consideration for the public to be concerned about just as much  as
         whether he might, although I found to the contrary, be a burden  on
         British taxpayers."

17. It can be seen from the passages  quoted  above,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has not, with any specificity, set  out  the  test  for  undue
    harshness which is applied.  Although of course the Judge did not  have
    the benefit of the Supreme Court's decision in KO at the  date  of  the
    decision, there is in the alternative none  of  the  authority  on  the
    meaning of unduly harsh that did exist at that time.  The  closest  the
    First-tier Tribunal comes  to  explaining  what  the  test  is,  is  in
    paragraph 25, which states only that it is not the same as unreasonable
    for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Although the focus of the Supreme Court in KO was the
    issue of whether or not wider factors beyond the circumstances  of  the
    child should be  taken  into  account  in  the  assessment  of  whether
    relocation and/or separation would be unduly harsh for the purposes  of
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  (following
    consideration of the similar provisions in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of
    the Immigration Rules and section 117B(6)),  Lord  Carnworth  indicates
    the meaning of the section in paragraph 23 as follows:

         "On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary
         to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with the requirement  to  show
         "very compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
         the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
         sentences of four years or more."

18. In the Supreme Court  consideration  of  the  specific  appeal  in  KO,
    further reference is made to the authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which stated in paragraph 46:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  and  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

19. In the First-tier Tribunal's decision under appeal in the present case,
    it can be seen from the passages set out above that not  only  was  the
    test of unduly harsh not specifically set out, but it was  not  in  any
    event applied.  Counsel for the Appellant accepted that there  were  no
    express reasons as to why either  scenario  (remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the Appellant or relocating to Nigeria) would be unduly
    harsh on either the Appellant's wife or any of  their  three  children.
    The consideration of possible  practical  consequences  of  deportation
    fall far short of giving adequate reasons for finding that Exception  2
    in Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    applies.  Further, the matters referred to, primarily in the context of
    the best interests assessment, including in particular the  Independent
    Social Worker's report, do not identify anything other than  the  usual
    consequences on a family of deportation of one of the parents and  fall
    far short of identifying any  matters  which  could  amount  to  either
    scenario being 'unduly harsh'.

20. For these reasons, I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred
    in law, in essence applying the wrong test in law by equating the  best
    interests of the children with satisfaction for Exception 2 in  section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  of  relocation  or
    separation being unduly harsh on the children; and also in  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for the finding in any event.  It is necessary to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for this reason alone
    and for the appeal to be remade.  The findings in relation to the  best
    interests of the children are preserved and the remaking of the  appeal
    reserved to the Upper Tribunal given that only limited further  finding
    of facts by way possible updating to the family situation is required.

21. As to the other grounds of appeal from the Respondent, there  is  force
    in the submission that the First-tier Tribunal  speculated  as  to  the
    possible situation of  the  family  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the Appellant and their circumstances on relocation to Nigeria,
    without any evidential basis  being  identified  for  the  findings  in
    particular in paragraphs 17 and 26 of the decision.  This is a  further
    error of law, although it is in any event very closely  connected  with
    the error identified above as to the correct approach to the assessment
    of unduly harsh and would be required to  be  reconsidered  with  fresh
    findings made when the appeal is remade.

22. Finally, the First-tier Tribunal's findings in relation to  the  public
    interest in deportation and the overall assessment under Article 8  are
    infected by the error errors of law already identified.   However,  the
    public interest in deportation is only likely to become material if  it
    is necessary  for  a  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions to outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation, i.e. if it is found that  none  of  the
    exceptions apply.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is to be relisted before UTJ Jackson on 14 February 2019  with  a
time estimate of two hours for the re-making of  the  appeal.   Any  further
evidence to be relied upon by the Appellant must  be  filed  and  served  no
later than 14 days prior to that hearing, i.e. by 4pm on 31 January 2019.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]             Date     23rd January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson



