
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08206/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34 without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|23rd June 2020                       |On 8th July 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 RAJNISH [S]
          Appellant before the First-Tier Tribunal, respondent before the UT

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
          Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal, appellant before the UT


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

      1. FtT Judge Phull dismissed Mr [S]'s appeal  "under  the  Immigration
         Rules" (sic) and allowed the appeal "on Article 8  -  Human  Rights
         grounds" for reasons set out in  a  decision  promulgated  on  30th
         October 2019. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  FtT
         judge Woodcraft to the SSHD to appeal the decision, on 28th January
         2020. Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent on
         30th April 2020 and, in the  circumstances  surrounding  COVID  19,
         provision was made for the question of whether there was  an  error
         of law and if so whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  should  be
         set aside to be determined on the papers.

      2. Mr [S], through his legal representatives, stated that he  did  not
         wish to make any further submissions save  that  they  relied  upon
         previous grounds submitted (email dated 5th  May  2020).  The  SSHD
         filed a skeleton argument dated 1st April 2020. Neither Mr [S]  nor
         his legal representatives has responded to that  skeleton.  Neither
         party sought an oral hearing to  determine  whether  there  was  an
         error of law by the FtT Judge such that the decision should be  set
         aside to be remade.

      3. I  have  taken  the  reference  to  "grounds"  by  Mr  [S]'s  legal
         representatives to mean the grounds of appeal to the  FtT  and  the
         skeleton argument relied upon before the FtT; there  are  no  other
         grounds of which I am aware.

      4. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and the respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me[1]  are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

      5. Mr [S] is an Indian national subject to a deportation order imposed
         as a result of him receiving a sentence of 12 months in  2009.  His
         wife is a British Citizen of Pakistani descent. Their  relationship
         was embarked upon when he was unlawfully in the  UK.  They  have  a
         daughter who  is  a  British  Citizen  who  has  been  with  foster
         carers/in care for the past 10 years. Mr [S] sees his daughter  for
         unsupervised contact four times a year. The wife has mild  learning
         difficulties and Asperger's Syndrome  according  to  a  psychiatric
         report prepared in 2012.

      6. The FtT  judge  found  Mr  [S]  enjoys  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with his daughter and is a committed  parent  "because
         the social work contact schedule from early 2015 confirmed  he  has
         maintained contact with his daughter without fail" [50]. The  judge
         accepted his evidence that his daughter is always happy to see him,
         that his imprisonment had  an  adverse  effect  on  her,  that  his
         contact with her after his release from  prison  was  reduced  from
         every day. The judge found that "if he  were  deported  this  would
         have a further adverse impact on her, one he cannot alleviate  from
         India. It is not in dispute that if the appellant is deported,  his
         daughter will remain in care, because I accept as a matter of  fact
         that his daughter was taken into care because his wife  was  unable
         to look after her alone" [50].

      7. The judge further found that removal  of  Mr  [S]  would  have  the
         effect that his daughter would grow up in care without her  parents
         ([51]) and that her contact with her father would  "be  limited  to
         telephone calls, email and, possibly,  very  occasional  visits  to
         India, if she is allowed to by the  Family  courts/social  services
         ([51]).

      8. The judge goes on to find:

             "52. I have no doubt that the effects of  deportation  on  the
             child would be considerable. The question is whether it  would
             be "unduly harsh" on the child.  This  will  obviously  depend
             upon the weight to be given to the  respondent's  lawful  aim,
             which in turn amounts to whether those harsh effects are 'due'
             on the basis of the offending. I have found on  the  basis  of
             the evidence before me the  appellant  poses  a  low  risk  of
             reoffending and whilst I consider his offending to be  serious
             it is non violet offending.

             53.  I find that the appellant cannot exercise a  right  to  a
             family life because he cannot take his daughter to India.  She
             is under the care  of  social  services  and  the  council  is
             allowing him to have unsupervised contact with his daughter. I
             accept his evidence that if his deportation order  is  revoked
             he would apply to have his daughter  return  to  him  and  his
             wife.... I find that the appellant has  established  that  the
             effect of his deportation on his British child would be unduly
             harsh."

      9. In so far as Mr [S]'s wife is concerned, the judge found  that  she
         could not manage alone ([55]), that she could not look after  their
         daughter alone and that is why she was taken in to care when he was
         in prison; that she would find it very difficult to manage her life
         without her husband and there is no-one who could provide her  with
         care she requires if her husband is deported ([58]).

         Grounds seeking permission to appeal.

     10. The SSHD submits that although the judge refers to the severing  of
         the relationship between the child and her father he does not  give
         reasons for this, that the ability to provide economically for  the
         child and wife which would cease on deportation does not amount  to
         undue hardship and that there has  been  no  consideration  of  the
         child's best interest if he did apply to have the child returned to
         him.

     11. In so far as the wife is concerned the SSHD submits that  the  high
         threshold of very compelling circumstances has not been  made  out.
         And that no consideration has been given to the size  of  India  on
         deciding she could not go to India with him.  Nor  does  the  judge
         take into account that the wife would be able to  maintain  contact
         with the child and in any event appears to have managed  to  travel
         to Pakistan by herself in any event.

         Decision

     12. The FtT decision is most unsatisfactory. Although the judge has set
         out the relevant legislative framework, he has failed  to  properly
         apply this. The  issue  of  whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  is  not
         dependant on the nature of the criminality. It either is or is  not
         unduly harsh. The judge seems to think that the test relies upon an
         interference with a right to family life rather  than  a  right  to
         respect for family life. The judge mistakes parental responsibility
         for a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship.  There  is  no
         indication what contact his wife has with the child.  There  is  no
         indication why, given he has not been  in  prison  since  at  least
         2010, no application was made for him and  his  wife  to  have  the
         child returned to live with them - at that time she would only have
         been away from them for a few months. There was no explanation  why
         what he claimed was daily contact was reduced to once  every  three
         months. As it was at the date of the hearing she had gone into care
         aged about 4 and by the time  of  the  hearing  was  aged  15.  The
         finding by the  judge  that  unsupervised  contact  amounted  to  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship is unreasoned. Even if
         it was such a relationship, there is  no  assessment  of  the  best
         interest of the child, the effect on the  child  of  contact  being
         maintained through letters, visits etc as oppose to what he wanted.
         The judge has simply not identified with any reasons why  it  would
         be unduly harsh upon her for her father to be deported.

     13. In so far as the wife is concerned, there is even  less  reasoning.
         The judge has failed to acknowledge the age of the medical  reports
         relied upon, failed to identify the role played by the wife in  the
         child's life, failed to refer to evidence of difficulties the  wife
         would have in India other than that her family  were  unhappy  with
         the relationship, failed to  provide  any  reasons  why  she  could
         travel to Pakistan without assistance but cannot remain in  the  UK
         without such assistance as would be provided  by  social  services,
         failed to provide details of what he did  for  her  which  she  was
         unable to do and why.

     14. Overall the FtT decision, although  long,  fails  to  reach  either
         reasoned or  actual  findings  on  the  fundamental  issues  to  be
         determined in an appeal of this nature.

     15. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  for  legal  error.  The  appeal
         against the decision giving rise to the appeal  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is allowed with no findings preserved.

     16. In this case, there have been no findings on  relevant  matters  as
         required. Oral evidence will be required, and full findings of fact
         will have to be made. In accordance with the practice direction, it
         is appropriate in this case for the appeal to be  remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh,  no
    findings preserved.

    Not before FtT Judge Phull.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
23rd June 2020
-----------------------
    [1] (a)the SSHD's bundle; (b) the bundle filed on behalf of Mr Sharma
    received by the Tribunal on 10th July 2019 and skeleton argument dated
    30th September 2019; (c) the decision of FtT Judge Phull promulgated on
    30th October 2019; (d) The application for permission to appeal and the
    grant of permission to appeal dated 28th January 2020.

