
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08884/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     f B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel instructed by Caversham
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Algeria born in 1984, appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision dated 1 May 2019  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim within the context of a decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order.

 2. The deportation order followed  the  appellant's  convictions  for  two
    offences of possession or control of identity documents with intent  to
    deceive committed on 7 August 2018, and one offence  of  possession  or
    control of an article for use in fraud,  committed  between  1  January
    2016 and 7 August 2018, for which he received a total  sentence  of  18
    months'  imprisonment  on  19  October  2018  in  the  Crown  Court  at
    Canterbury.  He has an earlier  conviction  on  27  February  2007  for
    possession of falsely or improperly  obtained  identity  documents  for
    which he received a sentence of imprisonment of six months.

 3. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  dated  1  May
    2019 came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler  ("the  FtJ")  at  a
    hearing  on  29  October  2019  which  resulted  in  the  appeal  being
    dismissed.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 4. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's  decision  contend  that
    the FtJ erred in concluding at [24] that the appellant  demonstrated  a
    propensity to act impulsively and at [25] that  he  had  minimised  his
    offending behaviour.  In relation to the former, that appears to relate
    to the identity documents offence in 2018 whereby, on  the  appellant's
    account, his mother died earlier in the year and he attempted to  leave
    the UK.  It is argued that those  facts  are  not  sufficient  to  show
    propensity to act impulsively in circumstances where the appellant  was
    "aggrieved" as a result of his mother's death, a  matter  which  it  is
    argued the FtJ did not consider.

 5. In  relation  to  the  latter  point  (minimisation  of  his  offending
    behaviour) it is contended that the FtJ  was  in  error  at  [25]  when
    stating that the appellant described his offending "as a big  mistake",
    when what the appellant actually said was  that  it  was  his  "biggest
    mistake".  He had also said that he regretted his offending.  What  the
    appellant said ought to have been considered in the context of  English
    not being his first language, it is argued.

 6. The grounds further contend that there was no consideration of the risk
    or likelihood of reoffending which, on the  facts,  is  a  matter  that
    would be resolved in the appellant's favour.  It is further argued that
    there was no consideration of the  character  references  provided  and
    that "This factor is  relevant  in  calibrating  the  scales  of  undue
    harshness".

 7. In terms of  the  appellant's  partner's  health  and  the  appellant's
    anxiety and depression, it is said that the  FtJ  erred  in  concluding
    that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's step-daughter  M,
    to remain in the UK without the appellant.  A relevant factor  in  that
    respect is that M's biological father does not have any involvement  in
    her life and the appellant has  stepped  into  her  father's  shoes  to
    provide stability and security.

 8.  In  addition,  there  was  evidence  of  on-going  treatment  of   the
    appellant's partner with a spinal specialist, a matter  which  the  FtJ
    did not make any findings about.  Furthermore, there was evidence as to
    M having felt neglected and having been referred to counselling due  to
    the appellant's incarceration and evidence of  his  partner  struggling
    with childcare.  It is argued that the FtJ failed to make any  findings
    on that evidence  which  was  also  relevant  to  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness.

 9. The grounds refer to evidence from the appellant's  partner  about  her
    mother's depression and anxiety and her inability to provide support to
    the appellant's partner in his absence.  Again, that is  said  to  have
    been a matter that the FtJ failed to take into account.

10. Similarly, it is argued that the FtJ failed to assess the fact that the
    appellant's partner is now pregnant and due  to  give  birth  in  April
    2020, and how that  would  affect  her  ability  to  take  care  of  M,
    particularly with her own health problems.  Lastly,  it  is  said  that
    there was no consideration of the appellant's own health and  the  fact
    that he would be returning to Algeria with no family  support,  savings
    or property.

11. In submissions, Mr Maqsood relied on the grounds and skeleton  argument
    which mirrors the grounds.  His oral submissions  emphasised  different
    aspects of the  grounds.   It  was  submitted  that  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's lack of family support, savings  or  property  in  Algeria,
    although that may at first sight not appear relevant to the question of
    undue harshness in relation to his step-daughter,  it  is  relevant  in
    terms of the role he would be able to play in  her  life,  taking  into
    account his health.

12. Whilst it was accepted that the FtJ did not need to set out every point
    relied on by the appellant, it was submitted that the issues that  have
    been highlighted did need to be adjudicated upon.

13. In her submissions, Ms Jones also relied on her skeleton argument.   We
    were referred to Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  PG
    (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, in particular at [43] and [46] in terms
    of the analysis of  undue  hardship.   RA  (s.  117C:  "unduly  harsh";
    offence: serious) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) was  similarly  referred
    to in general terms in relation to its guidance on undue harshness.

14. Although there were character references from  relatives  and  evidence
    from the appellant's  partner,  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  that
    evidence was a matter for the FtJ, it was submitted.

15. Similarly, Ms Jones argued that the FtJ was entitled to conclude as  he
    did in relation to the propensity to act impulsively and  in  terms  of
    minimisation of his behaviour.

16. As regards the complaint about a failure to take into account a lack of
    property, income or savings on return to Algeria, that matter has to be
    seen in the context of the appellant  having  attempted  to  return  to
    Algeria for his mother's funeral and using false documents  to  do  so.
    It was submitted that his evidence as to his circumstances there  could
    not be relied on.

17. In terms of medical evidence, before the FtJ there was only evidence of
    a referral for counselling in relation to M when the appellant  was  in
    prison.  There was no other (documentary) evidence on the point.

18. As regards the appellant's mental health, Article 3 was not  relied  on
    and that matter must be balanced against his conduct.

19. The FtJ concluded that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  M  to  live  in
    Algeria but found that it would not be unduly harsh for her  to  remain
    in the UK without the appellant.

20. In  terms  of  the  appellant's  partner's  pregnancy,  there  were  no
    documents from social services or from the school to say that  she  was
    unable to cope with the demands of looking after a child.  This  was  a
    matter that the FtJ assessed at [34] and [39].

21. In his reply, Mr Maqsood submitted that  the  respondent's  submissions
    are relevant only to any re-making of the decision.   The  matters  set
    out in the grounds are interconnected in terms of showing  what  effect
    the appellant's removal would have on the  sponsor's  ability  to  look
    after two children.  For example, in  terms  of  the  evidence  of  her
    chronic back pain and treatment from a spinal specialist.

    Our Assessment

22. We do not consider that there is any error of law  in  the  FtJ  having
    concluded  that  the  appellant  demonstrated  a  propensity   to   act
    impulsively.  That finding at [24] was  made  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant wanting to leave the UK and going to Dover in order to do so,
    using false identity documents.  The appellant's  evidence  before  the
    FtJ, as summarised at [24], was that he acknowledged that he could have
    approached the respondent in order to return to Algeria but that  would
    have taken too long.  We consider that the FtJ was entitled to make the
    finding that he did in relation to those  circumstances.   Furthermore,
    that finding must also be seen in the context of what the FtJ described
    as  a  "clear  pattern  of  offending  behaviour".  The  appellant  was
    convicted in 2007 for possessing an identity document to which  he  was
    not entitled, convicted in 2018 for  similar  offences,  and  has  made
    attempts to enter  the  UK  unlawfully,  often  with  false  documents,
    including in addition to those previously described, in about 2002, and
    again in 2010 and 2012 ([26]).

23. Similarly, the appellant having  described  the  latest  offence  as  a
    "mistake", was  a  clear  basis  for  the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant sought to minimise his offending behaviour, particularly when
    seen in the context of  his  conduct  overall.   The  emphasis  in  the
    grounds on the FtJ describing the appellant as having  said  it  was  a
    "big" mistake as opposed to "biggest" unjustifiably  seeks  to  elevate
    what is a trifling difference to one of significance.

24. In any event, even if, contrary to our  view,  those  are  findings  to
    which the FtJ was not entitled, we do  not  consider  that  such  would
    amount to an error of law, still less one that is material.

25. Although the grounds contend  that  the  FtJ's  failure  to  take  into
    account the appellant's partner's  on-going  treatment  with  a  spinal
    specialist was  relevant  to  the  issue  of  undue  harshness  in  her
    remaining in the UK without the appellant, we are  not  satisfied  that
    there is any merit in that complaint.  In the first place, that relates
    to paragraph 399(b) in terms of his relationship with his  partner  but
    the appellant is not able to meet the requirements of  that  aspect  of
    the Rules because it is not a relationship formed  when  the  appellant
    was in the  UK  lawfully  and  when  his  immigration  status  was  not
    precarious.

26. It is a matter that is relevant  to  s.  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") but the  FtJ  made  an
    assessment of that provision, from [37].  At [39] he concluded that the
    appellant's partner would undoubtedly face  difficulties  as  a  single
    parent who was pregnant at the date of hearing, but those  difficulties
    would be faced by any partner bringing up children as a single  parent.
    He found that it had not been established that the degree of  harshness
    goes beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner in those
    circumstances.  We do not  regard  the  absence  of  reference  to  his
    partner's back problems  as  establishing  any  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.  In the first place,  the  FtJ  was  plainly  aware  of  that
    evidence, having recorded it at [8].  Secondly,  the  medical  evidence
    was that the deterioration in her back  condition  was  caused  by  her
    having to drive for around three hours each way to visit the  appellant
    whilst he was in detention.   Those  circumstances  plainly  would  not
    apply in the event of the appellant's removal.

27. The contention that the FtJ failed to take into account the appellant's
    partner's pregnancy is plainly unsustainable, the FtJ  having  referred
    to it at [39].

28. Likewise, the FtJ undoubtedly did take into  account  the  evidence  in
    terms of M's  feelings  on  separation  from  the  appellant,  at  [30]
    referring to M's wishes and feelings and noting at [34] that there  was
    no professional report in respect of M to indicate a level  of  concern
    outside the family.  He found that whilst the outcome for  her  may  be
    regarded as harsh, that level of harshness was one that was  acceptable
    or justifiable in the context of the deportation of a foreign criminal.



29. As regards the appellant's circumstances on return to  Algeria,  as  Ms
    Jones submitted, it is relevant that the appellant  himself  sought  to
    return to Algeria in 2018, albeit that that was following the death  of
    his mother.

30. In terms of the appellant's own health and his circumstances on  return
    to Algeria, those are not matters that are  directly  relevant  to  the
    issues of undue  harshness  as  it  affects  the  appellant's  partner.
    Neither could  it  realistically  be  argued  that  those  matters,  in
    combination with any of the other matters in favour of  the  appellant,
    amount to very compelling circumstances within paragraph 398,  or  over
    and above the Exceptions within s. 117C (see NA (Pakistan) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [27]), such  as
    to outweigh the  public  interest  in  his  deportation.  Although  the
    grounds at [18] assert that the appellant would have no family  support
    in Algeria, according to the FtJ's  typed  record  of  proceedings  the
    appellant's evidence was that he had married sisters in Algeria as well
    as his father.  Even if we do not have regard to  that  record  of  the
    evidence, given that the  parties  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to
    address us on it, it is nevertheless the case that  the  appellant  has
    not said that he has no family there.

31. As regards  the  character  references,  whilst  there  is  no  express
    reference to them in the FtJ's decision, such a lack of reference  does
    not amount to an error of law.  A judge is not  expected  to  refer  to
    every piece of evidence.  Secondly, those references,  which,  for  the
    most part, refer to the appellant's character,  could  not  inform  the
    assessment of undue harshness in terms of the  appellant's  partner  or
    his step-daughter M.  They would, otherwise, attract minimal weight  in
    terms of any assessment outside the Rules or Exception 1 within s. 117C
    as to very compelling circumstances.

32. In summary, we are not satisfied that there is any error of law in  the
    FtJ's decision in any respect.

    Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            23/1/20


