
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08395/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2020                  |On 23 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Xhevahir Terzia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Lengar of Counsel, instructed by Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of the appellant against a decision of the Secretary
of State refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2. The big difficulty facing the appellant is that he has been assessed to
be an "unsuitable" person.  According to the Secretary of State, the
unsuitability arises largely from his absconding and living irregularly in
the United Kingdom for a period of about five years when he ought to have
been reporting to the Secretary of State.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not helped by a dearth of evidence
from the Secretary of State but it is not absolutely clear that the judge
accepted and recognised that it was for the Secretary of State to prove the
precedent facts to support the conclusion that the appellant was
unsuitable.  There are two directions where there is reference to the
burden being on the appellant and in this respect it is not.  As Ms Everett
pointed out, correctly, there is a saving provision at paragraph 9 which
refers to the onus being on the respondent to adduce the relevant evidence
but that is not quite the same point as recognising that it is for the
respondent to prove the case but in any event, there is not a clear
direction and that is a matter of considerable importance.

4. This problem is compounded by the judge speculating on what sort of
procedure would have been followed and what material would have been made
available to the appellant telling him that he was required to report.  The
judge may or may not have got that right although there is reason to think
it was wrong but most importantly, there was just no evidence for it and it
is not for judges to guess about what might have happened but to decide the
case on the evidence that was there and if the party that bears the burden
does not produce the evidence, that is the party's problem. It must not
become the judge's.

5. On this occasion the decision is fundamentally flawed.

6. I have been assisted in this conclusion by entirely realistic
concessions by Ms Everett, who said that if she did not concede "she would
end up defending the case on a lot of little fronts to the point where it
was not possible to defend the decision".  With respect, I found that wise
and clear and I adopt her phrase here.  This is a fundamentally
unsatisfactory decision.  The consequence of that is it has to be set aside
and both parties agree with me that it is a failing of such magnitude that
the appellant is entitled to a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal, so I
direct that the case be heard again.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
and I direct that the case be heard again in the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
different judge.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 November 2020               |




