
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2017                               |On 18 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                        miss Jennifer Bautista Manuel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Olphert of Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who was  born  on  6  May
    1976.  She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 1  January  2013.
    Her visa expired on 21 October 2013.  The appellant thereafter remained
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  On 6 August  2015  she  applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom based  on  her  marriage  to  the
    sponsor, Mr Haxhi Rama.   In  a  decision  dated  5  October  2015  the
    respondent refused the appellant's application.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on  22  December  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   The  judge
    did not consider that there were any insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant and the sponsor relocating to  the  Philippines.   The  judge
    found that there were no exceptional circumstances in their family life
    that were not otherwise considered under the Rules and  that  therefore
    there was no good reason to consider the claim outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge also considered that the  facts  of  the  appellant's
    case did not come  within  the  discretion  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and that  requiring  the  appellant  to
    make an application when overseas would not  be  disproportionate  when
    considered against the proper aim of immigration control.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 17 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the commencement of the hearing  Mr  Bramble  raised  a  preliminary
    issue.  He indicated that the sponsor is not a British citizen and that
    therefore the judge had made a factual mistake.  The sponsor has  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee.  He did not  submit  that
    this was material to the outcome of the appeal.

 6. The grounds of appeal set out two grounds.  Ground 1 asserts  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made a mistake  of  fact  which  resulted  in
    unfairness.  At paragraph 46 of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  the
    judge mistakenly considered  Kosovo  to  be  a  part  of  the  European
    Economic Area when considering whether the appellant  and  her  husband
    could relocate there.  Ground  2  submits  that  the  judge  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why this case does not fall  within  the
    Chikwamba principle.  It is  submitted  that  the  Chikwamba  principle
    essentially allows  an  individual  to  bypass  the  Immigration  Rules
    requirement to submit an out of country application.

 7. Mr Olphert relied on the grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    proportionality assessment was flawed.   He  referred  to  the  Supreme
    Court case of R (on the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11
    at paragraph 51.  He submitted that the Supreme Court found that if  an
    appellant was required to leave the United Kingdom purely  to  make  an
    application that was  bound  to  succeed,  there  would  be  no  public
    interest in requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom to make
    that application  where  there  were  no  countervailing  factors.   He
    submitted that the appellant is not a foreign criminal and although  he
    accepted that the appellant had overstayed at the end of  her  visa  he
    submitted that the temporary separation  to  make  an  application  for
    entry clearance is  disproportionate.   He  referred  to  HS74  of  the
    respondent's bundle and submitted that it was clear that the  appellant
    would succeed in an application for entry clearance.  It was  simply  a
    paper exercise and was therefore not in the public interest to  require
    the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

 8. The Rule 24 response asserts that the grounds fail to identify why  the
    appellant should be given preferential  treatment  and  why  the  judge
    should find in her favour in contradiction to R (on the application  of
    Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) [2015] UKUT 00189 and SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ
    387. Mr Bramble relied on the Rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that
    although the judge had erred  in  paragraph  46  but  that  was  not  a
    material error of law.  The  judge  had  already  considered  that  the
    sponsor and the appellant would not face  insurmountable  obstacles  in
    relocating to the Philippines as set out in paragraphs 36 to 45 of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Further, at paragraphs 47 to 49,  with
    regard to the claim under paragraph 276ADE the judge found  that  there
    would not be very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration
    in the Philippines if she were required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore, the judge had made findings on insurmountable obstacles  and
    very significant obstacles upon which no appeal  has  been  made.   The
    appellant had not  challenged  the  judge's  finding.   Therefore,  the
    mistake in paragraph 46 cannot affect the outcome of this appeal.  With
    regard to the second ground of appeal he submitted that the  judge  had
    taken into consideration, at paragraph 30, that the appellant is in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully as an overstayer.  In this case the appellant
    has overstayed illegally and was in the UK unlawfully when she  entered
    into the relationship and subsequent marriage  with  the  sponsor.   He
    submitted  that  these  factors  therefore  take  this   case   outside
    Chikwamba.  He submitted the appellant has two choices, either they can
    both go to the Philippines, that is the appellant and the sponsor,  and
    continue family  life  there,  or  the  appellant  can  return  to  the
    Philippines and make an application.

Decision and Reasons

 9. On the first ground of appeal it is clear that the  judge  is  mistaken
    with regard to return to Kosovo - at paragraph 46:

         "46. For the avoidance of doubt, I can see  no  reason  to  suggest
             that the appellant and her husband return to Kosovo and indeed
             as the appellant's husband is now a UK  national  such  return
             would be on the basis that he  was  exercising  treaty  rights
             rather than returning to his own country."

10. Clearly the sponsor (who in any event is not a UK national)  would  not
    be expected to return to Kosovo having been granted refugee  status  in
    the United Kingdom.  It is also evident that even if the  sponsor  were
    to return to Kosovo he would not  be  exercising  treaty  rights.   The
    judge was clearly in error.  However, this is not a material  error  of
    law.  At the beginning of that paragraph it is  clear  that  the  judge
    only considered this issue as an alternative as the paragraph commences
    with "For the avoidance of doubt".  The judge made clear findings  that
    the appellant and sponsor would not face  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    their  family  life  continuing  in  the   Philippines.    Also,   when
    considering private life under paragraph 276ADE the  judge  found  that
    there was no evidence before her that there were any  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into the Philippines.

11. The appellant did  not  appeal  against  or  challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's findings on the 'insurmountable  obstacles'  or  'very
    significant obstacles' tests.

12. With regard to the second ground of  appeal  the  appellant  relies  on
    Agyarko in the Supreme Court at paragraph 51.  The  Supreme  Court  set
    out:

         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
             to  remain  in  the  UK   only   temporarily,   however,   the
             significance of this consideration depends on what the outcome
             of immigration control might otherwise be. For example, if  an
             applicant would  otherwise  be  automatically  deported  as  a
             foreign criminal, then the weight of the  public  interest  in
             his or her removal will generally be very considerable. If, on
             the other hand, an applicant - even  if  residing  in  the  UK
             unlawfully - was otherwise certain  to  be  granted  leave  to
             enter, at least if an application were made from  outside  the
             UK, then there might be no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
             removal. The point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department."[emphasis added]

13. This paragraph should be considered in light  of  the  Supreme  Court's
    considerations overall. The court did not conclude that there  will  be
    no public interest in removal.

14. The weight of the  public  interest  in  removal  will  depend  on  the
    individual circumstances. It is always fact specific. In Chen the Upper
    Tribunal explained that the proportionality assessment is fact specific
    and ultimately it is for the appellant to  demonstrate  that  temporary
    removal would be a disproportionate interference with protected rights.
    In the headnote and at paragraph 39:

         (i)  Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
         whether it would be disproportionate to  expect  an  individual  to
         return to his home country to make an entry  clearance  application
         to re-join family members in the U.K. There may be cases  in  which
         there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed
         outside the U.K.  but  where  temporary  separation  to  enable  an
         individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
         disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for  the  individual  to
         place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
         separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
         It will not be enough to rely solely upon the  case-law  concerning
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

         "39. In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual  (the  burden
         being upon him or her) that an application for entry clearance from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his or her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained,  it
         will be easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was "precarious". In other words, in the former case,  it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
         case. However, it all depends on the facts."



15. In this case the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  not
    even precariously, when her relationship with  the  sponsor  commenced.
    She clearly had no expectation that she would be entitled to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  There are no  children  involved.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in finding that this case  does  not  fall  within
    "the discretion set out in Chikwamba...". The grounds of appeal  assert
    that the Chikwamba principle essentially allows an individual to bypass
    the  immigration  rules'  requirement  to  submit   an   out-of-country
    application. The grounds do not provide any specific reasons as to  why
    in  this  case  the  judge  erred  in   finding   that   it   was   not
    disproportionate for her to make an out of country application. As  set
    out above it is for the appellant  to  demonstrate  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate for her to be removed. It was not incumbent  upon  the
    judge to give any further reasons.

16. There was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.







Signed        P M Ramshaw                        Date 16 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

