
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08689/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2019                           |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                 Dwayne [C]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A I Corban, Solicitor Advocate at Corban
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 20 September 2018, in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim in the context of deportation dated 10 August 2017 was dismissed.



 2. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica who  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in 2002.  He was  at  some  point  included  as  a
    dependent on his mother's application for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds, pursuant to which discretionary  leave  to  remain  was
    granted to 15 July 2013 and then to 26 September  2016.   On  17  March
    2016, the Appellant was  convicted  of  possession  of  a  firearm  and
    subsequently sentenced to 6  years  imprisonment.   The  Appellant  was
    notified of the intention to deport him  by  the  Respondent  and  made
    submissions in response, including  relying  on  a  genuine  subsisting
    parental relationship with his British and child born in 2009.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that although  it  was
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine   subsisting   parental
    relationship, it was not considered to be unduly harsh for the child to
    relocate to Jamaica with him or to remain in the United Kingdom without
    the Appellant, where he could continue living  with  his  mother.   The
    Appellant did not have a partner in the  United  Kingdom  and  did  not
    satisfy the exceptions to deportation on private life grounds either.

 4. Judge Buckwell dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  20
    September 2018 grounds.  In summary it was found  that  there  were  no
    very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  significant  public
    interest  in  deportation  in  this  case  and  that  the   Appellant's
    deportation would not be unduly harsh on the  Appellant's  son,  taking
    into account the strength of the public interest.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    ground that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53,  which  had
    been handed down since the decision  under  challenge.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted on this sole ground,  although  it  was  noted  that
    there was an issue as to whether any error would  be  material  on  the
    facts of this case.

 6. At the hearing, Mr Corban identified the error of law in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision as not having regard to all of the factors relevant
    to proportionality and failing in the first instance to make  a  lawful
    assessment and whether the  Appellant's  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh on his son in accordance with the Supreme Court's decision in KO.
     It was accepted that  in  light  of  the  length  of  the  Appellant's
    sentence of imprisonment, that he would need to  show  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in  deportation,  however
    the minimum starting point is the exceptions to deportation set out  in
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  section  117C  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was submitted that in the  absence
    of  any  balancing  exercise  including  consideration  of  the  public
    interest, by reference to  the  Appellant's  immigration  and  criminal
    history and that if one focuses only on the  interests  of  the  child,
    there can only  be  one  answer  in  this  case  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh on his son.

 7. As had been highlighted in the grant of permission  in  this  case  the
    real issue is whether any error of law in light of the decision  in  KO
    could be material and as such I asked Mr Corban to identify  what  were
    the very compelling circumstances relied upon by the Appellant in  this
    appeal.  He submitted that the Appellant had been  in  his  son's  life
    since he was born, had had a high level involvement in his life, living
    with him initially as part of the family and at the age of nine his son
    was now fully aware of  circumstances  and  deportation  would  have  a
    greater impact upon him compared to  a  younger  child.   It  was  also
    suggested that the Appellant's son was  at  a  critical  stage  of  his
    education and separation from his father would likely have  an  adverse
    impact on the same.  It was noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant's  son  to
    relocate to Jamaica in these circumstances.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble highlighted the high  threshold
    of establishing  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    exceptions to deportation which would be required for the Appellant  to
    be successful in his appeal.  It was accepted  that  there  were  clear
    errors in light of the decision in KO in paragraph 79, 83 and 84 of the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, however it  was  submitted  that  these
    were not material on the facts of the case.  There had  been  a  child-
    centred consideration in the beginning part  of  paragraph  79  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and there were no other factors  in
    relation to the child that  had  not  been  taken  into  account.   For
    example, there was no social work report, no medical  evidence  and  no
    other evidence to show that the adverse impact on the  child  would  be
    anything beyond what  would  normally  be  expected  in  a  deportation
    context.  There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  this
    appeal to establish that the effect on the  Appellant's  son  would  be
    unduly harsh the Appellant were  to  be  deported  to  Jamaica  and  no
    evidence which could  meet  the  higher  hurdle  of  establishing  very
    compelling circumstances against deportation.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    its assessment of whether the Appellant's deportation would  be  unduly
    harsh on his son, by remaining in the United Kingdom with  his  mother,
    as set out in paragraphs 79, 83 and 84 of the decision.  The assessment
    undertaken is not in accordance with the decision of the Supreme  Court
    in KO.  I would however note that this was through no  fault  of  Judge
    Buckwell in this case whose decision, at the date of promulgation,  was
    entirely in accordance with the authority in MA (Pakistan) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 which was at  that
    time binding upon him and only subsequently overturned by  the  Supreme
    Court in KO.

 2. The issue is however whether the error of law found was material to the
    outcome of the appeal in this case and whether in all the circumstances
    it is necessary to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and for it to be remade afresh.  In this case I decline  to  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal because on the particular facts
    of this appeal, the error is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

 3. In accordance with  paragraph  398(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    for a person who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
    least four years, the public interest requires deportation unless there
    are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  the  two  express
    exceptions to deportation.  On the facts of this  case,  there  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of any adverse  impact  on  the
    Appellant's child which could even meet the test of being unduly harsh,
    as set out by the Supreme Court in KO,  let  alone  any  factors  which
    could  even  arguably  meet  the  high  threshold  of  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

 4. The Appellant's son is a British Citizen who has lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since birth and he is now nine years  old.   As  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal he is settled in education in the  United  Kingdom,
    has established family life with his mother and father and even at  his
    young age has developed a social circle of friends.  It is in the  best
    interests of the child to remain in the United Kingdom  with  both  his
    mother and father.  Although the evidence of the Appellant and  of  his
    son's mother was clearly that the Appellant had a strong bond with  his
    son, had a significant role in his life and his deportation would  have
    an adverse impact on his son, the evidence did not go  beyond  this  to
    identify  any  particular  impact  which  would  go  beyond  the  usual
    consequences of deportation of a parent to another country or  to  show
    that this would be unduly harsh in this particular case.  For  example,
    there is no medical evidence of any particular  needs,  no  independent
    social work report and no specific factors  relied  upon  to  show  any
    unduly harsh impact over and above what  would  normally  be  expected.
    The suggestion by Mr Corban that the Appellant's  son,  in  the  latter
    stages of primary education is at a critical stage  of  that  education
    are simply unsustainable.  There is nothing critical at all about this,
    the Appellant is not studying towards any particular qualifications and
    is not even yet in secondary school.  As to the Appellant's son's  age,
    this cannot of itself, nor in combination with other factors, amount to
    a very compelling circumstances on the facts of this case.  Further, if
    reaching a particular page was generally accepted as a very  compelling
    circumstances, the rules and primary  legislation  would  clearly  have
    been drafted differently with exceptions relating expressly to the  age
    of a child.  On the  facts,  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    Appellant's child to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant
    and the exception is not therefore met.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal,  when  undertaking  the  balancing  exercise,
    albeit wrongly, to assess whether deportation would be unduly harsh  on
    the Appellant's child, took into account other matters in the round  in
    the Appellant's favour, including the contact which could realistically
    be maintained between the Appellant  and  his  son  from  Jamaica,  the
    Appellant's length of time in the United Kingdom having  arrived  as  a
    minor and the relationship with his  mother  who  is  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Taking all of these factors together, it is clear that
    they could not, on any legitimate to view, even cumulatively, establish
    very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  significant  public
    interest in deportation in this case where the Appellant was  sentenced
    to six years' imprisonment for possession of a firearm.  The  balancing
    exercise which was undertaken, albeit in the wrong context in  relation
    to the assessment of undue harshness would, in all  material  respects,
    be the same assessment which would now be required to determine whether
    there are very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest
    in deportation.  It is clear for the reasons given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and set out above, that this high threshold cannot be  met  by
    this Appellant on the basis of the evidence that was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  For these reasons it is not necessary to set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal because even applying  the  correct
    test set  out  in  KO,  the  Appellant's  appeal  would  inevitably  be
    dismissed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
                                                 Date     22nd February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

