
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 November 2017                      |On 01 December 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                   ms p s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, Counsel instructed by Goulds Green
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nepal, applied for entry clearance for  the
    purposes of settlement in the UK along with her parents and her younger
    brother on 12 August 2015.  Their applications were granted,  but  hers
    was refused by the Respondent on 11 September 2015. She  duly  appealed
    that decision to the First tier Tribunal, and her  appeal  came  before
    First tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence, sitting at Hatton Cross, on  28
    April 2017. That appeal was dismissed by his decision promulgated on 18
    May 2017.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was initially refused to her by a decision of First tier Tribunal
    Judge Boyes on 26 July 2017 but undaunted her application  was  renewed
    to the Upper Tribunal. It was granted by  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Reeds of 26 September 2017. So the matter comes before us  today.
    This is our joint decision.

 3. Before us today Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Respondent has  very  fairly
    accepted that  the  Judge's  decision  fails  to  provide  an  adequate
    analysis of either the relevant jurisprudence, or,  the  evidence  that
    was placed before him. It  is  accepted  that  his  decision  discloses
    material errors of law of such a nature that leave as the  only  course
    open to us a decision to remit this appeal for a fresh hearing with  no
    findings of fact preserved. We can only  express  our  profound  regret
    that such a course  is  necessary,  particularly  given  the  delay  in
    processing the appeal to date. In the circumstances we set out  briefly
    why it is accepted that we are constrained to take this course.

 4. Although the decision was promulgated on 18 May 2017 and the  Judge  on
    that date would have had available to him  the  guidance  to  be  found
    within the Court of Appeal decision Rai v Entry Clearance Officer  (New
    Delhi) [2017] EWCA Civ 320, no reference to  that  guidance  is  to  be
    found in the decision.  Undoubtedly that is one of the reasons for  the
    deficiencies with the approach that was taken by the Judge towards  the
    appeal, but of no less concern is the failure of the  Judge  to  engage
    with the wealth of relevant evidence that was before  him  upon  issues
    with which he had to engage in order to deal fairly with the appeal.

 5. A wealth of evidence was relied upon by the Appellant to establish both
    that she had an innocent explanation for the allegations of  dishonesty
    that had been made against her by the ECO, namely, that she had in  the
    past; submitted false documents in support of a Tier  4  Student  entry
    clearance application; misrepresented her marital status in the current
    application  when  describing  herself  as  single;  and,  untruthfully
    claimed not to have formed an independent family unit at  the  date  of
    the application.  Had the allegation(s) of the ECO been made out,  then
    they would have had to be  weighed  in  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise as adding to the public  interest  in  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, whether or not the Appellant had established  the  existence
    of "family life" with the  members  of  her  immediate  family  at  any
    relevant date.

 6. Taking those allegations in turn the Appellant had  accepted  that  she
    was married in September 2010, as she had disclosed in her 2010 Tier  4
    entry clearance application, but had explained in the  evidence  placed
    before the Judge that the marriage had lasted only a few months  before
    it had failed, and, that as a result she had returned to live since her
    separation from her husband in the same family home in  which  she  had
    grown up with her parents and her sibling. She had  continued  to  live
    with them thereafter (as indeed she  had  until  the  occasion  of  her
    marriage) until they had left Nepal for  the  UK.  In  support  of  her
    explanation she had produced documents issued by the relevant  Nepalese
    authorities that recorded both  the  separation,  and,  her  subsequent
    divorce.  No reference is made to these passages  of  evidence  in  the
    witness statements, or to the existence or content of these  documents,
    in the course of  the  Judge's  decision.  Taken  at  face  value  this
    evidence was a complete answer to the second and third  allegations  of
    dishonesty that she faced.

 7. The Appellant had also provided documentary evidence to corroborate her
    explanation that far from  dishonestly  providing  false  documents  in
    support of an application for entry clearance, she and her  family  had
    given genuine documents to the agents in Nepal that  she  had  engaged,
    with the help of her father, to help her  prepare  an  entry  clearance
    application as a Tier 4 Student. She and her father alleged  that  they
    had been the victims of a fraud by these agents.  In  support  of  that
    explanation, and counter-allegation, she had  produced  in  evidence  a
    decision of the Kathmandu District Court of 5 August 2012 which, whilst
    not on our reading a final decision in her favour  of  the  allegations
    that she and her father had made against the  individuals  running  the
    firm in question, certainly accepted that they had a case of  fraud  to
    answer. Mr Jarvis accepts before us that there was no  suggestion  made
    on behalf of the  ECO  before  the  Judge  that  the  decision  of  the
    Kathmandu District Court was anything other than authentic.  (It  would
    after all be an easy matter to check.) Again, we note with regret, that
    the Judge quite simply failed to engage with this explanation, and  the
    evidence relied upon to corroborate it.

 8. The position that the Judge was faced with in relation  to  the  family
    relationships, was the assertion that at the  date  she  submitted  her
    entry clearance application  the  Appellant  was  living  as  an  adult
    divorced child in the same  household,  with  her  younger  brother  (a
    child) and her parents. They were granted entry clearance and  she  was
    not.  On the basis of the evidence before the Judge she remained living
    in that same family home, supported by her parents, up to and including
    the date of the hearing of the appeal.  On the  face  of  the  evidence
    therefore she had at least an arguable case  that  notwithstanding  her
    marriage she had either never formed an  independent  family  unit,  or
    perhaps more realistically, that upon the  breakdown  of  her  marriage
    after such a short period of time, that she had returned to the  family
    home, and to the emotional  and  financial  embrace  of  her  immediate
    family, and there  resumed the relationships  and  life  that  she  had
    enjoyed up to the point at which she had married, and  which  had  been
    all too briefly interrupted. We are unable to identify anything in  the
    jurisprudence that would mean that  her  argument  that  "family  life"
    existed at the date her parents and younger sibling left Nepal for  the
    UK was bound to fail.  The guidance available within the  jurisprudence
    is quite clear; Article 8  cases  concerning  adult  children  are  not
    susceptible to "bright line" rules, and require a very careful analysis
    of the evidence. To employ the perhaps overused phrase,  their  outcome
    is entirely fact sensitive.

 9. It is conceded before us today  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  the
    evidence before him the analysis that  the  parties  were  entitled  to
    expect of him, and that the fact finding exercise that he was  required
    to undertake did not occur. In consequence it is conceded that we  have
    no other course than to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing, with no findings of fact preserved.

10. We note for completeness for those who may come after  us  to  consider
    this appeal, that it is also conceded now that  there  is  in  fact  no
    evidence to suggest that the Appellant did ever travel to the UK on the
    Tier 4 Student visa with  which  she  was  issued  in  2011.  Thus  her
    evidence that she chose not to do so when she realised that the college
    to which she had been directed by the agents engaged in Nepal to assist
    her, had ceased to trade. She  had  ostensibly  been  granted  a  place
    through the application that had been submitted on her  behalf  by  the
    agents in Nepal against whom she has made the  fraud  allegations.  Her
    case was that when she realised the true  position  she  chose  not  to
    travel to the UK.  Mr Jarvis accepts that that was the case.  It may of
    course be that those who may need  to  analyse  this  evidence  in  the
    future will need to bear in mind, and  consider  that  explanation  for
    what happened subsequent to the grant of her entry clearance as a  Tier
    4  Student  as  going  to,  rather  than  going  against,  her  general
    credibility, and therefore as corroborating rather than as  undermining
    the explanation she has offered for what has occurred in the past.

11. In the circumstances the decision discloses a  material  error  of  law
    that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision  must
    in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  We  have  in  these
    circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  or  whether  to  proceed  to
    remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where it would appear
    that the relevant evidence has not  properly  been  considered  by  the
    First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of  law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for her case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial
    fact finding exercise is such that having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  25
    September 2012. Having reached that conclusion, with the  agreement  of
    the parties we make the following directions;

     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo at  the  Hatton  Cross  hearing
        centre. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge  NMK  Lawrence.
        No findings of fact are preserved.

    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the sponsor as a witness,  and
        the time estimate is as a result, 2 hours.




Decision

12. The decision promulgated on 18 May 2017 did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 30 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes






