
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08461/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2018                   |On 11 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    CFNCK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Davey Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judge Casswell who, in a decision promulgated on 18 August
         2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.




Background


      2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon who arrived in  the  United
         Kingdom with a false passport in 2002. The appellant  was  arrested
         in November 2015 and served with a removal  notice.  On  5  January
         2016  the  respondent  sent  a  letter  requesting  proof  of   the
         appellants paternal relationship with a child in the United Kingdom
         and, on 9 January 2016, a letter was received from the  appellant's
         representatives setting out additional grounds. On 9 March 2016 the
         respondent refused the application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom  or  exceptional  grounds  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.
      3. The Judge records at [15] that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
         under the Immigration Rules. The Judge noted the appeal rested very
         largely on the relationship the appellant has with his son  J  born
         on 12 May 2014. J's mother [C] is a Portuguese national, as  is  J.
         The appellant and J's mother are not in a relationship.
      4. The Judge, at [16], finds the appellant  has  a  strong  and  close
         relationship with J and that family life is being exercised between
         them. The Judge considered section 55 and the best interests of the
         child. When considering the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
         decision the Judge finds at [18]:

             "18.     Under Razgar, I  then  have  to  go  on  to  consider
                  whether the family life would be interfered  with  if  the
                  Appellant were removed to Cameroon.  Initially,  it  would
                  appear that it would, but there is an absence of  evidence
                  to demonstrate that that situation  would  continue  given
                  the lack of information about [C]  plans  for  the  future
                  (and indeed her ability to remain in the UK). If she  does
                  return to Portugal, Mr Medley-Daly asks  me  to  find  the
                  Appellant could not go and visit his son there or live  in
                  that country. However, I have no  evidence  before  me  to
                  show that that is correct. Even if there were  substantial
                  interference with family life, which I do not find proved,
                  the decision to remove the Appellant is clearly lawful and
                  serves the legitimate aim of the protection of the  social
                  and economic interests of the UK through  the  maintenance
                  of  fair   and   effective   immigration   control.   When
                  considering whether the Respondent  has  shown  it  to  be
                  proportionate, I have to consider a number of matters. The
                  Appellant speaks English  and  has  not  been  an  obvious
                  burden on public funds, but he has been working  illegally
                  in the UK for 15 years, has lived here illegally  all  the
                  time, and only sought to regularise his status once he had
                  been apprehended. He has an HIV condition,  but  there  is
                  treatment available in Cameroon for  this,  and  his  only
                  significant relationship in the UK is with his son J. J is
                  a Portuguese national who on the evidence before me has no
                  right to remain in the UK on a long-term basis and who may
                  not remain here."

      5. The Judge found any interference proportionate [19].
      6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal on 1  February  2018.  The
         operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

             "2.  The grounds alleged that the Judge erred  in  failing  to
                  consider that the best interest  of  the  child  generally
                  involved having a  relationship  with  both  parents.  She
                  further erred in suggesting that there was an  absence  of
                  clear evidence that the  Appellant's  removal  would  have
                  major consequences for his son. Given that his son resides
                  in the UK, the  suggestion  that  the  relationship  could
                  continue in Portugal was unlawful. She had  further  erred
                  in failing to consider that the Appellant's son was an EEA
                  citizen.


             3.   I have  carefully  considered  the  decision.  While  the
                  evidence before the Judge regarding the Appellant's  son's
                  circumstances was not completely clear,  nevertheless  she
                  found that there was family life between the Appellant and
                  his son. The evidence before her was  that  the  Appellant
                  saw his son on a daily basis, and she found that there was
                  a "strong and  close  relationship".  Given  this,  it  is
                  arguable that the Judge has failed  to  properly  consider
                  the best interests of the Appellant's son."


Error of law


      7. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that it is relevant  to
         the proportionality assessment that the appellant was found to have
         a strong relationship with his son J. It is argued the child's best
         interests are to maintain a relationship with both parents and that
         had the Judge given  proper  weight  to  this  aspect  a  different
         decision may have been warranted. It was argued there  was  nothing
         that could be done to compel  J  to  leave  the  territory  of  the
         European Union and that the relationship will be severed if limited
         to indirect contact. It was argued  it  was  in  the  child's  best
         interests for physical  contact  to  be  maintained.  It  was  also
         asserted the Judge failed to consider the relevance of  the  rights
         of an EEA national and the fact the appellant provides  care  which
         allows the child's mother to work. It was accepted there was little
         evidence to assist the Judge as J's mother would  not  support  the
         appellant as she did not 'turn up' or provide evidence or  want  to
         assist the appellant.
      8. It was further  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  in
         relation to the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  if  the
         appellant is removed J's mother will be unable to work and have  to
         claim large benefits which will have a negative economic effect. It
         was argued the balancing exercise had not  been  conducted  by  the
         Judge. It was also submitted the Judge speculated regarding  J  and
         it could not be said that the correct balance had been carried out,
         making the decision arguably unsafe.
      9. It is also submitted that insufficient weight had been given to the
         relationship between the appellant and J.  It was argued the  Judge
         erred in implying that family life  could  continue  elsewhere  and
         that it was wrong for the Judge to say that J may not remain in the
         United Kingdom as there was no evidence to this effect  and  as  an
         EEA citizen J is able to exercise a right of free movement. It  was
         submitted on the appellant's behalf that  the  relationship  should
         not be severed by reference to section 117B(6). It is  accepted  on
         the appellant's behalf that J is not a 'qualifying child',  but  it
         was argued it would not be in the  public  interest  to  break  the
         relationship between J and his father  and  that  the  same  weight
         should be given to this issue is if J is a 'qualifying child'.
     10. On behalf of the respondent it was argued the Judge  who  made  the
         decision is one of the  most  sensitive  judges  on  the  Bench  in
         relation to family matters and that the Judge made the best of  the
         limited evidence made available to her. There was no evidence  from
         J's mother and it is accepted that as an EU citizen  single  mother
         she will be able to go where needed.  It  was  submitted  that  the
         economic impact on the United Kingdom was part of the equation.  It
         was not disputed that J's mother could remain and work  in  the  UK
         and it is not a case of forcing her to  leave  the  UK.  The  Judge
         looked at all the relevant issues but did not make hard findings on
         what may happen sufficient to amount to speculation. It was  argued
         that there was nothing  arguably  wrong  with  the  decision  under
         challenge.
     11. In his reply Mr Medley-Daley indicated that if the mother relied on
         state benefits this would not assist the economic  welfare  of  the
         United Kingdom and it is not in the State's interests  for  her  to
         have to rely on public funds which the  respondent  does  not  want
         people to do.  It was argued the state benefit point was raised but
         not considered in the decision by the Judge.



Discussion



     12. This is a  family  splitting  case  in  which  the  decision  under
         challenge seeks to remove the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom.
         His son J and former partner will remain as J's mother  is  an  EEA
         national exercising treaty rights in the UK.
     13.  In  relation  to  submissions  made  on  the  appellant's   behalf
         suggesting that a child who is not a 'qualifying child'  should  be
         treated in the same way as a 'qualifying child' pursuant to section
         117B(6) of the 2002 Act, as it suits the appellant's case,  has  no
         arguable merit. The purpose of defining a child  as  a  'qualifying
         child' is in recognition of the period of time the child  has  been
         in the United Kingdom and whether it be reasonable for  that  child
         to leave the United Kingdom disturbing ties  and  roots  they  have
         acquired  during  the  period  required  for  them  to   become   a
         'qualifying child'. J is not  a  qualifying  child  as  defined  in
         section 117.
     14. The second point is the submission made on the  appellant's  behalf
         that the public interest in the economic well-being of  the  United
         Kingdom is not served by the appellant's removal, if this meant J's
         mother may become dependent upon greater benefits as a result of  a
         change to her working arrangements,  has  no  arguable  merit.  The
         Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  forms  part  of  the
         Government of the  United  Kingdom  which  chooses  to  remove  the
         appellant for the reasons set out in the refusal notice.  The  fact
         there may be a consequence in a  member  of  the  remaining  family
         having to claim state benefits is not arguably unrealistic, but the
         State has a margin of appreciation in relation to such matters  and
         it is not made out it is arguably irrational or unlawful  for  such
         to  be  exercised  in  this  way,  so  as  to  make  the   decision
         disproportionate if there is a greater demand on the  public  purse
         as a result of  the  increase  benefits.  The  appellant  fails  to
         establish, even if this issue was relevant on the facts, that there
         would be a net cost to the United Kingdom if the appellant  himself
         is removed in light of the costs incurred in providing services  to
         an individual who is not one whose taxes paid exceed  the  notional
         cost of providing services to them as  British  citizens  or  those
         entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.
     15. The third aspect is that it has not been  established,  and  indeed
         was conceded by the appellant's representative, that no  breach  of
         rights under the Citizenship Directive was pleaded before the Judge
         or any EU law issue raised in the manner which  it  is  now  relied
         upon in support of the claim the Judge erred in law. This is not an
         obvious point and it is not made out the Judge was expected  to  do
         more than she did in relation to this aspect. It is not  acceptable
         for a representative to present a case on one basis and  then  seek
         to assert arguable legal error on a completely different  basis  in
         relation to which the Judge's findings or opinion was not sought.
     16. In relation to the evidence before the Judge, it is clear the Judge
         considered  the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
         scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in support of the  findings
         made. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter  for  the
         Judge. There is no credible  challenge  to  the  rejection  of  the
         appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules. The respondent  does
         not challenge the finding at [16] that the appellant has  a  strong
         and close relationship with J and the Judge records  at  [17]  that
         she was asked to consider section 55 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2009
         which she did, taking into account as a primary  consideration  the
         best interests of both J and a younger child B  although  recording
         in the same paragraph, "However,  there  is  an  absence  of  clear
         evidence to indicate that removal of the Appellant from the life of
         J (or B) would have major consequences for him  or  them.  If  that
         were the case, I would expect [Ms C] to say  so,  and  to  say  she
         intends to stay in the UK to facilitate the relationship.  Be  that
         as it may, as already  indicated,  I  find  there  is  family  life
         between the Appellant and J on the evidence  before  me.  I  cannot
         find that there is family life between  him  and  B,  however,  the
         evidence not being strong enough to demonstrate that". The  grounds
         seeking to argue that the Judge should have given greater weight to
         the best interests assessment appear to completely ignore the  fact
         that the Judge did undertake an appropriate assessment but noted  a
         lack of evidence to support the  appellant's  contention  of  major
         consequences for the children if the appellant was removed. It  was
         not made out this is a case in which the  Judge  should  have  done
         more than she did. It is not one of  those  rare  cases  where  the
         Judge was required to undertake an investigative role or  adjourned
         for further evidence when clear directions had been given  for  the
         parties to provide all the evidence they were seeking to rely upon.
         The grounds claim that J's mother [Ms C] was  unwilling  to  assist
         the appellant and become involved in the proceedings  but  that  is
         not the fault of the Judge. There was no application for a  witness
         summons to compel her attendance prior to  the  hearing  which  the
         Procedure Rules provide for. The Judge made  the  decision  on  the
         basis of the evidence before her and no  arguable  legal  error  is
         made out in her having done so.
     17. The Judge adopts a structured approach to assessing the  merits  of
         the appeal outside the Immigration Rules and in  relation  to  this
         aspect sets out relevant findings of fact at [18] - set out  above.
         Again, the Judge notes that the evidence did  initially  support  a
         finding there will be interference with the family  life  found  if
         the appellant was removed to Cameroon but there was an  absence  of
         evidence to demonstrate what the situation would  actually  be,  in
         reality. J and his mother are Portuguese nationals who  may  return
         to their home State or exercise a right of free movement elsewhere.
         The appellant did not adduce  sufficient  evidence  to  enable  the
         Judge to make a firm finding on this point. The submission  by  the
         appellant's representative to the Judge that she  should  find  the
         appellant could not go and visit his son in  Portugal  or  live  in
         that country was  rightly  rejected  on  the  basis  there  was  no
         evidence provided to show that this was correct. Having weighed  up
         the competing interests the Judge concludes on  the  basis  of  the
         available  evidence  that  removing  the   appellant   serves   the
         legitimate aim of protection of social and  economic  interests  of
         the UK and  the  maintenance  of  fair  and  effective  immigration
         control. The Judge makes a number  of  points  in  the  appellant's
         favour but notes that during the 15 years he has been in the United
         Kingdom  he  has  remained  here  unlawfully  and  only  sought  to
         regularise his status once he had been  apprehended.  Treatment  is
         available for the appellant in Cameroon and, as  the  Judge  notes,
         the appellant's only significant relationship is with J.  There  is
         nothing arguably wrong in the comment by  the  Judge  that  on  the
         evidence before her J has no right to remain in the UK on  a  long-
         term basis and may not remain here. This  is  not  speculation  but
         merely a comment on the nature of the evidence, or  lack  of,  made
         available. J may be an EU citizen, but he is a Portuguese national.
         It is not known what the effect of Brexit will be in  terms  of  EU
         nationals exercising treaty rights in the UK and it is not known on
         what basis J would seek to remain, if he wanted to do so. It is not
         unlawful speculation  but  a  reflection  of  the  reality  of  the
         situation based upon the evidence provided.
     18. Whilst the appellant wishes to remain in the United Kingdom he  has
         failed to establish  any  arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
         decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  warranting  the  Upper  Tribunal
         interfering any further in this decision.


Decision

     19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.


     20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 December 2018
