
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/08077/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Cardiff        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 August 2019                             |On 24 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                           Sunday christopher ozor
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Shepard, instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born in 1974.  He came  to  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa in January 2005, or possibly  very  late
    in 2004.  He has been in the United Kingdom ever since,  for  the  most
    part without leave.  There was a period in which he was  granted  leave
    between October 2016 and May 2017.  He made a further  application  for
    leave to remain, apparently on Article 8 grounds inside or outside  the
    Rules.  That application was refused on 20 March  2018  and  carried  a
    right of appeal.


 2. There is no basis, so far as I understand it, and so far as Mr  Shepard
    has put before me, for saying that  the  appellant  can  succeed  under
    Rules.  He claims two relationships which he says ought to  enable  him
    to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  first  relationship  is  the
    relationship  with  his  partner,  [                     ],  a  British
    citizen.  Before Judge Obhi in February 2019 there were  two  items  of
    evidence  about  that  relationship.   The  appellant  said  that   the
    relationship was an active one and that the appellant and  his  partner
    lived together in his one bedroom flat.  His solicitors, who have acted
    on his behalf throughout, asserted that the  appellant  was  not  in  a
    relationship and did not live with anybody  else  in  his  one  bedroom
    flat.  That is, I think, the sum  total  of  the  evidence  about  that
    relationship.  Judge Obhi thought that there was no reason to make  any
    findings in relation to Article 8 in favour of  the  appellant  on  the
    basis of that relationship.


 3. The second claimed relationship is a relationship with  a  child.   The
    assertion is that the appellant and the mother of the child were  in  a
    relationship, and that the child is the product of  that  relationship.
    I think it is fair to say that the tribunal has never  been  given  any
    evidence at all about the identity of either the mother  or  the  child
    and there is no evidence  of  any  existing  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the mother or the appellant  and  the  child.   The  only
    further information is that at the time of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Obhi the position was said to be that the mother refuses to  allow  the
    appellant any contact with the child.


 4. I have described the child as said to be the appellant's child.  It  is
    also  said  that  there  has  been  DNA   evidence   establishing   the
    relationship, but other than a statement by the  solicitors  (the  same
    solicitors that produced  the  evidence  denying  the  appellant's  own
    account of his current relationship) in a  letter  that  the  DNA  test
    finds the appellant to be the father of the child there is nothing: the
    evidence has not been produced to the tribunal.  On that basis  it  was
    not surprising perhaps that Judge Obhi decided to dismiss the appeal.


 5. The application for  permission  to  appeal  is  supported  by  grounds
    asserting that Judge Obhi failed to take into account a request for  an
    adjournment.  The position was that when Judge Obhi came to  hear  this
    appeal there was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  There
    had  been  to  the  judge's  knowledge  two   previous   requests   for
    adjournments: I will read out what the judge said about the  procedural
    history of the case.  The judge writes in paragraph 1 of  the  decision
    as follows:


         "1.  ... The application was refused on the  20  March  2018.   The
             appellant appeals against that decision by  Notice  or  Appeal
             lodged with the Tribunal on the 3 April 2018.  The appeal  was
             listed for a hearing on the  5  September  2019.   On  the  31
             August 2018 his  solicitors,  Sabz  solicitors  wrote  to  the
             tribunal seeking an adjournment of the hearing on the  grounds
             that the appellant was seeking to  establish  that  he  had  a
             private and family life with his daughter [PJ] who was born on
             the 16 July 2005 and in respect of  whom  there  were  pending
             proceedings in the Wolverhampton Family Court.  He provided  a
             copy of an order dated the 25 April 2018 [that is to say many,
             many months before the application for the adjournment].  That
             order provided for DNA testing to be  undertaken  through  the
             offices of  CAFCASS  (Children  and  Families  Court  Advisory
             Service).  The letter advised  that  the  appellant  had  been
             proved to be the child's father and that the court  would  now
             consider further steps towards direct contact.  The  case  was
             adjourned to the 31 October 2018 with  a  direction  that  the
             appellant's solicitors  must  provide  the  Tribunal  with  an
             update in respect of the  court  proceedings  two  clear  days
             before the adjourned hearing.  It was noted at the CMR on  the
             31 October 2018 that no update had been provided  as  directed
             and therefore the matter was set down for a hearing on  the  1
             February [2019].


         2.   On  the  25  January  2019  the  solicitors  representing  the
             appellant wrote to the Tribunal in almost identical terms,  as
             the letter provided before  the  previous  hearing  on  the  5
             September 2018 in which they wanted the case to  be  adjourned
             "to a date in the New Year" as this would allow the  appellant
             to represent himself and his circumstances more accurately.


         3.   The application of the 25 January 2019 was considered  by  the
             Tribunal caseworker who did not  accede  to  the  request  and
             adjourned it to the hearing on the 1 February  2019,  so  that
             proper consideration could be given at that hearing."


 6. The judge goes on  to  say  that  he  considered  the  application  for
    adjournment and refused it on the basis that no further progress  could
    be made without proper information being given to the tribunal.  As far
    as I understand it no complaint is made about the judge's  approach  to
    that  application  for  adjournment.   What  is  said  instead  by  the
    solicitors is that a further application was made for  an  adjournment.
    That application was the subject of a letter of  31  January  2019,  in
    other words the day  before  the  date  fixed  for  the  hearing.   The
    application for permission to appeal includes, what purports to  be,  a
    copy sent by fax to the tribunal.  On examination  however  it  appears
    that the person receiving the fax was indeed the solicitors.  It may be
    that what they have sent was a copy of  a  letter  faxed  to  them  for
    onward transmission, but in any event, there  is  no  evidence  of  its
    transmission by the process claimed by the solicitors.


 7. There is, however, a copy on file which  is  date  stamped  1  February
    2019.  Evidently it arrived somewhere in the Birmingham Hearing Centre,
    it having been addressed rather vaguely, after hours on 31 January  and
    was then received.  It appears quite evident that it was not before the
    judge when he made his decision.  I will read the letter in full:


         "Dear Sirs,


         Subject: Request for Adjournment


         Appellant:    Mr Sunday Christopher Ozor
              DOB: 29.10.1974
              Nigeria

         We continue to represent the above named in his immigration matter.

         Our client's appeal matter is scheduled to take place on Friday 1st
         February 2019 at IAC Birmingham.

         We write to explain that the Appellant is currently  going  through
         proceedings at the Family Court at Wolverhampton under Case Number:
         [                ] and a hearing has been  set  for  15th  February
         2019.

         Please find attached a letter from a senior solicitor of  our  firm
         Mr Carl Davies who is currently dealing with the appellant's family
         matter.  Unfortunately we cannot disclose any  further  information
         with regards to the family matter due to it being in relation to  a
         minor child.  Our Family law department is currently in the process
         of making an application to the family court for disclosure.

         We further request that under the current circumstances, it is  not
         appropriate for the Appellant  to  continue  with  his  Immigration
         Appeal which is set to take place on 01  February  2019.   This  is
         because the outcome of his family  matter  is  likely  to  have  an
         effect on his immigration appeal, and to reach an accurate  outcome
         relating to the Appellant's circumstances, it  would  be  ideal  to
         wait for the outcome of his family matter.

         In the event that the court wishes to  go  ahead  with  the  appeal
         matter, we wish  to  withdraw  as  acting  for  the  client  as  we
         currently do not have instructions from our client to proceed  with
         this matter at this moment in time.

         In the light of the above it  is  requested  that  the  Appellant's
         appeal hearing is adjourned to a date after February 2019  allowing
         him time to complete  his  family  matter.   This  will  allow  the
         Appellant  to  represent  himself  and   his   circumstances   more
         accurately and will save time and money to all parties involved.

         We confirm that our request does not prejudice  the  Respondent  in
         any way.

         Should you have any questions please contact our office."


 8. Despite the assertion at the end of that letter there is  no  evidence,
    so far as I am aware, that this application had been mentioned  to  the
    respondent at any time.  What is said is that that application was made
    in time and should have been considered by the judge.  So  far  as  the
    first of those assertions is concerned I am  very  far  from  satisfied
    that it was made in time.  It was obviously made on the day before  the
    hearing by fax and was  received  on  1  February;  but  it  is  wholly
    unreasonable to expect a busy hearing centre and a judge to  know  that
    vaguely addressed material is present when it has been put  in  at  the
    last minute.  However, even if it had been received in time,  there  is
    nothing in it which in my judgement could have persuaded the  judge  to
    reach a different view from the view he did reach.


 9. First, it is a letter which is wholly equivocal.  Indeed looking at the
    balance of assertions in it, the main assertion appears to amount to  a
    withdrawal of the appellant's case.  "It is  not  appropriate  for  the
    appellant to continue with his immigration appeal  ...We  do  not  have
    instructions from our client to proceed with  this  matter".   It  then
    goes on to ask for an adjournment, but it does so on a  basis  that  no
    information is to be provided to support it other  than  the  assertion
    that there is a hearing on 15 February 2019.  There  is  no  Notice  of
    Hearing attached to the letter.  There is  no  indication  of  why  the
    hearing was not mentioned in the earlier adjournment application of  24
    January.  There is no indication of what the hearing is  to  be  about.
    There is no indication of any progress that that might be made  at  it,
    which might mean that, as the letter suggests, the family  matter  will
    have been completed by the end of February 2019.  It seems to  me  that
    the solicitors left it until the  last  possible  minute  to  make  the
    adjournment  application  in  these  terms,  because   it   is   almost
    inconceivable that the first notice  of  an  important  hearing  on  15
    February 2019 was given as late as 31 January 2019.  So, even  if  this
    application had been before the judge I cannot see that it  would  have
    added at all to the case for an adjournment.  In  those  circumstances,
    it appears to me that any error by the judge in  not  considering  this
    further adjournment request was wholly immaterial to the  decision  the
    judge made on whether the appeal should have been adjourned.


10. No issues are raised as to the  substantive  matters  which  the  judge
    considered. I therefore dismiss this appeal.


11. The position is of course that if there is a genuine  relationship  the
    appellant is at liberty to put the facts before the Secretary of State.
     It is no use doing that on the hypothetical and speculative basis upon
    which it has been done so far.  I am told that even now,  months  after
    the hearing of 15 February, there is no evidence  of  any  relationship
    between the appellant and his child  that  would  be  affected  by  his
    removal to Nigeria: but that no doubt is a matter to be  considered  if
    at all  elsewhere.   For  the  reasons  I  have  given  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.













                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 19 September 2019





