
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08934/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|Judgment given orally                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE GOSS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

                                    R Y A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant who is a citizen of Ghana arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in 1982 then aged 22 and was admitted as a  visitor.   He  subsequently
    secured indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of  a  person  present
    and settled in the United Kingdom.  That relationship did not  continue
    and he now  has  six  British  citizen  children  with  three  separate
    partners.  In February 2014, having changed his plead to one of  guilty
    at the last moment, he was convicted before the Maidstone  Crown  Court
    of an offence of causing death by dangerous driving and  was  sentenced
    to four years and four months' imprisonment.  As a consequence, he is a
    foreign criminal in respect of whom Section 32 of the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 requires the Secretary of State to make a deportation order unless
    one of the statutory exceptions applies.  As he had been  sentenced  to
    more than four years' imprisonment then on the facts of  this  case  he
    can avoid deportation only  if  he  establishes  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in exceptions 1
    and 2 of Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  To a significant extent although not exclusively  the  appellant
    relied upon his relationship with his children, three of whom are under
    the age of 18 and each of whom is living with their respective mothers.



2.   By a lengthy judgment running to 120 paragraphs, a judgment  which  has
    been written with evident care, the judge dismissed the appeal  because
    having directed himself correctly and comprehensively in law and having
    carried out what we regard  to  be  a  meticulous  examination  of  the
    evidence he found absent the very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those required to qualify  for  those  exceptions.   In  reaching
    those conclusions the judge navigated a course through the  Immigration
    Rules the statutory framework of Sections 32 and 33 of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 as well as Section 117A to D of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as well as going on to strike a balance outside the
    Rules between the competing interests in play of the public interest in
    the deportation of a foreign criminal  and  the  appellant's  right  to
    respect for his private and family life informed of course by what  was
    in the  best  interests  of  the  children  concerned,  but  the  judge
    concluded that the public interest arguments prevailed in each of those
    assessments.

3.   There are two grounds of appeal developed  by  Mr  Halim  in  his  oral
    submissions this morning.  The first ground complains  that  the  judge
    fell into legal error in that he determined the appeal by reference  to
    the Immigration Rules despite having been referred to the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60.  This is said in the grounds to  be  because
    the judge said at paragraph 115 of his judgment

         "Taking into account all of the evidence I  therefore  dismiss  the
         appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 117C".

     The reference to Article  117C  obviously  is  a  simple  typographical
    error, it being clear from the context that the judge was referring  to
    Section 117C of the 2002 Act and it is not  suggested  otherwise.   The
    written grounds drafted by Mr Halim assert that the  Supreme  Court  in
    Hesham Ali made clear that "the Rules are not law and therefore do  not
    govern the determination of appeals" but it is said by  Mr  Halim  that
    this is precisely what the judge has done.  Put another  way  Mr  Halim
    suggests  or  submits  that  the  judge  has  effectively  reached  his
    conclusion by  completing  his  assessment  under  the  Rules  and  the
    statutory framework and therefore  has  embarked  upon  his  assessment
    outside the Rules with his hands tied to a decision that he has already
    made.  Mr Halim complained also that what was lacking was a balance  on
    the part of the judge outside the Rules in that although he gave weight
    against the appellant to the matters raised in the statutory framework,
    when he looked at the matters that spoke in favour of the appellant  he
    simply took due regard of it.

4.   Mr Jarvis in response points to the guidance of the Court of Appeal  in
    NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA
    Civ 239 and points in particular at paragraph 14 of the judgment in the
    Court of Appeal where it was pointed out that  Sections  117A  to  117D
    taken together are intended to provide for a structured approach to the
    application of Article 8 which produces in all  cases  a  final  result
    which is compatible with Article 8.  In particular if  working  through
    this structured approach, one  gets  to  Section  117C(6),  the  proper
    application of that provision produces a final result  compatible  with
    Article 8 in all cases to which it applies.  Mr Jarvis also points  out
    in response to a matter which in fairness to Mr Halim he did  not  seek
    to develop in his oral submissions that of course the Supreme Court  in
    Hesham Ali was not concerned at all with Section 117A to D, that  being
    a statutory provision introduced by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  by  a
    Commencement Order given effect after the date of  the  decisions  with
    which the Supreme Court were concerned.

5.   In this judgment the judge has carefully identified all of the  matters
    that were capable of speaking in favour of the  appellant  as  well  as
    those that spoke in favour  of  the  public  interest  arguments.   The
    determination of the judge must be read as a whole and when it  is,  it
    is in our judgment transparently clear that the judge did not make  the
    errors that Mr Halim  has  alleged.   The  judge  has  worked  his  way
    through, progressively and in  a  structured  manner,  the  Immigration
    Rules, the statutory  framework  applicable  and  has  then  considered
    Article 8 outside the Rules making plain at each stage  precisely  what
    he found to be the position or the outcome.  That was  a  rational  and
    correct approach because of course as Mr Halim accepts  the  assessment
    outside the Rules must also of course be informed by the conclusion  of
    the judge as to the extent which, if at all, the applicant has met  the
    requirements of the statutory framework which he has just navigated his
    way through.  In our judgment the  approach  of  the  judge  cannot  be
    faulted and so the first ground is not made out.

6.   The second ground of challenge complains that  the  approach  taken  by
    the judge in arriving at his conclusion that the  appellant  would  not
    face very significant obstacles to integration on return to  Ghana  was
    legally flawed.  This is because in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the Court of Appeal made  clear
    that what is required is a broad evaluative judgment.  It said that the
    judge failed to take that approach.  The grounds  point  out  that  the
    applicant who is now 57 arrived in the United Kingdom in 1982 then aged
    22 years of age and has now lived in the United  Kingdom  awfully  with
    indefinite leave for 35 years and he last visited Ghana as long ago  as
    1999 and given the facts considered as a whole it is submitted that the
    findings of the judge in this respect were irrational  or  inadequately
    reasoned.  We disagree.  When the judgment is read as  a  whole  it  is
    readily apparent that the findings made by the judge are not irrational
    but are simply unassailable.  He heard the evidence, he has had careful
    regard to everything to which he has  been  referred,  he  has  plainly
    carried out a structured balancing act and  has  reached  a  conclusion
    which was plainly open to him.  It is plain that  the  judge  has  done
    precisely what it is complained he did not which  is  to  carry  out  a
    broad evaluative judgment and that is precisely in fact what he said he
    was doing having directed himself specifically in terms of the guidance
    in Kamara at paragraph 27 of his judgment.  For these  reasons  we  are
    entirely satisfied that the judge made no  error  of  law  material  or
    otherwise and indeed on the facts it is hard to see what other  outcome
    was rationally open to the judge other than to dismiss the  appeal  and
    so for those reasons the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  and
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maka is to stand.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 20 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
