
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/08221/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|On 20 July 2020                    |
|Rules 2008                         |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                       (Anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

      1. The appellant appeals with permission  from  the  decision  of  the
         First  tier  (Judge  Malik)  dismissing  her  appeal  against   the
         respondent's decision to refuse her leave to remain on the basis of
         her marriage under R-LTRP1.1  (c )(ii) and on human rights grounds.



      2. FtTJ Malik made an anonymity direction in her decision  promulgated
         on the 20 October 2019. It is unclear to me the  basis  upon  which
         the order was made but in the light of this appeal being considered
         on the papers and in the absence  of  any  further  submissions  on
         this, I shall continue the direction made by Judge Malik.

      3. Permission was granted by the FtT (Judge  Ford)  on  the  30  March
         2020. The FtTJ considered that it was arguable that the outcome  of
         the appellant's appeal turned  on  the  outcome  of  her  husband's
         appeal which was allowed on 15 November 2019.

      4. In the light of the present need to take  precautions  against  the
         spread of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the
         Procedure Rules[1], directions were sent out to the  parties   that
         the Upper Tribunal's  provisional   view   was  that  it  would  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      5. That decision also set out directions. It was sent out the  parties
         by way of email.  In compliance with those directions,  submissions
         were provided by the respondent dated 17 June 2020 which  indicated
         that she accepted that the decision of the FtTJ contained  material
         errors of law and therefore did  not  oppose  the  application  for
         permission to appeal and invited the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
         the appeal by setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         (Judge Malik)  and by allowing the appeal outright. This was on the
         basis that the appellant's husband's  appeal  was  allowed  by  the
         Upper Tribunal but that this appeal and her husband's appeal  could
         not be linked at the time of the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal
         ( see decision of UTJ Finch promulgated on the 15 November 2019  at
         paragraph 5).

      6. It is further recorded in the written submissions on behalf of  the
         Secretary of State that in the light of the concessions made at the
         appellant's  husband's  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,   the
         respondent invited the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision  of
         Judge Malik and to allow the appellant's  appeal  with  no  further
         oral hearing.

      7. There has been no further correspondence  from  the  appellant  and
         there has been no compliance with the directions sent on behalf  of
         the Upper Tribunal on the 22 May 2020 to the  address  notified  to
         the Tribunal for the appeal.

      8. Having had full regard to the Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency
         arrangements in the First -Tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal,  the
         Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020 and all documents submitted by
         the parties,  including  the  representations  made  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal for the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  the
         provision of the decision of UTJ Finch by  the  appellant,  I  have
         reached the decision  this appeal should be made without a hearing.



      9. In the preceding paragraphs I have set out the submissions advanced
         on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in  the  original  application  for
         permission to appeal. No issues have been raised other  than  those
         addressed in the written submissions.  In my judgment  and  in  the
         light of the issues set out in the respondent's written submissions
         which have been resolved in favour of the  appellant  there  is  no
         complexity which necessitates an oral hearing  to  ensure  fairness
         and that the decision is one which can properly and fairly be  made
         on the papers taking into account the overriding objective  as  set
         out in the Tribunal Procedure Rules which  includes  the  issue  of
         delay.

     10. The application made by the appellant was for leave  to  remain  as
         the spouse of a settled person. At the hearing before FtTJ Malik an
         application had been made for an adjournment of her appeal  because
         her spouse had a hearing before the Tribunal.  In  the  application
         drafted by counsel dated 1/11/2019 at paragraph 7, it set out  that
         it had been submitted on behalf of the appellant that she would  be
         less  likely  to  succeed  in  her  own  right  and  therefore   an
         adjournment should have been granted. At paragraph 8  of  the  same
         document, counsel set out  that  the  appellant's  application  had
         always been entirely dependent/parasitic to her husband's appeal as
         his dependent/spouse of a person seeking ILR and that if her spouse
         succeeded, that the appellant's appeal would be more likely to "see
         the same fate". Thus, to deal with  the  appeal  separately,  might
         lead to a risk of contrasting decisions.

     11. As set out in the grounds of appeal  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant, the appellant's application for leave was  made  on  the
         basis that her husband had applied for ILR as a settled  person  on
         the basis of his  long  residence  and  that  the  outcome  of  his
         application and subsequent appeal for the Upper Tribunal was likely
         to dictate the outcome of the appellant's own application.  It  was
         further  submitted  as  a  result  of  failing   to   adjourn   the
         application, the judge failed to consider the effect  of  requiring
         the appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  where  the  appellant's
         husband cannot leave without having the effect  of  abandoning  his
         appeal.

     12. Since the decision of FtTJ Malik and the application for permission
         to appeal, there has been a decision made by the Upper Tribunal  on
         the appeal of the appellant's spouse. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch in
         a decision promulgated on 15 November 2019 set aside  the  decision
         of Upper Tribunal Judge Martin and remade the appeal in  favour  of
         her spouse allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds.

     13. In a reply from the respondent dated 17 June 2020, it has now  been
         conceded by the respondent that the decision of the  FtTJ  involved
         the making of a material error of law and should be set aside.  The
         reply noted that Judge Finch was not able to link the appeal before
         her and the present appeal for the reasons set out at paragraphs  4
         and 5 of her decision.

     14. Having considered the papers and  in the light of the  decision  of
         the Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal of the  appellant's  spouse,
         and considering the  submissions  made  previously  by  counsel  on
         behalf of the appellant, and the submissions made on behalf of  the
         respondent in which it is conceded that the decision of Judge Malik
         involve the making of a material error of law, I am satisfied  that
         the decision should be set aside. It had been  procedurally  unfair
         and irregular to not accede to the adjournment request in order  to
         await the outcome of the appellant's husband's appeal in the  light
         of his appeal which was against the refusal of his application  for
         indefinite leave to remain. There would have been a short period of
         delay in the light of the hearing taking place in November 2019 and
         thus the proper approach would have been to adjourn the hearing  to
         await the  outcome  given  the  relevance  for  this  appellant.  I
         therefore set aside the decision of the FtTJ.

     15. As to the remaking of the  appeal  in  the  light  of  the  present
         evidence that  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's  spouse  has  been
         resolved in his favour having been allowed on  article  8  grounds,
         the outcome of the present appeal should be an order  allowing  the
         appeal  on  article  8  grounds  as  conceded  on  behalf  of   the
         respondent.

Decision:

     16. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law and  is  set  aside,  and  the
         decision is remade as follows - the appeal is allowed on article  8
         grounds.


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds      Dated:  6 July 2020

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.



           ______________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).


