
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/08884/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2017                           |On 11 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     aK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 5 October  2017ofy  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Owens which refused the human rights claim  of  the
    appellant brought in the context of a decision to deport him made on 14
    September 2016.
 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.  The
    order is made to prevent serious harm arising to the minors involved in
    this appeal.

 3. The background to this matter is  the  respondent's  records  show  the
    appellant came to the UK from Pakistan with his mother in 1975 when  he
    was 11 years old.  Existing records  held  by  the  respondent  do  not
    confirm when he was granted with indefinite leave to remain (ILR) but a
    "No Time Limit" stamp  was  placed  in  his  Pakistani  passport  on  1
    December 1994.  The  appellant  remained  in  the  UK  thereafter.  The
    appellant married a British  national  and  had  one  child  from  that
    marriage in 1986.  That son now has a family of  his  own  and  so  the
    appellant also has two British grandchildren.  The  appellant  and  his
    first wife divorced in 1992.

 4. The appellant formed a relationship with another British national,  SH,
    approximately 27 years ago and that they have been married for eighteen
    years.  The appellant  and  SH  have  four  children  together.   Their
    details are as follows:

         SK born on 14 November 1998

         ASK born on 11 November 2000

         SAK born on 11 November 2004

         ZK born on 16 January 2006

 5. The appellant has an offending history going  back  to  1977.   Between
    November 1977 and August 2016 the appellant amassed 51 convictions  and
    22 offences.  This prolific history is connected to his drug addiction.



 6. The appellant continued to  offend  notwithstanding  letters  from  the
    respondent dated 15 June 2007 and 1 April 2010 informing him  that  the
    Criminal Casework team would not be pursuing  deportation  against  him
    but giving him warning that he could face deportation if  he  continued
    to offend.

 7. On 4 July 2016 the appellant was convicted  of  dangerous  driving  for
    which he was sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment,  of  theft  for
    which he was sentenced to four months' imprisonment and for failing  to
    surrender at a point in time for which he  was  sentenced  to  fourteen
    days' imprisonment.  As the sentences were set to run consecutively his
    total sentence was for sixteen months' fourteen days' imprisonment.

 8. These offences in 2016  led  the  respondent  to  commence  deportation
    proceedings on 15 September 2016 with service of notice of  a  decision
    to deport.  On 18 July 2017 a deportation order was made under  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 9. The appellant brought his appeal in front of the first-tier Tribunal on
    26 September 2017 on the basis of his private  and  family  life  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The appellant was unrepresented at the  hearing.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the issue of the  appellant  being
    unrepresented at [5]-[8] of the decision:

         "5.  The appellant  was  unrepresented  and  did  not  produce  any
             documents in support of his appeal.   Nor  did  any  witnesses
             attend the appeal hearing to give evidence on his behalf.   In
             the interest of justice and given the  important  consequences
             of a decision for  the  appellant,  I  considered  whether  to
             adjourn  the  appeal  in  order  for  the  appellant  to  seek
             representation or arrange for his wife to attend the  hearing.
             The appellant himself did not request an adjournment.

         6.   As far as representation is concerned, the appellant has never
             been represented.  His evidence is that he does  not  wish  to
             pay money for a representative and has not made any efforts to
             seek a representative.  He is able to speak good  English  and
             has access to a telephone.  In these  circumstances,  I  found
             that there was  no  realistic  prospect  of  him  obtaining  a
             representative.

         7.   The appellant also indicated that his wife and  children  were
             not aware of his convictions and he  does  not  wish  them  to
             attend the hearing because he does not want them to know about
             the full extent of his offending.  In  these  circumstances  I
             was satisfied that the appellant did not intend  to  call  any
             further witnesses.

         8.   The appellant had not  prepared  an  appeal  statement  but  I
             considered  that  the  Tribunal  could  take  the  appropriate
             evidence  from  him  during  the   appeal   hearing.    Having
             considered all of  the  relevant  factors  including  avoiding
             further delay in determining the appeal and the length of time
             the appellant has been in detention as well  as  the  unlikely
             prospect that any further witnesses would attend the appeal, I
             decided that it was fair and in the  interest  of  justice  to
             proceed with the appeal.  I took into account Rules 2 and 4 of
             the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 when making this decision".

10. At [9]-[13] the judge set out the correct law applicable to the appeal.
     At [14]-[17] the judge set out the materials that were before her.  At
    [18]-[22] she set out the respondent's decision.  At [25]-[30] she  set
    out the appellant's case.

11. The First-tier Tribunal went  on  in  [35]-[45]  to  give  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant had not shown that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife or children.  The  reasons  given
    for finding that there was no genuine and subsisting  relationship  was
    the absence of any evidence from any of  the  family  members  bar  two
    brief letters from two of the children.  In addition,  the  appellant's
    evidence about the role he played in his family  was  "very  confused";
    see [39].

12. At [46] the judge accepted that the appellant had established a private
    life in the 42 years that he had been living in the UK.

13. At [48] to [76] the  judge  conducted  an  assessment  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules following  the  Razgar  questions  and  applying  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and Sections 117B and 117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

14. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that where there was no  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with  either  the  wife  or  the  children  the
    appellant could not succeed under paragraphs 399(a) or  399(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  At [67] the judge assessed the best interest of the
    children being as remaining with their mother and there not  being  any
    "serious detriment to their wellbeing" if the appellant  were  deported
    given the lack of evidence of a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with them and the absence of "any positive role  in  their  lives  thus
    far".

15. Paragraph 399A was also not found to have been met. The judge  accepted
    at [64] that notwithstanding the appellant's  serious  drug  habit  and
    prolific offending and not working for many years but he was  "socially
    and culturally integrated".  At [65], however, she did  not  find  that
    there would be "very significant obstacles to  his  integration  if  he
    were returned to Pakistan".  This was for the following reasons:

         "65.     I next turn to whether there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration if he were returned to  Pakistan.
             I find that he has been absent from Pakistan for a  very  long
             period - 43 years which is a significant period  of  time.   I
             accept that he has only returned  on  one  occasion  when  his
             father died and that he has been in the UK since  the  age  of
             11.  I find that his two  brothers  are  in  the  UK  and  his
             parents are deceased.  Although I find that  it  will  not  be
             easy for him to find employment in Pakistan given his  lengthy
             absence and his likely probable future drug use, I find he  is
             likely to have extended family members in Pakistan who will be
             able to assist him at least at the outset.  His eldest brother
             who manages a clothing factory is also in a position  to  send
             remittances  to  him  in  Pakistan  to  enable  him  to   live
             independently.  The appellant does  have  work  experience  in
             running a business in the  past.   The  appellant  has  health
             problems.   He  suffers  from  zero  positive   CCP   positive
             rheumatoid arthritis.  He takes methotrexate and his  symptoms
             include tender joints  and  morning  sickness.   I  find  that
             treatment is likely to be available in  Pakistan.   I  do  not
             find that this condition will preclude him from finding  work.
             The appellant can speak Punjabi and has friends and associates
             in the UK.  I find that he will  be  able  to  similarly  find
             friends in  Pakistan.   He  has  cultural  ties  wit  Pakistan
             through his brothers and wife who has Pakistani heritage.   On
             balance considering all of the factors, I find  that  he  does
             not satisfy paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  which  is
             reflected in Exception 1 at 117C(4)  Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002."

16. The judge also did not find "very compelling circumstances" that  could
    lead to the appeal being allowed.

17. The application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
    on very lengthy grounds set out over  sixteen  pages.   Permission  was
    granted in a decision dated 2 November 2017 on a limited  basis.   That
    limited basis was as follows:

         "At paragraph 65 of her decision the judge  indeed  considered  the
         appellant's circumstances upon return to Pakistan and whether there
         would be very significant obstacles to his integration  if  he  was
         returned to Pakistan.  The judge found that it was likely that  the
         appellant had extended family members in Pakistan who would be able
         to assist him at least at the outset and that an elder brother  who
         manages a clothing factory would be in a position to remit money to
         Pakistan in order to enable the appellant to live independently.  A
         careful scrutiny  of  the  judge's  decision  did  not  reveal  the
         evidence which fairly  generated  such  findings  and  the  judge's
         findings were arguably to be characterised as speculative as  being
         unsupported by evidence.  To this extent only the grounds disclosed
         an arguable error of law but for which the outcome  of  the  appeal
         might have been different".

18. The appeal before me is therefore limited to this aspect of the grounds
    which challenges the findings at [65], set  out  above.  The  appellant
    objection to those findings is set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 on page  5
    of grounds. He states as follows:

         "7.  Paragraph 65;

             In one example to prove that the Learned Judge's  failure  and
             malicious  intent  to  certify  the   admissibility   of   key
             information is indicated in this paragraph in itself.  How she
             concluded that AK has  extended  family  members  without  any
             references?  Similarly on what grounds she believes  that  his
             brother is financially stable and will support him when AK  is
             deported?  How sure she is that his brother  will  financially
             support him?  Logically  when  his  brothers,  if  financially
             stable and had means, why they could not support AK on private
             funding to deal his legal case now when his brothers are local
             let alone when he is 8,000 miles distant apart.

         8.   The Learned Judge concluded in the  same  paragraph  that  his
             eldest  brother  manages  a  clothing  factory   -   a   false
             information and her belief that  his  brother  will  send  him
             remittances  to  him  in  Pakistan  to  enable  him  to   live
             independently  is  a  careful  and  manipulative  tactic   for
             persuasion where in fact .............is to transparently  and
             impartially consider the information and should have  acquired
             information from the respondent, if not sure  could  had  then
             explored from the appellant.   In  both  aspects  the  Learned
             Judge failed to test  information  as  well  as  a  slanderous
             attempt  to  discredit  character  and  credibility   of   the
             appellant".

19. There is no basis for any of the more emotive aspects of  the  grounds,
    for example  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  acting  with  "malicious
    intent". Nothing in the materials begins to support  such  allegations,
    the careful consideration of  the  appellant  being  unrepresented  and
    whether to adjourn showing a fair-minded approach to the appeal.

20. The judge's comments on the existence of family  in  Pakistan  and  the
    brothers in the UK being able to assist the appellant on return must be
    viewed  within  the  wider  assessment  of   the   proportionality   of
    deportation. There is no challenge to the finding  that  the  appellant
    retained cultural ties with Pakistan because of his family  environment
    in the UK, his wife also being of Pakistani heritage.  The finding that
    the appellant has work experience from running a business in  the  past
    also stands.  The  judge  had  already  found  at  [49]-[50]  that  the
    presumption in favour of deportation was present here, arising not just
    from the index offences but "a pattern of  persistent  offending".  The
    offending in the face of two warning letters from  the  respondent  and
    failure to cease offending  even  after  repeated  drug  rehabilitation
    courses was found  to  further  weigh  against  the  appellant  in  the
    balance. The appellant was found "likely to reoffend"; see [61].

21. The appellant maintains that the evidence did not permit the First-tier
    Tribunal to conclude that his brothers in the UK would assist him.  The
    burden was on the appellant to set out his circumstances  if  deported.
    Nothing indicates that he told the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  would
    not be assisted at all by his  brothers.  At  G5  of  the  respondent's
    bundle in a letter which appears to  have  been  written  in  2010,  he
    referred to having "added support from extended  family  also  in  this
    country." My conclusion is that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to
    make the finding concerning the appellants brothers on the basis of the
    evidence before her and no error of law arises.

22. The same letter from 2010 at G5  of  the  respondent's  bundle  states,
    however, "I have absolutely no one in  Pakistan".  That  statement  was
    addressed by the respondent on page 9 of the refusal letter:

         "Although you have stated that you have no family in  Pakistan  and
         that you have not been back there in almost 43 years, it  is  noted
         that you spent  your  earlier  childhood  years  in  Pakistan  and,
         notwithstanding the length of time that you have  lived  away  from
         Pakistan, there will be people  in  your  home  district,  be  they
         extended family, family friends,  or  former  neighbours,  who  you
         would be able to draw on the help and support of, should  the  need
         arise, until such time as you are able to  re-establish  your  life
         and support yourself independently in Pakistan."

23. The appellant  was  not  found  credible  regarding  other  significant
    aspects of the appellant's evidence were not reliable, for example  his
    involvement with his children.  Where that was so and the  parties  had
    set out opposing views on the issue of support on return  to  Pakistan,
    it is my reading of [65] that the judge was entitled to take  the  view
    put forward by respondent and that it was open to her conclude that the
    appellant "was likely to have extended family members in  Pakistan  who
    will be able to assist him at least at the outset". Given  the  weighty
    factors against the appellant in the proportionality  assessment,  even
    if the finding of initial support  from  extended  family  in  Pakistan
    could be shown to wholly incorrect, it  also  not  my  view  that  this
    factor alone could have made a material difference to  the  outcome  of
    this appeal.

24. It is therefore my conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not disclose an error on a point of law and shall  stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 10 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
