
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08091/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2017                     |On 30 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DOVE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Abike Fakemi Nwawulu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Aminu, Counsel instructed by Martyns Rose
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the respondent which  comes  before  me  with  the
    benefit of permission having been granted on 26 July 2017 by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup  against  a  decision  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver promulgated on 6 July  2017.
    The appeal concerned the question of whether or not the  appellant  was
    entitled to a right of abode in the UK on the basis that she  had  been
    born in the UK before 1 January 1983.  It appears  that  prior  to  the
    application which led to the appeal before the judge there had been  an
    earlier  application.   He  describes  that  earlier   application   in
    paragraph 2 of his decision in the following terms:-

         "2.  An earlier application, made on 17  December  2008,  had  been
             refused on 9 February 2009 because she had  failed  to  attend
             for interview  on  5  February  2009  when  invited.   In  her
             application she had stated that she did  not  hold  a  British
             passport but it  was  asserted  that  records  showed  that  a
             passport had been issued to a person  of  the  same  name  and
             claimed date of birth.  In the application she had stated that
             she was born in Anhwich hospital, but  the  birth  certificate
             she had submitted showed that a female child of the same  name
             and date of birth was  born  at  Dulwich  Hospital.   She  had
             submitted no other evidence of  her  birth  and  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom.  The appellant's request for another interview
             date was refused as the decision had already been made."

2.   In  his  decision  the  judge  records  that  in  the  context  of  the
    application leading to the appeal she had been interviewed again.   The
    evidence of the interview  was  that  she  had  been  born  in  Dulwich
    Hospital on 9 May 1970, but then returned to Nigeria with her family in
    1971 and had not returned since.  She has an older brother  in  the  UK
    with whom she proposed to stay upon  arrival.   Her  brother  had  also
    returned to Nigeria in 1971 and then become resident in the UK in  2005
    having successfully claimed a right of abode here.  Evidence  was  also
    provided in support of the application  from  her  father.   The  judge
    records her father's contribution in the decision as follows:-

         "4.  On the same  date  her  father,  71-year-old  Fashola  Onosoya
             Savage (born 9/10/45) was also interviewed.  He  had  come  to
             the United Kingdom in 1964 to study at  his  own  expense  and
             married his wife in Lewisham on 19 October 1968.  He confirmed
             that they had returned to Nigeria in 1971.  His profession  as
             a computer expert was confirmed by  membership  of  the  Radio
             Society of Great Britain dated 12 October 1964, an educational
             certificate from his  London  college  dated  July  1966,  his
             marriage certificate and by a letter from his employers  dated
             15 September 1971.  His claimed profession accorded  with  the
             description  of  his  occupation  on  the  appellant's   birth
             certificate and was  consistent  with  him  following  in  the
             footsteps of his  own  father  as  shown  on  the  appellant's
             father's birth certificate."

3.   It appears that as with the earlier refused  application  reliance  was
    based upon the suggestion that  there  had  been  an  earlier  passport
    application made by the appellant leading to the issuing of  a  British
    passport.  The judge records this contention  at  paragraph  5  of  his
    decision in the following terms:-

         "5.  The respondent refused the application on 9 February  2009  on
             the same basis as before; her evidence that she had never  had
             a passport was inconsistent with records showing that one  was
             issued to a person  of  the  same  name  and  date  of  birth.
             Mention was made of  an  application  which  was  made  for  a
             British passport by somebody in her identity in 2005, the same
             time period  as  when  her  brother  returned  to  the  United
             Kingdom."

4.   Having recorded the procedures  which  occurred  at  the  hearing,  and
    correctly self-directed in relation  to  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof, the kernel of the judge's decision was recorded in the following
    terms at paragraph 10 of his decision:-

         "10. The respondent has accepted that the  child  born  in  Dulwich
             Hospital on 9 May 1970 is entitled to a  certificate  but  has
             questioned  whether  the  appellant  is   that   child.    The
             respondent has asserted that the appellant in her  application
             stated in part seven that she was born  in  Anhwich  Hospital.
             No such hospital and no such place exists and on its  face  it
             would appear highly likely that  a  simple  mistake  has  been
             made.  In fact, however, there is no  reference  to  the  non-
             existent  hospital  in   part   seven   of   the   appellant's
             application.  The respondent has  further  asserted  that  the
             person born in Dulwich Hospital earlier  made  an  application
             for a British passport, a matter denied by the appellant.  The
             respondent  has,  however,  produced  no  evidence   of   that
             application  or  the  passport  said  to  have  been   issued.
             Although  the  appellant  has  not  helped  herself   by   not
             explaining why she did not attend for interview, by  producing
             a witness statement and by asking her brother  to  attend  the
             hearing, I find that the historic  family  documents  she  has
             produced  are  sufficient  to   show   on   the   balance   of
             probabilities that she was the child born at Dulwich  Hospital
             and is therefore entitled to the issue of the certificate."

5.   In this appeal the respondent raises two bases upon which  it  is  said
    the judge erred in law.  The first  basis  is  a  contention  that  the
    judge's reasons in paragraph 10 for concluding that the  appeal  should
    be  allowed  were  inadequate.   It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the judge failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  which
    properly engaged with the nuances in the case, in particular in respect
    of the earlier application which had a hospital  identified  within  it
    which did  not  exist,  and  in  relation  to  the  brother's  lack  of
    attendance at the hearing which was relied upon by  the  respondent  as
    undermining the credibility of the appellant's case.  In the grounds of
    appeal, although not orally developed in  detail,  reliance  is  placed
    upon the failure of the judge to engage with the fact that there was no
    evidence produced from the appellant's parents, and that also there had
    been an application by another person for a  passport  using  the  same
    details as the appellant.  Ground 2 is a ground based upon  unfairness.
    It is said that the judge ought fairly to have afforded the opportunity
    for the material in relation to the  passport  application  made  by  a
    person of the same name and date of  birth  to  be  produced  prior  to
    relying upon the absence of  such  evidence  in  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision.

6.   The law in relation to the provision of  reasons  is  definitively  set
    out in the speech of Lord Brown in the case  of  South  Bucks  District
    Council No 2 and  Porter  [2004]  UKHL  33  [2004]  1  WLR  1953.   The
    principles are well-known.  It is necessary for  a  decision  maker  to
    provide adequate reasons so that the party which has been  unsuccessful
    understands the basis upon which they  have  failed.   Further,  it  is
    necessary for the reasons to  deal  with  the  principal  controversial
    issues which arise in the  case.   The  reasons  must  be  adequate  to
    understand how any future application might  be  addressed  and  how  a
    decision maker in the light of that decision ought properly to approach
    any future applications.  I have considered the contentions  raised  in
    relation to paragraph 10 in that light.

7.   Notwithstanding the attractive way in which Mr Bramble has  argued  the
    case on behalf of the respondent, I am unable to accept that  there  is
    any illegality or deficiency in the reasons provided by  the  judge  on
    this occasion.  Firstly, it is a cardinal principle that  the  decision
    must be read as a whole.  It is  inappropriate  to  "cherry-pick"  from
    certain parts of the decision without reading those parts in the  wider
    context of the totality of the decision.

8.   True it is that the judge referred in paragraph 10 to  the  absence  of
    any reference to Anhwich Hospital in part 7 of  the  application  which
    led to the appeal.  However, the  judge  was  fully  cognisant,  as  he
    explained  in  paragraph  2,  with  the  deficiency  in   the   earlier
    application and that that was a matter relied upon in  support  of  the
    respondent's case that the appellant was not credible.  That  said,  he
    explains his response to those contentions when he  observes  that  the
    reference to Anhwich Hospital "would appear highly likely" to have been
    a "simple mistake".  That is, in my view, clear and succinct  reasoning
    which adequately explains why he has reached the  conclusion  that  the
    respondent's contention carries little forensic weight.

9.   He engages with the brother failing to attend within paragraph 10,  but
    clearly explains in his reasoning that the "historic family  documents"
    are the centrepiece of the conclusions  which  he  has  reached  as  to
    credibility.  It will be evident from the quotation above at  paragraph
    4 and also from the reference to the contents of the birth  certificate
    that the phrase "historic family documents" was  a  reference  back  to
    what the judge had observed was produced by the appellant's  father  in
    support of the contention that there  was  a  consistent  framework  of
    official documentation demonstrating that it was likely (and  that  was
    the test) that she was the child who was born at Dulwich  Hospital  and
    whose birth was recorded in the birth certificate relating  to  9   May
    1970.

10.  Turning to the reliance on the absence of  evidence  of  the  passport,
    the judge says no more and no less than was necessary  in  relation  to
    that point raised by the respondent, namely there was  no  evidence  of
    either the application or the passport upon which a decision  could  be
    based.  Finally, so far as the evidence from the appellant's parents is
    concerned in the written grounds, it is clear that the matter proceeded
    by way of submissions  only  and  that  there  was  evidence  from  the
    appellant's father produced by way of various documents as I  have  set
    out in the quotation from paragraph 4.  Thus, in my judgement the judge
    provided perfectly adequate reasons to explain why he had  reached  the
    decision which he did.

11.  I turn then to ground 2.  As I have already observed, this is a  ground
    based upon a contention that it was unfair, if the judge was  going  to
    rely upon the absence of evidence  of  an  application  or  a  passport
    having been  issued,  to  rely  upon  that  without  affording  further
    opportunity for the respondent to  produce  such  documentation.   That
    observation needs in my view to be put  in  its  proper  context.   The
    question of whether or not there  had  been  this  earlier  application
    which adversely affected the credibility  of  the  appellant  had  been
    raised in refusing the  present  application  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 21 January 2016.  It was one of the important points  relied
    upon in that refusal.  The hearing of the appeal was on 13  June  2017,
    that is to say nearly eighteen months after that refusal had been made.
     I  note  that  it  does  not  appear  that  the  respondent  made  any
    application for an adjournment for that documentation  to  be  produced
    but chose at the hearing to  rely  upon  an  assertion  unsupported  by
    documentary evidence.  In those circumstances I do  not  consider  that
    there was any unfairness to the respondent  in  the  judge's  decision.
    The judge had to reach a decision on the material  placed  before  him.
    It was not for him to make an application for an adjournment on  behalf
    of the respondent when  the  respondent  had  failed  to  assemble  the
    necessary documentation required to prosecute the case.

Notice of Decision

12.  For all of those reasons I am satisfied that  there  was  no  error  as
    contended  for  in  the  judge's  decision  and  this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Dove




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Dove
