
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08115/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(remote hearing)                     |On 28 May 2021                       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MOIN AKHTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn nOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Fazli, Counsel, instructed by Edward Marshall
Solicitors


This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, for  convenience
      I will refer to the parties as they were designated in the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

   2. The respondent is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Buckwell ("the judge"), promulgated on 19 December 2019,
      allowing the appellant's article 8 ECHR human rights appeal.

Preliminary issue: error by the Upper Tribunal when granting  permission  to
appeal

   3. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  admit  the  Secretary  of  State's
      application for permission to appeal because it was made out of  time.
      There was no  error  in  so  doing,  as  confirmed  in  Bhavsar  (late
      application for PTA: procedure) [2019] UKUT 00196 (IAC).

   4. As the application had not been admitted,  the  Upper  Tribunal,  when
      considering the renewed application for permission,  was  required  to
      apply rule 21(7) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008, whereby the Upper Tribunal can only admit the  application  made
      to it (whether or not that application was in time) if it considers it
      is in the interests of justice for it to do so.

   5. The Upper Tribunal did not apply rule 21(7) and  instead,  mistakenly,
      stated that the First-tier Tribunal did not have the power  to  refuse
      to admit the permission application. Mr Fazli argued that  because  of
      this mistake I should consider  the  issue  of  the  lateness  of  the
      application for permission to the First-tier Tribunal.

   6. The Upper Tribunal decision  granting  permission  to  appeal  was  an
      excluded  decision  under  s11(5)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007: see Patel & Ors v The Secretary of State for the
      Home Department (Rev 1) [2015] EWCA Civ 1175. I therefore do not  have
      jurisdiction to set it aside, and it can only be challenged by way  of
      judicial  review:  see  Ndwanyi  (Permission  to  appeal;  challenging
      decision on timeliness) [2021] UKUT 00378 (IAC).

   7. I therefore declined to  consider  the  lateness/admission  issue  and
      proceeded to hear argument on the substantive appeal.


Background

   8. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17 November 1964.

   9. In 1992 he entered  the  UK.  In  1993  he  applied  for  asylum.  His
      application was refused (in 1994) and subsequent appeal dismissed  (in
      1995).

  10. In 2009 he was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on the basis of long
      residency.

  11. In 2012 he was issued  with  a  certificate  of  naturalisation  as  a
      British citizen.

  12. On 18 September 2014 he was deprived of his citizenship under  section
      40(3) of the British  Nationality  Act  1981  on  the  basis  that  he
      obtained his British nationality fraudulently. The fraud identified by
      the respondent was that the appellant concealed that  he  was  outside
      the UK on the following occasions: (a) in 2005, when he was  issued  a
      Pakistani passport in Rawalpindi, and applied for a family visit  visa
      in Islamabad; and (b) when his children born in  2000  and  2004  were
      conceived, as there was no evidence that his wife visited  the  UK  in
      the relevant time frame.

  13. The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  to  deprive  him  of
      citizenship. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Phillips. In a decision promulgated on 28  May  2015,  Judge  Phillips
      dismissed the appellant's appeal. Following a  detailed  consideration
      of the evidence, Judge Phillips  found  the  appellant  to  not  be  a
      credible witness. He found that, on the balance of probabilities,  the
      appellant was in Pakistan in 2005 when he obtained  his  passport  and
      made  a  visitor  visa  application.  He  also  did  not  accept   the
      appellant's explanation for the birth of  his  children  in  2000  and
      2004, which was that in 1999 and 2003 his wife entered and exited  the
      UK unlawfully. Judge Phillips found that the appellant was outside the
      UK when his children were conceived. Permission to appeal against  the
      decision of Judge Phillips was refused.

  14. In a decision  dated  13  December  2018,  the  respondent  considered
      whether to grant the appellant leave on the basis of his family and/or
      private life. The respondent  refused,  on  the  basis  that,  as  the
      appellant had  made  false  representations  in  previous  immigration
      applications,  he  did  not   satisfy   the   applicable   suitability
      requirements of the Immigration Rules: S-LTR 4.2 and 4.3. It was  also
      stated  by  the  respondent  that  there  were  not  very  significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration in Pakistan  and  that  there
      were not exceptional  circumstances  rendering  refusal  a  breach  of
      article 8 ECHR.

  15. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  his  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell  ("the  judge").
      In a decision promulgated on 19 December 2019, the judge  allowed  the
      appeal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  16. The judge considered in detail the appellant's claim that he  had  not
      engaged in deception. He found the appellant to be a credible  witness
      and accepted his account. Amongst other things, the judge accepted the
      appellant's evidence that his passport in  Pakistan  was  obtained  by
      agents on his behalf whilst  he  remained  in  the  UK  and  that  his
      children were conceived in the UK following illegal entry by his wife.



  17. The judge  referred  to  the  decision  of  Judge  Phillips  in  three
      paragraphs. At [46] he  noted  that  a  witness  in  that  appeal  (Mr
      Shaheen) was now deceased. At [47] the judge stated that the  date  of
      the hearing was recorded incorrectly in Judge Phillips' decision.  And
      at [80] the judge stated:

           "In view of the evidence presented I have found  it  appropriate
           to  depart  from  certain  findings  previously  made  by  Judge
           Phillips. There is clearly additional evidence before me."


  18. The judge stated twice (in paragraphs 1 and paragraph 74) that it  did
      not  appear  that  the  appellant  had  challenged  the   respondent's
      deprivation of citizenship decision. This is  plainly  wrong,  as  the
      appeal before Judge Philips was against the deprivation of citizenship
      decision.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

  19. The respondent argues that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  follow
      Devaseelan (Second Appeals -  ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri
      Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702.

  20. Mr Tufan submitted that, before Judge Phillips, the  appellant  relied
      on the same evidence and submissions as he did  in  this  appeal;  and
      that Judge Phillips considered the evidence thoroughly. He argued that
      the judge failed to explain why he considered it appropriate to depart
      from the findings of Judge Phillips.

  21. Mr Fazli argued that the judge  referred  to  the  decision  of  Judge
      Phillips in paragraphs 46, 47  and  80  of  the  decision  and  it  is
      therefore apparent that he was  aware  of,  and  had  regard  to,  the
      earlier decision. He also argued that  the  judge  gave  thorough  and
      cogent reasons, based on a detailed consideration of the evidence, for
      accepting the appellant's account. He argued that Devaseelan does  not
      preclude a  judge  from  forming  his  own  views  having  heard  oral
      evidence.

Analysis

  22. Devaseelan states in relevant part that:

           39(1)The first Adjudicator's determination should always be  the
           starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
           Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In principle issues
           such as whether  the  Appellant  was  properly  represented,  or
           whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.


           ....


           41(6)If before the second Adjudicator the  Appellant  relies  on
           facts that are not materially different from those  put  to  the
           first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what  is
           in essence the same evidence as that available to the  Appellant
           at that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the issues as
           settled by the first Adjudicator's determination  and  make  his
           findings in line with that determination  rather  than  allowing
           the matter to be re-litigated....

  23. The Court of Appeal has confirmed that Devaseelan  remains  good  law:
      see BK (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2019] EWCA Civ 1358; AL (Albania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2019] EWCA Civ 950.

  24.  The judge erred because he was required to, but did  not,  treat  the
      decision of Judge Phillips as a starting point. Although the  decision
      of Judge Phillips was mentioned, the judge did not in any  way  engage
      with it.

  25. Moreover, the appellant relied  on  facts  that  were  not  materially
      different from those before Judge Phillips, and supported his claim by
      reference to the same  evidence  that  was  available  to  -  and  was
      considered by - Judge Phillips. Accordingly, as explained  in  [41(6)]
      of Devaseelan, the judge needed to regard these issues as  settled  by
      Judge Phillips rather than allow the matter to  be  re-litigated.  The
      judge erred by failing to have regard to this guidance in Devaseelan.

  26. I have decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      heard afresh by a different judge. This is because the nature  of  the
      error is such that none of the findings can be preserved.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision involved the making of a material error of law and is set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh before
a different judge.

|                                 |            |                      |
|Signed                           |            |                      |
|                                 |            |                      |
|D. Sheridan                      |            |                      |
|                                 |            |                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |            |Dated:  14 May 2021   |

