
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/08843/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 February 2019                   |On 20 February 2019              |
|                                      |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                ADUL SEMAPET
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman (counsel); Instructed by Paul John &
                    Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Kainth, promulgated on 19 November 2018, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14 January 1970 and is a national of  Thailand.
On 6 April 2018 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application
for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Kainth ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  21  December  2018  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient weight to  the
      right to family life of the Appellant's only grandchild with whom  the
      Appellant  lives.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has   set   out
      insufficient analysis dealing with  the  criteria  in  relation  to  a
      British child leaving the United Kingdom.  It  is  arguable  that  the
      proportionality exercise has been affected.

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Coleman moved the grounds of appeal. He  told  me  that  there  is
clear evidence of a special  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
British citizen grandchild. He told me that the  appellant  was  part  of  a
close family unit - which includes his wife and daughter and grandchild.  He
took me to [27] of the decision where (he said)  the  Judge  identifies  the
need to consider more than simply the appellant's  interests,  but,  in  the
last sentence of [27] the Judge focuses clearly on the  appellant  only  and
fails  to  consider  the  impact  of  the  respondent's  decision   on   the
appellant's British citizen grandchild.

(b) Mr Coleman told me that the appellant's British citizen  grandchild  has
no contact with her biological father and  looks  to  the  appellant  has  a
father figure. He relied on MSA (St Lucia) [2018] CSOH 92  and  Beoku-Betts.
He urged me to set the decision aside and remit  this  case  the  First-tier
Tribunal for further fact-finding.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Wilding told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law. He told me that at [30] the Judge  accepts  that  the
appellant forms part of a small, close, family  unit  in  the  UK,  but  the
Judge finds that there is an abundance of family support for  the  appellant
in Thailand. He told me that the appellant's British citizen  grandchild  is
a factor in  this  case,  but  that  the  appellant's  granddaughter  cannot
outweigh the public interest. He told me that  the  Judge  acknowledged  the
relationship  between  the  appellant's   granddaughter   in   the   overall
proportionality assessment.

(b) Mr Wilding told me that, on the evidence presented,  the  Judge  reached
conclusions well within the range of  reasonable  conclusions  available  to
him. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The Judge's proportionality assessment starts at [27]  of  the  decision.
In the final sentence of [28] the Judge finds that the appellant is not  the
primary carer for his grandchild, and at [30] finds that  the  appellant  is
part of a small, close, family unit in the UK. At [16] of the decision,  the
Judge finds that article 8 family life exists for the appellant  in  the  UK
because he lives with his wife, his daughter and  his  grandchild.  At  [17]
the Judge finds of the appellant's grandchild is a British national.

8. Between [28] and [35] the judge dwells on  article  8  private  life  and
does not really consider article 8 family life.  At  [37]  the  Judge  finds
that there are no exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case.

9. The problem is that  the  Judge  races  to  conclusions,  citing  caselaw
rather than making findings of fact. The balance sheet article 8  assessment
encouraged by Agyarko cannot be found in the  decision.  Having  found  that
article 8 ECHR family life exists, the Judge gives  that  article  8  Family
life scant consideration in the proportionality balancing exercise.

10. In MSA (St Lucia) [2018] CSOH 92  a  grandmother  from  St  Lucia  whose
application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  her
private and  family  life  was  certified  by  the  respondent  as  "clearly
unfounded" successfully challenged that certification  because  the  reasons
for refusal letter failed to take into account the "best interests" of  that
petitioner's grandchild in considering her claim article 8 ECHR grounds.

11. The appellant's relationship with his British citizen stepdaughter is  a
central issue in this appeal, but  there  is  no  consideration  of  section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act and no consideration of section 55 of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. There are no  meaningful  findings  of
fact about the relationship between the appellant and  his  British  citizen
granddaughter.

12.  Because the fact-finding exercise is incomplete; because  the  decision
contains  no  meaningful  analysis  of  relevant  evidence  lead   for   the
appellant; because s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act has  not  been  considered  and
because there is no consideration of s.55 of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009, the decision is tainted by material error  of  law.  I
set it aside. I consider whether I  can  substitute  my  own  decision.  The
material error of law in the decision  relates  to  an  inadequacy  of  fact
finding. I cannot substitute my own decision. Further fact-finding  exercise
is necessary.

13. As Mr Wilding concluded his submission, he told me that there  has  been
a change in circumstances for the appellant's family. Mr  Coleman  confirmed
that the appellant's wife has now been granted leave to remain  in  the  UK.
It is clear from the Judge's decision that the appellant's daughter  had  an
outstanding application at the date of the appellant's  hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal. It is more than likely that the  circumstances  of  the
appellant's family have changed, and those changes will be relevant  to  the
article 8 proportionality assessment. As a result,  an  entirely  new  fact-
finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Kainth.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 19  November  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 18 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



