
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08538/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 March 2021 by Skype                     |On 12 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M. Islam, M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes back before me after  a  hearing  on  30  July  2020,
    following which I decided that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT"), which allowed the appellant's appeal, should be set aside  for
    error of law, and for the decision to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.
     The proceedings concern the  respondent's  decision,  dated  30  April
    2019, to refuse to revoke a deportation order.

 2. For context, I repeat the background to the appeal. The appellant is  a
    citizen of India, born in 1980. His  immigration  history  is  that  he
    arrived in the UK on 16 November 2000 from France using the ID  of  one
    SS. He claimed asylum but then absconded.

 3. He next arrived in the UK on 19  September  2003  from  Copenhagen  and
    again claimed asylum. That  application  was  refused  and  his  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed.

 4. He was arrested on 19 April 2004 and illegal entry papers  were  served
    on him. He was arrested again on 14 April 2007 for attempting to  check
    in for a flight to Canada using a  British  passport  in  the  name  of
    another person. On 30 April 2007, in the Crown Court at Lewes,  he  was
    convicted of possession of a  false  identity  document  for  which  he
    received a sentence of 12 months' imprisonment.

 5. On 6 November 2007 the respondent made a decision to make a deportation
    order, as a result of that conviction. The appellant's  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed by the FtT in February 2008.

 6. According to  a  letter  from  the  respondent  dated  21  March  2017,
    rejecting further submissions, on 6 May  2009  he  was  placed  on  the
    Police  National  Computer  as  an  absconder   and,   therefore,   the
    deportation order was unable to be enforced at that time.

 7. The appellant was located in 2012 and further submissions were made  in
    March and June 2013 in respect  a  claimed  relationship  with  an  EEA
    national. Yet further representations were made in 2015 and rejected on
    19 December 2015. The deportation order was signed on 21 December 2015.

 8. The appellant then made another application for leave to  remain  which
    was refused on 21 March 2017. A judicial review application in  respect
    of that decision was unsuccessful. Further applications  for  leave  to
    remain were made on 7 April 2018 and 24 November 2018.

 9. On 25 January 2019 he was granted 30 months' leave to remain, seemingly
    on the basis of the 'ten-year  route  to  settlement'.  However,  on  4
    February 2019 the Home Office said that that decision had been made  in
    error, and the grant of leave was withdrawn. In response  to  a  letter
    from the applicant's solicitors dated 26 February 2019, the  respondent
    said that the letter would be treated as an application to  revoke  the
    deportation order. That led to the  decision  under  appeal,  dated  30
    April 2019.

10. The further context for the re-making of the decision are the following
    paragraphs from my error of law decision:

         "46. However, I do consider that there is merit in the argument  on
             behalf of the respondent in terms of the FtJ's  failure  fully
             to reflect the appellant's poor immigration history, which  at
             [57] and [66] she described as "some failure  to  comply  with
             reporting conditions".  That  does  not  properly  convey  the
             appellant's immigration history in terms of absconding.

         47.  More fundamentally, notwithstanding the detail  in  the  FtJ's
             analysis of the very compelling  circumstances  issue,  it  is
             impossible to discern from the FtJ's  decision  what  are  the
             very compelling circumstances. The low risk of reoffending is,
             according to authority, not a  matter  of  great  weight.  The
             sentence of  imprisonment  being  at  the  lower  end  of  the
             sentencing scale (in deportation  terms),  is  nevertheless  a
             sentence mandated by Parliament as one attracting  deportation
             (subject to the exceptions; none of which apply).  The  length
             of time spent in the UK, without leave, which include  periods
             of  absconding  and  making   unsuccessful   applications   or
             representations, could hardly be said to be a very significant
             factor in his favour.

         48.  Notwithstanding the nationalities of  those  affected  by  the
             decision ([60] of  the  FtJ's  decision),  there  is  a  clear
             finding by the FtJ that it would not be unduly harsh  for  the
             appellant to be separated from his family.

         49.  With reference  to  what  the  FtJ  said  at  [61]  about  the
             fracturing of the family if the appellant  was  deported,  the
             effect of deportation is often to split families apart, as has
             been said many times. That is  a  commonplace.  Likewise,  the
             FtJ's emphasis of the closeness of the family in the  analysis
             of   very   compelling   circumstances,   overestimates    the
             significance of the family's relationships  with  each  other,
             contrary to what was said in  NA  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department & Ors [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  at
             [33]:

                  "Although there is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
                  inexorably follows from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the
                  cases in which circumstances are  sufficiently  compelling
                  to outweigh the high public interest in  deportation  will
                  be rare. The commonplace incidents of family life, such as
                  ageing parents in poor health or the natural love  between
                  parents and children, will not be sufficient."

         50.  The point was reiterated at [34] of HA (Iraq), as was what was
             said about the best interests of children in NA (Pakistan), at
             [35] of HA (Iraq), a matter which the FtJ also  relied  on  in
             her conclusions on the issue of very compelling circumstances.

         51.  The FtJ does not explain why  she  considered  it  significant
             that KK and G are en route to settlement. I do  not  say  that
             she needed to explain the significance of  every  matter  that
             she  took  into  account  on  the  issue  of  very  compelling
             circumstances, but it is not clear why the fact that they  are
             en route to settlement is  significant.  They  have  leave  to
             remain until  14  December  2020,  but  neither  of  them  has
             'qualifying status' at present; only H does.

         52.  As regards the fact that the deportation order was not  signed
             until 21 December 2015, a matter that the FtJ also  took  into
             account at [66], the appellant was arrested for the offence on
             14  April  2007.  On  30  April  2007,  he  was  convicted  of
             possession of a false identity document for which he  received
             a sentence of 12 months' imprisonment and on 6  November  2007
             the respondent made a decision to make a deportation order, as
             a result of that conviction. The  appellant's  appeal  against
             that decision was dismissed by the FtT in February 2008.

         53.  According to the letter from the  respondent  dated  21  March
             2017,  rejecting  further  submissions,  on  6  May  2009  the
             appellant was placed on the Police  National  Computer  as  an
             absconder and, therefore, the deportation order was unable  to
             be enforced at that time. He was located in 2012  and  further
             submissions were made in March and June 2013 in respect of  an
             EEA national (not his wife, KK). Yet  further  representations
             were made in 2015  and  rejected  on  19  December  2015.  The
             deportation order was then signed on 21 December 2015.

         54.  Although the FtJ did not characterise the period  between  the
             conviction and the signing of the deportation order as 'delay'
             on the part of the respondent, the basis upon  which  the  FtJ
             considered  that  this  was  a  significant  matter   in   the
             appellant's favour is not apparent, particularly in the  light
             of the events that occurred between  the  conviction  and  the
             signing of the deportation order.

         55.  I am satisfied, therefore, that the FtJ did err in law in  her
             conclusion that there were very compelling circumstances  over
             and above those within 399 or 399A and s.117C of the 2002  Act
             which outweighed  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The
             factors which led her so to  conclude  are  either  not  fully
             explained,  not  matters  that  could  properly  regarded   as
             amounting to very compelling circumstances, or  otherwise  not
             sufficiently identified. Accordingly, her decision must be set
             aside."

11. At the re-making hearing, which both parties agreed could be dealt with
    remotely, the appellant and his partner (KK) attended  the  appellant's
    solicitors'  offices.  They  both  gave  oral   evidence   through   an
    interpreter, who also attended remotely. No issues arose in relation to
    interpretation or otherwise in respect of the fact that the hearing was
    conducted remotely.

12. Updated skeleton arguments were provided by both parties.  In  addition
    to evidence previously filed and served, there was a  letter  from  the
    appellant's stepson, H, a British citizen (born on 15 July 2010), and a
    letter in relation to KK, dated 17 March 2021, from her GP.

13. The half-page letter from H refers to the things that they do  together
    and the time that the appellant spends with H and his sister G (born on
    20 November 2016). The letter says how sad H would be if the  appellant
    had to go back to India.

14. The letter from KK's GP states  that  she  complained  of  poor  mental
    health  on  12  February  2021  with  associated  symptoms   of   sleep
    difficulties and low mood. It goes on to state that she was referred to
    a specialist, is waiting for therapy and has been started on Sertraline
    50mg.

    THE ORAL EVIDENCE

15. In examination-in-chief the appellant adopted the witness statement  he
    made in the proceedings before the FtT. In  cross-examination  he  said
    that his wife only has her brother in the UK, apart from an  uncle  and
    aunt who he described as distant family.

16. He agreed that her uncle was the person who helped  his  wife  buy  her
    property. The uncle and aunt live in Surrey,  in  Virginia  Water.  His
    brother-in-law lives in Seven Kings in Ilford, about five  or  10  mins
    away. He sees him quite frequently.

17. He disagreed that in  his  absence  his  brother-in-law  would  provide
    emotional or other support, saying that he is a bit selfish, lives hand-
    to-mouth and 'does his own thing'. They see him once every two weeks or
    once a month.

18. His children, H and G, have two cousins, who are  his  brother-in-law's
    children. One is aged 6 or 7 and the other about 4. The cousins do  not
    have a good relationship with his children because his brother-in-law's
    wife and his wife do not have a good relationship.

19. KK also adopted the witness statement  she  made  for  the  proceedings
    before the FtT. She last saw her brother, HS, last  year,  long  before
    lockdown. In addition, she, KK, does night shifts and sleeps  when  she
    gets home from work. She does not  get  on  with  her  brother's  wife,
    either. She last saw her brother in  October  last  year  in  the  Sikh
    temple. The appellant speaks to her brother but because of his wife she
    does not go regularly to see them.

20. If she was in the UK without the appellant she does not think that  her
    brother would support her because during lockdown  she  asked  them  to
    look after her children when the appellant had to  go  somewhere.  They
    said that they could not as they would get a fine. They  did  not  help
    and she cannot really trust  them.  Even  before  households  were  not
    allowed to mix her sister-in-law did not help her.

21. As to whether she had explained her difficulties to her aunt and  uncle
    in Virginia Water, because of lockdown she only talks to  them  briefly
    on the phone. Because of her husband's tension and  coronavirus  stress
    she does not sleep very well. She does tell her uncle and aunt over the
    phone what she is going through but it is difficult for  them  to  help
    her. They listen but they are busy with their own lives,  and  she  and
    her husband are busy as well. It means that no-one can help anyone.

    SUBMISSIONS

22. In submissions, Mr Whitwell relied on his  skeleton  argument  and  the
    decision letter. As regards the preserved findings from the decision of
    the FtT, he submitted that it was clear that the FtT found that it  was
    not unduly harsh for H to be separated from the appellant. The addendum
    social work report is not materially different from the  evidence  that
    was before the FtT. There is no reason to go behind the finding that it
    would be harsh, but not unduly harsh, for the appellant to be separated
    from H.

23. If  the  only  remaining  consideration  is  whether  there  are  'very
    compelling circumstances' there is nothing in the evidence that is  not
    covered by Exceptions 1 and 2 in s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), even  cumulatively.  That  is  so
    notwithstanding that  there  is  only  one  "historic"  offence  to  be
    considered.

24. The evidence is that there is family in Surrey. Although KK  said  that
    they only communicate by phone, that is necessarily so  at  the  moment
    (because of Covid restrictions). They made a  significant  contribution
    to the purchase of KK's house. That indicates  a  willingness  to  help
    financially, and perhaps more.

25. KK's brother lives locally. The appellant said in evidence that he sees
    them once a month, whereas KK said that she had  not  seen  them  since
    October 2020. Although that issue is not determinative, it is  relevant
    to the question of whether there are very compelling circumstances over
    and above the Exceptions.

26. Mr Aslam similarly relied on his skeleton argument. The addendum social
    work report is significant, he argued. The appellant  and  his  stepson
    have a particularly close bond. In this respect [81]  of  HA  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176
    was relied on.

27. The decision of the FtT cites the example of the visit  by  immigration
    officers when H got particularly upset  and  the  immigration  officers
    decided as a result to leave the appellant at the  house,  rather  than
    detain him, and took off the handcuffs.

28. The First-tier Tribunal judge ("the FtJ") observed that the independent
    social worker's report was not particularly focussed on the impact on H
    which is why the addendum report was  provided.  That  addendum  report
    does provide that focus. It highlights their close relationship.

    ASESSMENT AND CONCLUSIONS

29. The test to be applied when considering whether to revoke a deportation
    order is set out in paragraphs 390-392 of the Immigration Rules HC  395
    (as amended), read with paragraphs 398-399A. These provisions state:


         "Revocation of deportation order


         390  An application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
             considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
             following:
             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;
             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
             (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                  maintenance of an effective immigration control;
             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
                  compassionate circumstances.


         390A Where paragraph  398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
              consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it
              does not, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
              the public interest in maintaining the deportation order will
              be outweighed by other factors.


         391  In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
              conviction of a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
              deportation order against that  person  will  be  the  proper
              course:


                  (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence  for  which
                  the person was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of
                  less than 4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since  the
                  making of the deportation order when,  if  an  application
                  for revocation is received, consideration will be given on
                  a case by case basis as to whether the  deportation  order
                  should be maintained
                  ...
                  Unless... the continuation would be contrary to the  Human
                  Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol  Relating
                  to the Status of Refugees, or there are other  exceptional
                  circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed  by
                  compelling factors.


         391A In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally  be
                  authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been   materially
                  altered, either by a change  of  circumstances  since  the
                  order was made, or by fresh information  coming  to  light
                  which was not before  the  appellate  authorities  or  the
                  Secretary of State. The passage of time since  the  person
                  was deported may also in itself amount to such a change of
                  circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.



         Deportation and Article 8


         A398 . These rules apply where:


             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
                  deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;


             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                  against him to be revoked.


         398  Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention, and
             ...


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months;
             ...


             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399 This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b)... applies if-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and


             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case


             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and


             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported; or


             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and


                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b)... applies if-


            (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life; and


            (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."

30. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the
    2002 Act") provides:


             "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving
             foreign criminals


             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.


             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


             (4) Exception 1 applies where-


             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,


             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and


             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.


             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."


31. In the error of law decision I stated that, subject to submissions from
    either party, I considered that the following facts found by the FtJ
    should be preserved:


         . It would be unduly harsh to expect H to relocate to India.

         . There is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
           appellant and H.

         . It would not be unduly harsh for  H  to  be  separated  from  the
           appellant.

         . H has the medical conditions identified in  the  evidence  before
           the FtJ ([44]).

         . The appellant provides H with day-to-day  care  as  KK  works  to
           support the family. Her employment is as stated in  the  evidence
           [45].

         . The appellant's conduct has not been exemplary ([47]).

         . The family is a close one.

         . There is a low risk of reoffending.

         . The appellant  has  acknowledged  his  wrongdoing  and  expressed
           remorse.

         . The appellant is culturally and socially integrated in the UK.

         . The appellant speaks English and is not a drain on public funds.

32. At the resumed hearing  neither  party  took  issue  with  any  of  the
    proposed preserved findings, with  one  exception.  On  behalf  of  the
    appellant, it was submitted that the  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for H to be separated from the appellant should not  be  a
    preserved finding.  For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that whether or
    not that finding was preserved made no difference to the outcome of the
    appeal.

33. In the light of the agreement between the parties as to the majority of
    the preserved findings, all the findings set  out  in  [31]  above  are
    preserved for the purposes of my decision, except for the finding  that
    it would not be unduly harsh for H to be separated from the  appellant.
    I do not consider that it is appropriate to retain this as a  preserved
    finding in the light  of  the  addendum  social  work  report  from  Dr
    Farooqi, dated 14 March 2021, the additional evidence that I  refer  to
    below, and the length of time since the hearing before the  FtT  on  18
    February 2020. That finding aside,  I  proceed  on  the  basis  of  the
    preserved findings.

34. The appellant's amended skeleton argument at [3] frames the  issues  to
    be determined in the  re-making  of  the  decision  as  being  firstly,
    whether or not it would be unduly harsh for H to be separated from  the
    appellant, and secondly, if not,  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances such that the public interest  in  deportation  would  be
    outweighed by other factors.

35. It is not argued on behalf of the appellant that he is able to  succeed
    in  his  appeal  with  reference  directly  to  any  provision  of  the
    deportation immigration rules or the Exceptions to  deportation  within
    s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act except in terms of his relationship with  his
    stepson  H  and  the   'unduly   harsh'   assessment   of   separation,
    alternatively in terms of very compelling circumstances over and  above
    the relevant Exception.

36. I have considered the evidence that was before the FtT in the bundle of
    386 pages. Additional evidence  before  me,  apart  from  the  addendum
    social work report, was an undated letter from H and a letter from KK's
    GP dated 17 March 2021.

37. The letter from H describes the things that he  and  the  appellant  do
    together, as well as their activities as a family and with his  sister,
    in the home and outside, and the help that the appellant gives him  and
    his sister G with homework. The letter describes how upset he would  be
    if the appellant had to return to India.

38. The letter from KK's GP states that she registered with the practice in
    December 2009 and that she complained  of  poor  mental  health  on  12
    February 2021 with associated symptoms of sleep  difficulties  and  low
    mood. The letter goes on  to  state  that  she  was  referred  to  "the
    specialist", is now awaiting therapy and has been started on medication
    in the form of Sertraline 50mg.

39. In terms of the Rules in relation to revocation of a deportation order,
    in this case, given that the appellant has not  been  deported,  it  is
    paragraph 390A that applies, which itself brings  into  play  paragraph
    398 of the Rules.

40. In a consideration of the Rules, and  Article  8  generally,  the  best
    interests  of  the  children,  in   particular   H,   are   a   primary
    consideration. Those best interests cannot, however, be decisive.

41. HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev  1)  [2020]
    EWCA  Civ  1176  is  a  recent  decision  of  particular  relevance  to
    deportation cases involving, amongst other things, consideration of the
    'unduly harsh' test, the best interests of a child, and the question of
    very  compelling  circumstances.  The  appellant's   amended   skeleton
    argument relies in particular on [56], and [81]-[82] of that  decision.
    The respondent's skeleton argument could not have foreseen the reversal
    of the appellant's acceptance that the unduly harsh test in relation to
    H was met. It,  therefore,  proceeds  on  the  footing  that  only  the
    question of very compelling circumstances needs to be  determined.  The
    respondent's skeleton argument relies  in  particular  on  [29]  of  HA
    (Iraq),  in  terms  of  the  relationship  between  the  Exceptions  to
    deportation provided for in s.117C of the 2002 Act and 'very compelling
    circumstances'.

42. So far as the children's best interests are concerned, I accept that it
    is in both their best interests for the appellant to remain  with  them
    as part of their family unit. The evidence in this case makes  that  an
    uncontroversial conclusion. It  is  not  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that H, a British citizen, should be required to go to India
    with the appellant, his mother and the younger child, G.

43. I have taken into account H's age. He was born of 15 July 2010.  He  is
    now, therefore, almost 11 years of age. That means that he is at a very
    significant stage of his emotional  development.  Separation  from  the
    appellant will undoubtedly have a significant impact on him.  I  accept
    that the appellant has a very close relationship with H.   So  much  is
    clear from Dr Farooqi's reports, and from what H says  in  his  undated
    handwritten letter. It is  also  relevant  to  take  into  account  the
    evidence that was accepted before the FtT, namely that H  believes  the
    appellant to be his biological father, and that  there  is  no  contact
    with his biological father who does not provide any support for  H  and
    is not part of his life at all (see [42] of the FtJ's decision).

44. It is evident that whilst KK has been working long hours in a care home
    during the Covid pandemic, the appellant has as a consequence been very
    closely involved in the care of the children and has developed a closer
    bond with them because of that day-to-day close involvement with  them.



45. Having said that, it is not the case that the children,  and  focussing
    on H in particular, would, in the event of the appellant's removal,  be
    living outside a loving family environment. Their mother,  KK,  remains
    in the UK (albeit with limited leave to remain) and is clearly  a  very
    capable, loving and committed parent.

46. There is no reason to suppose that H would not be able to have  contact
    with the appellant from India, and presumably he would be able to visit
    him from time to time. I  recognise,  however,  that  such  contact  is
    really no substitute at all for the close daily contact with  a  parent
    that a child needs, and which is in the majority of cases best for  the
    child.

47. I do not accept that KK would be  without  support  from  other  family
    members in the UK if the appellant had to leave. She  has  her  brother
    here and although KK said in evidence  that  during  lockdown  she  had
    asked for help from him and his wife but they did not help, that  would
    necessarily be the case because of the social restrictions  imposed  by
    the Covid regulations and associated guidance. KK's evidence  was  that
    she was in contact with her brother and sees him, albeit not regularly.
    I do not regard it as  likely  that  she  would  be  left  without  her
    brother's support if the appellant had to leave.  Furthermore,  as  was
    pointed out by Mr. Whitwell in submissions, it appears that KK's  uncle
    and aunt who live in Surrey, made a significant financial  contribution
    to the purchase of KK's house. I  agree  with  Mr  Whitwell  that  that
    indicates a willingness to help  financially,  and  is  evidence  of  a
    general commitment to the family.

48. Furthermore, KK's brother lives a short distance away,  about  five  or
    ten minutes according to the appellant, (presumably by car).

49. The evidence overall does reveal that family support would be available
    to KK and her children if the appellant left the UK.

50. The suggestion in Dr Farooqi's report that with the appellant's absence
    there would be a risk of separation of the children from their  mother,
    with reference to s.17 of the Children Act 1989 in the event that KK is
    unable to care for them, is mere speculation,  unsupported, and  indeed
    contradicted, by the evidence. There is no basis for a conclusion  that
    the children may have to be taken into local authority care.  KK  would
    have family support in the appellant's absence.  She  has  some  mental
    health concerns but, as already indicated, she is a loving  and  caring
    parent and is presently able to maintain employment in a demanding job,
    working  long  hours.   That  is  a  testament  to  her  character  and
    resilience, albeit that at present she has the appellant's support.

51. There  is  evidence  of  H  having  suffered  from  medical  conditions
    (inguinal hernia in 2019 and investigation for a problem with his nasal
    passage) which were either investigated but seemingly required  limited
    further action, or treated successfully.  H's  health  was  not  argued
    before me as being a significant factor and is not referred to  in  the
    appellant's skeleton argument.

52. Considering all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that it would  be
    unduly  harsh  for  H  to  be  separated  from  the  appellant.  It  is
    undoubtedly the case that  separation  would  be  harsh.  However,  the
    degree of harshness revealed by the evidence is not such as to indicate
    a level that could properly be described as unduly harsh.

53.  The  question  next,  then,  is  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances  over  and  above  the  Exceptions  in  s.117C.  I   have
    considered the Home Office guidance  referred  to  in  the  appellant's
    amended  skeleton  argument  at  [17].  That   guidance   is   entitled
    Criminality: Article 8 ECHR cases, version  8.0,  dated  13  May  2019,
    which says the following on page 38:

           "When   considering   whether   there   are   very    compelling
           circumstances you must

           consider all relevant factors that the foreign criminal  raises.
           Examples of relevant

           factors include:

           . the best interests of any children who will be affected by the
           foreign criminal's

           deportation

           . the  nationalities  and  immigration  status  of  the  foreign
           criminal and their family

           members

           .  the  nature  and   strength   of   the   foreign   criminal's
           relationships with family

           members

           . the seriousness of  the  difficulties  (if  any)  the  foreign
           criminal's partner and/or

           child would be likely to  face  in  the  country  to  which  the
           foreign criminal is to be

           deported

           . the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) judgment  in
           Ruiz Zambrano

           (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09

           . how long the foreign criminal has lived in  the  UK,  and  the
           strength of their

           social, cultural and family ties to the UK

           . the strength of the foreign criminal's ties to the country  to
           which they will be

           deported and their ability to integrate into society there

           . whether there are any factors which might increase the  public
           interest in

           deportation - see section on the public interest

           . cumulative factors, for example where the foreign criminal has
           family members

           in the UK but their family life does not  provide  a  basis  for
           stay and they have a

           significant private life in the UK. Although, under  the  rules,
           family life and

           private life are considered separately, when considering whether
           there are very

           compelling circumstances, both private and family life  must  be
           taken into

           account".

54. The guidance is useful in terms of the factors which may be taken  into
    account in  assessing  the  issue  of  very  compelling  circumstances,
    depending on the facts of the case. Whilst the guidance itself does not
    have the force of law, it reflects factors, such as the best  interests
    of a child, that do. I do consider  that  some  of  those  factors  are
    relevant to the overall proportionality assessment in this case.

55. What is said in Dr Farooqi's report about the  risk  of  the  appellant
    committing suicide was expressly not a matter relied on  on  behalf  of
    the appellant, as confirmed to me at the hearing, no doubt  because  of
    the lack of any significant evidence on the point.

56. As I have already found, there would be support for KK and the children
    in the UK if the appellant was deported. I was informed at the  hearing
    that KK has further leave to remain for 30 months, with G, but I cannot
    see that this is a matter of  significance  either  in  favour  of  the
    appellant or against. That it is accepted that H could not be  expected
    to go to India to be with the appellant is  the  significant  issue  in
    terms of the family's stay in the UK.

57. The FtJ found that the appellant has family in India. So much is  clear
    from his witness statement. The evidence  does  not  suggest,  however,
    that the appellant would be able to provide support for his  family  in
    the UK from there, which would be a potentially significant  matter  if
    KK had to give up her employment if the appellant had to leave.

58. There is nothing to be said in favour of the appellant in terms of  any
    delay by the respondent having regard to the date  of  the  appellant's
    conviction in 2007 and the initiation of deportation by the respondent.
    It has to be borne in mind that  there  was  a  significant  period  of
    absconding  by  the  appellant  for  which  the  respondent   was   not
    responsible. I summarised the position in my error of law  decision  as
    follows:

         "52. As regards the fact that the deportation order was not  signed
             until 21 December 2015, a matter that the FtJ also  took  into
             account at [66], the appellant was arrested for the offence on
             14  April  2007.  On  30  April  2007,  he  was  convicted  of
             possession of a false identity document for which he  received
             a sentence of 12 months' imprisonment and on 6  November  2007
             the respondent made a decision to make a deportation order, as
             a result of that conviction. The  appellant's  appeal  against
             that decision was dismissed by the FtT in February 2008.

         53.  According to the letter from the  respondent  dated  21  March
             2017,  rejecting  further  submissions,  on  6  May  2009  the
             appellant was placed on the Police  National  Computer  as  an
             absconder and, therefore, the deportation order was unable  to
             be enforced at that time. He was located in 2012  and  further
             submissions were made in March and June 2013 in respect of  an
             EEA national (not his wife, KK). Yet  further  representations
             were made in 2015  and  rejected  on  19  December  2015.  The
             deportation order was then signed on 21 December 2015."



59. In relation to the offence that the appellant committed, with reference
    to the sentence that was imposed, in my error of  law  decision  I  was
    dismissive of the FtJ having taken  into  account  in  the  appellant's
    favour that the sentence imposed was at the lower end of the  scale  in
    terms of deportation. On reflection, I was wrong to take that view  and
    the FtJ was correct in his assessment in this regard, as is clear  from
    [92]-[94] of HA (Iraq).


60. That there is a low risk of  reoffending  is  also  a  matter  of  some
    relevance, but its significance should not be over  emphasised,  as  is
    also clear from [141] of HA (Iraq). The single  offence  of  which  the
    appellant was convicted occurred as long ago as 2007, now 14 years ago,
    albeit that he absconded for a period of time. The offence involved the
    appellant attempting to board  a  flight  to  Canada  using  a  British
    passport in the name of another person.

61. I bear in mind KK's health, and what is said about her being  on  anti-
    depressant medication. Again, however, she is able to receive treatment
    in the UK and she has family support here.

62. I have also taken into account that with the appellant here, KK is able
    to work, and that without him in the UK to care for  the  children  she
    may very well not be able to.

63. Naturally, there are factors that weigh on both sides in the  balancing
    exercise, and in this case in particular when  the  balance  shifts  in
    either direction,  it  returns  to  even  as  the  analysis  continues.
    Although I have found that the removal of the appellant  would  not  be
    unduly harsh in relation to H, the factors that tell in  favour  of  it
    being (merely) harsh are nevertheless relevant.

64. The appellant is  in  large  measure  responsible  for  the  fact  that
    deportation  proceedings  were  not  initiated   sooner,   because   he
    absconded, made further submissions in relation to a different  partner
    in 2013 and yet further submissions which were again rejected in  2015.
    However, none of that is the fault of his family, encompassing not only
    H, but KK and G as well. The length of time since the commission of the
    offence has relevance in terms of the assessment of whether the  public
    interest now demands the appellant's removal against the background  of
    his established family life. So also does the fact that the appellant's
    offending involves one offence only which attracted a sentence  at  the
    lowest end of the deportation scale.

65. That family life involves a stepson who only knows the appellant as his
    father and who is approaching  a  significant  time  in  his  emotional
    development, a daughter approaching five years of age, and a wife  who,
    presently, depends on the appellant so that she  may  continue  as  the
    breadwinner.

66. For H, the separation from the appellant would be harsh. The additional
    circumstances to which I have referred do, in  my  judgement,  tip  the
    balance in favour of the conclusion  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above Exception 2.

67. The paragraphs 390 and 390A analysis is subsumed within the analysis of
    very compelling circumstances.

68. Given that I am satisfied that there are very compelling  circumstances
    over and above the relevant Exception in s.117C of the  2002  Act,  the
    appeal must be allowed.

    Decision

69. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of Law. Its decision having been set aside,  I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this appeal involves children, unless and until a Tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.



A.M. Kopieczek
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            12/07/21
