
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chambers  Appeal Number: HU/08859/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 1st February 2019                |On: 14th February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                 Gloria [C]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Cartwright King
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs Gloria [C] is a national of Jamaica who is now 82  years  old.  She
    first landed in the United Kingdom in 1956, just six years after the SS
    Empire Windrush docked at Tilbury: she lived and worked here  for  many
    years before returning to Jamaica, and  in  the  years  since  she  has
    repeatedly returned to visit the United Kingdom, where at least six  of
    her children still live.  It was on such a visit in January  2015  that
    her daughters  became  concerned  about  her  welfare.   They  had  her
    assessed by a doctor and by February of that  year  Mrs  [C]  had  been
    formally diagnosed with vascular dementia. An application was  made  on
    her behalf that she may be granted leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.  It was the Respondent's decision to refuse such leave[1], and
    the First-tier Tribunal's agreement with that decision[2], that is  the
    subject of the appeal before me.




    The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 2. The case before the First-tier Tribunal was that the decision to refuse
    leave breached the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights: reliance was placed on Articles 3 &  8.  It
    was submitted that Mrs [C] is suffering from advanced dementia, as well
    as several physical ailments including diabetes and heart disease.   In
    the United Kingdom she was supported and cared for  by  her  daughters,
    and it was submitted  that  this  love  and  assistance  could  not  be
    replicated in Jamaica. Although  Mrs  [C]  has  adult  sons  living  in
    Jamaica, they had not hitherto shown themselves competent to look after
    her; there was some suggestion that the sons  had  been  neglectful  or
    even financially abusive.  Given her  ties  to  this  country  and  the
    nature  of  her  illness,  her  removal   was   submitted   to   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her Article 8(1)  rights.    It  was
    further submitted that her removal would  be  a  breach  of  Article  3
    because  she  would  find  herself  living  in  inhuman  and  degrading
    circumstances.

 3. For the Respondent it was pointed out that healthcare is  available  in
    Jamaica.  There is treatment available for all of the physical ailments
    that Mrs [C] suffers from, and a google search revealed there to be  44
    registered care homes for the elderly. There was no evidence to suggest
    that Mrs [C] could not be adequately accommodated in  such  a  setting,
    and supported if necessary by her sons.    Nor  was  there  any  reason
    given as to why any or all of Mrs [C]'s  British  daughters  could  not
    continue to support their mother financially, and  emotionally  through
    visits or 'skype' type calls.  The Respondent did not accept  that  the
    medical consequences of removal would violate Article 3,  or  that  the
    decision to refuse leave was disproportionate.

 4. In order to address these matters in dispute  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had the benefit of hearing live evidence from four of Mrs [C]'s British
    daughters, [C], [RD], [P] and [S1].  It was not considered appropriate,
    in light of the latest medical assessments, that the Appellant  herself
    be called to give evidence.    The  Tribunal  was  also  supplied  with
    limited, albeit unchallenged evidence, relating to Mrs [C]'s health and
    social needs.  This consisted of correspondence from the family GP  and
    other doctors, and a detailed report by Occupational Therapist  Ms  [S]
    dating from July 2018.

 5. The Tribunal's findings were as follows:

      i) This appeal is not concerned with someone who is "close  to  death"
         and as such the Article 3 caselaw relied upon by  Counsel  for  Mrs
         [C], including N v United Kingdom  26565/05,  D  v  United  Kingdom
         (1997) 24 ECHR and Paposhvilli v Belgium 41738/10 was not relevant;

     ii) There is a Kugathas dependency between Mrs [C]  and  her  daughters
         and as such it is accepted that she enjoys  an  Article  8  'family
         life' in the United Kingdom;

    iii) After a "period of more than  three  years  in  this  country"  the
         Tribunal accepts that Mrs [C] also enjoys an Article 8 private life
         here;

     iv) Article 8 is engaged by the decision;

      v) The decision to refuse leave is nevertheless proportionate for  the
         following reasons:

          a)  The  evidence  about  why  Mrs  [C]  came  here  in  2015  is
             unsatisfactory;

          b)  The  evidence  that  Mrs  [C]  may  have  been  neglected  or
             financially exploited by one or both of her sons in Jamaica is
             unsatisfactory;

          c) There is a contradiction in the evidence of  the  Occupational
             Therapist who on the one hand opines that "removal would cause
             significant shortening of life" and on the other that  without
             the assistance of her daughters Mrs [C] would suffer a "steady
             deterioration" in health. Nor was the OT qualified to make the
             comment that the care currently received by Mrs [C] "could not
             be replicated" in a care setting;

          d) Mrs [C]'s condition has worsened in several respects since her
             arrival in the United Kingdom but her needs  are  not  unusual
             for someone of her age;

          e) The drugs she requires are available in Jamaica and it has not
             been shown that all of the 44 care  homes  identified  by  the
             Respondent would be unsuitable;

          f) The submission that a care home could not replicate  the  love
             of a daughter must be read in line with the evidence that  Mrs
             [C]'s condition has deteriorated to  the  point  that  she  no
             longer recognises her daughters;

          g) The family could continue to support Mrs  [C]  financially  if
             she were to return to Jamaica;

          h) The  family  could  maintain  contact  by  telephone  and  the
             Tribunal was not therefore satisfied that the risk  of  social
             isolation would be any higher  for  Mrs  [C]  than  for  other
             widows her age;

          i) Whilst the decision under appeal would impact upon  the  lives
             of Mrs [C]'s daughters "that is the inevitable consequence for
             those left behind when some family members decide to  move  to
             another country";

          j) The maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
             interest and it had not been shown that Mrs [C] could meet the
             relevant immigration rules. She has the option of returning to
             Jamaica in order to apply under the appropriate  rule  if  she
             wishes to do so;

          k) There was a further public interest in refusing leave  because
             of the "increasingly high cost of social care" (it  being  the
             accepted evidence that Mrs [C] was receiving treatment on  the
             NHS, was attending a day centre four days per week,  and  that
             her daughters were receiving carers allowance);

          l) Her private life was established whilst her immigration status
             was 'precarious'.




    The Appeal

 6. The grounds take issue with several of  the  individual  findings,  but
    their central thrust is that the Tribunal erred in  failing  to  direct
    itself, upon consideration of Article 8, to  consider  the  meaning  of
    "very significant obstacles to integration". The rule is concerned with
    private life and in this case the nature of the appellant's illness was
    such that removal would result in a nullification of that right,  since
    Mrs  [C]  would  not  have  the  means  to   build   meaningful   human
    relationships in Jamaica. The Judge has  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    consequences of her advancing illness.  The Article  3  grounds  before
    the First-tier Tribunal were not pursued before me.

 7. For the Respondent Mr Bates resisted the  appeal  on  all  grounds.  He
    maintained that the Appellant failed to meet the  requirements  of  the
    rules relating to adult dependent relatives. She  had  not  shown  that
    care in a Jamaican care home would be inadequate, or that she could not
    speak to her daughters by telephone, with the assistance of a member of
    care home staff if necessary.  Mrs [C] had two sons in Jamaica and  the
    suggestion that they were estranged had not been proven.




    Discussion and Findings

 8. The most obvious error in the First-tier Tribunal's determination,  and
    one which infects the entire proportionality assessment,  is  that  the
    Tribunal appears to have entirely overlooked the fact that  Mrs  Gloria
    [C] is not simply a visitor who has overstayed. She  is  an  individual
    who can quite properly be said to be part of the 'Windrush generation'.



 9. The determination does allude to this factual background. At  paragraph
    9 [C]'s evidence that her brothers  are  regarded  as  "foreigners"  in
    Jamaica is recorded, and at paragraph 38 the determination  notes  that
    Mrs [C] only returned to live in Jamaica after the death of her husband
    in 2002.  It is however apparently  forgotten  by  the  time  that  the
    Tribunal conducts its proportionality  balancing  exercise,  since  the
    determination here contains errors that are otherwise inexplicable:

          i) At paragraph 36 the Tribunal accepts that after three years in
             the United Kingdom it could be said that Mrs [C] has a private
             life here. At paragraph 46 little weight is attached  to  that
             scant three  years  of  private  life  established  after  she
             arrived as a visitor. The Tribunal here fails to take material
             evidence into account, viz that from 1956 this country was Mrs
             [C]'s  home.  The  bundle  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
             contained a copy of the passport that Mrs [C]  used  when  she
             arrived in the United Kingdom. It was issued by  the  Governor
             of Jamaica on the 7th September  1956  and  was  an  old-style
             black British passport. It indicates that Mrs [C] (nee Carter)
             is a 'British subject:  citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
             Colonies'.  This was her status when  she  entered,  travelled
             and remained in this country, when she  lived  and  worked  in
             Derby and gave birth to at least 7 of her 9 children[3].

         ii)  At  paragraph  45  the  Tribunal  considers  the  impact   of
             separation  on  the  family,  but  apparently  discounts   any
             distress that might result as follows: "that is the inevitable
             consequence for those left behind  when  some  family  members
             decide to move to another  country".  I  can  only  read  that
             sentence, in the context of the paragraph (and  determination)
             overall, to mean that the family split has been caused by  Mrs
             [C]'s daughters moving  to  the  United  Kingdom.  That  is  a
             material error of fact. All of  four  daughters  who  appeared
             before the First-tier Tribunal were born in this country,  and
             have  been  British  since  birth.  They  have  not  therefore
             "decided  to  move  to  another  country".   If  anything  the
             family's current  predicament  has  been  caused  by  Mrs  [C]
             deciding to move to "another country" ie Jamaica, in 2002.

        iii) At paragraphs 40 and 45 the Tribunal refers to the cost to the
             NHS of providing  medication  etc  to  Mrs  [C],  and  to  the
             provision by social services of a care package  (an  allowance
             paid to [RD] as her mother's carer). This is a matter directly
             weighed in the balance against Mrs [C]. No regard is had  here
             to the evidence in the bundle indicating that Mrs  [C]  was  a
             long-term United Kingdom tax-payer who made national insurance
             contributions, and has in  fact  been  in  receipt  of  a  DWP
             pension since retirement.

10.  These  errors  of  fact  and  law  were  plainly  fundamental  to  the
    consideration of Article 8 'outside the rules'  and  for  these  errors
    alone I would set aside that part of the decision.

11. The failure to recognise Mrs [C]'s long immigration history  was  also,
    as I explain below, potentially relevant  to  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

12. The relevant rule in this case was unquestionably paragraph  276ADE(1).
    This much is recognised by the First-tier Tribunal at its paragraphs  2
    and 19 but I note as an aside that it important to underline that fact,
    since the determination, and indeed the parties  in  their  submissions
    before me, appeared to stray towards consideration  of  the  provisions
    relating to adult dependent relatives contained in Appendix  FM.  Those
    provisions are not  relevant  to  a  consideration  of  276ADE(1).  The
    Secretary of State, when drafting those rules, expressly  excluded  in-
    country applications under the adult dependent relative route, which is
    only open to those applying out-of-country for entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Thus the relevant rule, the only rule under which  Mrs
    [C] could apply, was 276ADE(1).  That reads:

         '276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i) does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-LTR.4.5.
             in Appendix FM; and

             (ii)      has made a valid application for leave to remain  on
             the grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)     has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv)       is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for at least 7 years  (discounting  any
             period of imprisonment) and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
             at least half of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi)      subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years  or
             above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.

         276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and  may  not  be
         relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to  return  a
         person to a third country pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

13. Before me the respective submissions made on behalf of Mrs [C] and  the
    Secretary of State dealt exclusively with the Tribunal's  treatment  of
    sub-paragraph (vi), and that is a matter which I address below.  Before
    I do I mark the unfortunate failure on the part  of  all  concerned  to
    consider whether Mrs [C] may in fact qualify for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of sub-paragraph (iii) of that rule.

14. It does not appear to be in issue that Mrs [C] arrived in this  country
    in September 1956: that is the date of  entry  marked  in  her  British
    subject passport. Nor has either party challenged the evidence recorded
    by the First-tier Tribunal (and repeated before me) that this  remained
    her home until she retired to Jamaica in 2002. By my  calculation  that
    is a period of continuous residence of well over 20 years. There  being
    no requirement in the rule that the period of continuous residence must
    immediately precede the application, it would seem that Mrs [C]  has  a
    prima facie case for indefinite leave to  be  granted  without  further
    ado.   As this was not a matter raised before  me,  or  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I say no more about it.

15.  Returning  to  the  grounds  as  argued  in   respect   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) I note that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directs
    itself to judicial guidance on how that rule should be interpreted.  It
    cites, for  instance,  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgement  in  Kamara  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813  to  the
    effect that the test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  requires  the
    decision-maker to evaluate whether the individual would be able:

         "... to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to  build
         up within a reasonable time a variety  of  human  relationships  to
         give substance to the individual's private or family life."

16. This jurisprudence is wholly consistent with how the Secretary of State
    interprets the rule. In his policy guidance Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life
    (as a Partner or Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes  January
    2019[4], the Respondent instructs caseworkers that the  starting  point
    should be the presumption that integration will be possible. It is  for
    the applicant to introduce evidence to demonstrate that it  is  not.  A
    number of factors can be considered, for instance linguistic, familial,
    cultural and social ties to the  destination  country,  but  the  focus
    should, in the Respondent's view, be on  the  extent  to  which  it  is
    possible for the applicant to  enjoy  an  Article  8  private  life  if
    removed from the United Kingdom:

         'A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
         than obstacles. They are looking to see  whether  there  are  "very
         significant" obstacles, which is a high threshold. Very significant
         obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates  that  they
         would be unable to establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of
         return, or where establishing a private  life  in  the  country  of
         return would entail very serious hardship for the applicant.'

                                                            (emphasis added)

17. The Court of Appeal judgment in Kamara, and the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy guidance, are both in turn consonant with the  jurisprudence  of
    the European Court of Human Rights, which has  consistently  held  that
    the term 'private life' encompasses "the physical and  moral  integrity
    of the person"[5]  and that this must include, fundamentally, the right
    to establish and develop relationships with other human beings: see for
    instance McFeeley v United Kingdom[6] , Pretty v United Kingdom[7]   or
    the opinion of Judge Martens in Beldjoudi v France[8].

18. That then, is the focus of the  test  in  276ADE(1)(vi).  The  decision
    maker must be assessing whether removal (or the refusal to grant leave)
    will result in a nullification, or at  least  a  flagrant  interference
    with, the individual's ability to enjoy such relationships.

19. In this case it was said on Mrs [C]'s behalf that  the  nature  of  her
    illness was such that her removal from the United Kingdom would deprive
    her of any  meaningful  human  contact  and  comfort  so  as  to  be  a
    disproportionate interference with her human rights: it would result in
    the nullification of, or flagrant interference with, her  Article  8(1)
    private life. On appeal it is Ms Rutherford's case that the  First-tier
    Tribunal wholly failed to grapple with that matter.

20. That is a submission with which I must agree.    At  paragraph  42  the
    Tribunal finds that Mrs [C]'s needs are "not unusual for  a  person  of
    her age". That is not relevant. There was no requirement upon  Mrs  [C]
    to demonstrate that  her  situation  was  unique  or  exceptional.   At
    paragraph 44 the Tribunal records itself to  be  unsatisfied  that  Mrs
    [C]'s sons would harm her. That was a factor of some relevance, but the
    Tribunal stops short of finding that these two sons  (one  of  whom  is
    said to work long hours and have little time for his mother, the  other
    of whom was said to have taken money from  her  and  have  a  'temper')
    would or could replicate the Kugathas relationships that Mrs [C] enjoys
    with [C] and [RD].   In the same paragraph the Tribunal finds that  the
    family could and would pay for Mrs [C]  to  live  in  a  care  home  in
    Jamaica. Whilst that was plainly a finding open to it on the  evidence,
    it was not determinative of the  question  posed  and  outlined  above:
    would Mrs [C] enjoy any meaningful human interaction in such a setting?
    Although her daughters expressed doubts about the quality of care  that
    Mrs [C] might receive in a home in Jamaica, this  case  was  not  about
    whether someone could take her to the toilet or make sure she took  her
    medication. This case was about whether, in the short  years  remaining
    to her, Mrs [C] might retain a modicum of comfort and human dignity  in
    the face of a  relentlessly  cruel  disease  which  stripped  away  her
    ability to "integrate".

21. That this  was  so  is  reflected  only  in  the  Tribunal's  remaining
    reasoning on the point: "I have to take into account  that  her  mental
    health has now deteriorated to  the  point  where  she  either  doesn't
    recognise her daughters or thinks they are still  young  and  addresses
    them as such, or forgets who they are".  This evidence was  taken  from
    the report of the OT, and from the statements of [C] and  [RD].  It  is
    accurate, but what  it  fails  to  reflect  is  the  totality  of  that
    evidence, that when Mrs [C] suffers  from  the  worst  effects  of  her
    illness it is the presence of her daughters which gives her comfort and
    reassurance, regardless of whether she is able to recall their names or
    ages. In her statement [C] describes her mother's condition as follows:

         "She can become upset and easily distressed at times  and  requires
         reassurances from myself that its ok. My mother also  suffers  from
         hallucinations where she believes she can see her dead husband, two
         dead sons, dead parents and  aunt.  She  will  also  say  she  sees
         people, babies, animals - things that are  not  there.  This  again
         causes my mother to become really upset and she will then start  to
         cry sometimes in the middle of the night and  early  hours  of  the
         morning.

         My mother since losing her memory has also become quite anxious. If
         I am out of sight for short periods she  often  becomes  upset  and
         cries..."

    In her report the OT Ms [S] concurs:

         "Whilst she has problems in recalling names, facts and events,  she
         is able to recognise her family  and  her  demeanour  when  in  the
         presence of  her  daughters  was  seen  to  be  calm,  relaxed  and
         seemingly trusting"

22. I am satisfied that it was, in light of that evidence,  irrational  for
    the Tribunal to focus simply on Mrs [C]'s difficulties with  memory  in
    order to defeat her claim under the rule. The focus should rather  have
    been on the consequences of that loss of memory, the distress that this
    caused, and the extent to which it would impede her ability to  receive
    reassurance from others outside of the home that she  currently  shares
    with [C] in the United Kingdom.

23. The test under 276ADE(1)(vi) is a stringent one. In R (Ullah) v Special
    Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26 the House of Lords stressed  that  in  cases
    where a migrant seeks to rely on ECHR rights other than family life  to
    resist removal he  or  she  must  demonstrate  a  "flagrant,  gross  or
    fundamental breach of that article such as to amount  to  a  denial  or
    nullification of the rights" concerned.  I am quite satisfied,  on  the
    evidence before me, that removal to Jamaica, and away from the home  of
    [C], would result in such a dramatic loss of private life for Mrs  [C].
    Her ability to form  meaningful  relationships  with  other  people  is
    diminished to the point of nullification. For that reason there plainly
    would be "very significant obstacles to integration" in Jamaica.

24. I therefore set the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and
    remake  it  by  allowing  the  appeal,  with  reference  to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, on human rights grounds.

25. It follows that I need  not  deal  in  any  detail  with  the  decision
    'outwith the rules' save to say that for the reasons set  out  above  I
    would also set that part of the First-tier Tribunal decision aside. The
    fact that the Appellant has a long association with this country, and a
    private life established here  when  she  was,  as  a  matter  of  law,
    entitled to be here as a British subject, was plainly  relevant.   Even
    taking account of  the  mandatory  public  interest  considerations  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  I  am
    quite satisfied that this is a case where the refusal  to  grant  leave
    would be disproportionate.  To refuse leave would be to  deny  Mrs  [C]
    dignity in the closing years of her life.




    Decisions

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and it is set aside.

27. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

         "the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

28. There is no direction for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            8th January 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] On the 28th March 2018
[2] Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge JWH Law dated 1st October 2018

[3] The papers before me are not in order but I have been able to identify
birth certificates showing that [C], [RD], [S1], [S2], [P] were all born in
Derby.  From the dates it would seem that Mrs [C]'s late sons [M] and [RS]
were also born here.
[4] The passage I cite here is identical to that in earlier versions of
this guidance, i.e. that available at the date of the First-tier Tribunal
decision
[5] See for instance X and Y v The Netherlands (A91 para 29)
[6] No 8317/78, 20 DR 44 at 91
[7] (2002) 35 EHRR 1
[8] App 234-A (1992)

