
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08644/2016
                                                HU/08697/2016, HU/08650/2016
                                                HU/08656/2016, HU/08662/2016
                                                HU/08669/2016, HU/08684/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  AAMER [M]
                                 ZAINAB [M]
                                    [G A]
                                    [M A]
                                    [S H]
                                   [A M1]
                                   [A M2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Barton, instructed by Briton solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all citizens  of  Pakistan.  The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife and the parents of the  remaining  five
    appellants. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom initially as
    a student in 2001. His leave to remain was extended successively  until
    an application for further leave was refused in July 2011. He  appealed
    against that decision but became appeals rights exhausted  on  11  June
    2012. None of the appellants have had any form of leave to remain since
    2012.  The  third  and  fourth  appellants  together  with  the  second
    appellant entered as dependants of the  student  father  in  2008.  The
    remaining appellants were born in the United  Kingdom.  The  appellants
    appealed against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  29  March
    2016 refusing their human rights applications. The First-tier Tribunal,
    in a decision promulgated on 29 September 2017, dismissed the  appeals.
    Permission to appeal was refused in both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    Upper Tribunal. Following successful proceedings for  judicial  review,
    permission was granted.

 2. Ms Barton, who appeared for the appellants before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relied on the grounds of appeal. Those grounds assert, inter alia, that
    the judge failed to have proper regard for the best  interests  of  the
    children (section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009) and to the judgement of the Court  of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ  705.  The  judge  had  failed  to  identify  'powerful
    reasons' requiring the family to be  removed  to  Pakistan.  Ms  Barton
    submitted that there no such reasons were present  in  this  case;  the
    only blemish on the immigration history of  the  appellants  being  the
    decision of the first and second appellants to overstay after 2012 when
    their application for further leave was refused an appeal dismissed.

 3. Mr Tan, who appeared for the Secretary of State, pointed out  that  the
    proceedings predated the judgement of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
    2018 UKSC 53. He submitted that the judge's decision in  many  respects
    prefigured that judgement. In essence, the  judge  had  found  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect children, whose parents had no  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, to accompany those parents to the country
    of nationality of all members of the family.

 4. Having reserved my decision  and  after  I  had  returned  to  chambers
    following the hearing, the court usher came to my chambers to  tell  me
    that Ms Barton had told her that the  appellant  [AM1]  (HU/08669/2016)
    had been issued with a British passport. I was not invited to reconvene
    the hearing although I was told that Mr Tan had been informed  of  this
    fact which had not been referred to in submissions. I was not given any
    indication as to how I was expected to treat this new information in my
    analysis or why it should make any difference to my deliberations. This
    new information was given without any context whatsoever.

 5. As both  the  parties  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  correctly
    considered, the focus in these appeals is upon  the  reasonableness  of
    return. We now have the benefit of the judgement in KO (Nigeria) [2018]
    UKSC 53 in particular at [18-19]:

         "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

             "22.     In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

    The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 had stated  at
    [40] and [49]:

         "40. It may be said that the wider approach can be justified  along
         the following lines. It will  generally  be  in  the  child's  best
         interests to live with his or her parents and siblings as part of a
         family. That is usually a given especially  for  younger  children,
         absent domestic abuse or  some  other  reasons  for  believing  the
         parents to be unsuitable. The approach of the  Secretary  of  State
         means that  the  stronger  the  public  interest  in  removing  the
         parents, the more reasonable it will be  to  expect  the  child  to
         leave. But it seems to  me  that  this  involves  focusing  on  the
         position of the family as a whole. In cases where  the  seven  year
         rule has not been satisfied, that is plainly what has to  be  done.
         As McCloskey J observed in PD and others v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) it  would  be  absurd  to
         consider the child's position entirely  independently  of,  and  in
         isolation from, the position of the parents given that the  child's
         best interests will usually require that he or she lives as part of
         the family unit. But the focus on the family does not  sit  happily
         with the language of section 117B(6). Had  Parliament  intended  to
         require considerations bearing upon  the  conduct  and  immigration
         history of the applicant parent to be taken into  consideration,  I
         would have expected it to say so expressly, not for the  matter  to
         have to be inferred from a  test  which  in  terms  focuses  on  an
         assessment of what is reasonable for the child. This does not in my
         view mean that the wider public interests have been ignored; it  is
         simply that Parliament has determined that  where  the  seven  year
         rule is satisfied and the other conditions in the section have been
         met,  those  potentially  conflicting  public  interests  will  not
         suffice to justify refusal of leave if, focusing on the position of
         the child, it is not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK. When section 117A(2)(a) refers  to  the  need  for  courts  and
         tribunals to take into account  the  considerations  identified  in
         section 117B in all cases, that would not  in  my  view  have  been
         intended to include specific circumstances where Parliament must be
         taken to have had regard to those matters.

         ...

         49. Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on  the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

 6. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides:

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

 7. There is no suggestion in  the  present  appeals  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  has  ignored  relevant  evidence  or  has   considered
    irrelevant matters in reaching her decision. That decision is  thorough
    and detailed. Judge has referred herself to MA (Pakistan) at more  than
    one point in her written decision. There is no reason to  suppose  that
    she misunderstood the ratio of that judgement. There is evidence in the
    file of the success which the children are  achieving  at  school  but,
    given the length of time there been living in the United Kingdom, there
    are no unusual or exceptional features to the  lives  which  they  have
    enjoyed here. Indeed, Ms Barton's submissions focused  almost  entirely
    upon her claim that the judge had failed to identify 'powerful reasons'
    as per MA (Pakistan). As I have set out  above,  the  judgement  in  MA
    (Pakistan) upon which the appellants so heavily rely must  be  read  in
    the light of subsequent judgement in KO (Nigeria).

 8. Any analysis in a case such as this will eventually expose the  tension
    which exists between  the  principle  that  there  must  be  'powerful'
    reasons to disturb children who have enjoyed life and education in  the
    United Kingdom for more than seven years and  the  equally  fundamental
    principle but a child is to be expected to accompany a parent  who  has
    no  right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  their  country  of
    nationality. As we see from the passages of KO (Nigeria) quoted  above,
    the Supreme Court considered both MA (Pakistan)  and  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 to contain accurate statements of the law.

 9. In these appeals, I have to determine whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law such that its decision should be set aside.  There  is  no
    error in the analytical process, assessment of evidence  and  reference
    to relevant authorities; the only challenge is the  judge's  conclusion
    that removal of the family would be reasonable. Ms Barton's submissions
    lead to the inexorable conclusion that, on the facts, the  appeals  had
    to be allowed. She submits, in effect, that the judge could  not  point
    to any 'powerful reasons' requiring  removal  because  none  exist  and
    because none exist the Tribunal should have allowed  the  appeals.  The
    problem with that submission  is  that  it  ignores  the  'real  world'
    perspective which KO (Nigeria)  urges  decision-makers  to  adopt.  The
    First-tier Tribunal has, following sound and  thorough  examination  of
    the evidence, reached an outcome which was, in my opinion, available to
    it on the evidence. She has  found  that,  notwithstanding  their  long
    residence and the private life which they have formed in this  country,
    the children can reasonably be expected to live in Pakistan. Ms  Barton
    did not submit  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    perverse nor do I find  it  to  be  so.  I  fully  acknowledge  that  a
    different tribunal, working by reference to the same  facts,  may  have
    come to a different conclusion. That does  not  in  itself  render  the
    decision which the First-tier Tribunal reached wrong in law. The  judge
    has decided that it would be reasonable for children who have lived for
    more than seven years in the United Kingdom to return to the country of
    their own nationality and that of parents who have chosen to  keep  the
    family in this  country  for  a  number  of  years  without  any  legal
    immigration status. Having regard to all the relevant jurisprudence and
    to the relevant statutory provisions, I am satisfied  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  in  reaching  that  conclusion.  As
    regards the recent issue of a passport to one of the appellants,  I  am
    aware that the definition of 'qualifying child'  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117B(6) include British citizens; I was  given  no  reason  why
    this new item of information should make any material difference to the
    submissions which I received in court.



Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.


Signed   Date 29 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

