
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/08420/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th March 2019                        |On 16th April 2019                 |
|                                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     n m
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley-Daley (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cope, promulgated on 17th October 2018, following the hearing  at
    North Shields on 26th September 2018.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born in 1985, and is  a  female.
    She appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of State,
    dated 27th March 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was that she applied for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life.  In March 2016, while she was  on
    holiday in Spain, she met Mr G, an Algerian national, who came  to  the
    UK in 2002, when he applied for asylum.  He was granted leave to remain
    in November 2007.  He subsequently became a British  citizen  in  March
    2012.  He was divorced from his first wife.  He has two adult  children
    who are also living in the United Kingdom.  He is in receipt  of  state
    benefits,  which  include  personal  and  independent  payments.    The
    Appellant developed a relationship with Mr G.   They  stayed  in  touch
    through telephone and social  media.   She  eventually  obtained  entry
    clearance on 19th July 2016 to come to the UK as a visitor.   She  came
    here on 30th July 2016.  She stayed for a month with Mr G.

 4. On 8th October 2016 she returned to the  United  Kingdom  and  she  has
    lived here ever since.  She and Mr G were married in Manchester on 25th
    November 2016.  However, before her leave  to  enter  expired  on  19th
    January 2017, the Appellant applied on 6th January 2017  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her marriage.  The couple's first child, L,  was
    born on 12th August 2017 in Leeds General Infirmary.  He is  a  British
    citizen.  Mr G cannot return to Algeria  because  of  the  difficulties
    that he has faced there, on the basis  of  which  he  acquired  refugee
    asylum status in this country, and subsequently British citizen status.
     He also has very little contact with his family there in any event.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that  the  Appellant  was  not  financially  independent
    (paragraph 78).  There was an absence of evidence in  relation  to  any
    private life in this country, by way of community and other links to  a
    wider society (paragraph 85).  Section 117B of the 2002 Act meant  that
    there was a public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control
    (paragraph 86) the  Appellant  had  entered  as  a  visitor,  and  this
    excluded her from being granted leave to  remain  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM, and given that her  status  was  precarious,  it  was  not
    disproportionate to require her to return to make a proper  application
    (paragraph 92).  As for the child, L, there was no suggestion  that  he
    would have to leave the UK if the Appellant had to go back  to  Algeria
    because it had not been established that Mr G, as his father, could not
    take care of him in this country or that he would be unwilling to do so
    (paragraph 99).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with a British citizen.  They had a child  together.   The
    child is a British citizen.  The judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration for this  fundamental  fact.   Instead,  he  has  focused
    mainly on the relationship with the partner and the risk on  return  to
    Algeria.   The  judge  has  also  failed  to  carry  out  an   adequate
    proportionality assessment.  He has simply concluded that  the  refusal
    is in accordance with the law.  Second, the judge has stated  that  the
    Appellant can return to Algeria to make an entry clearance application.
     This ignores the fact that there is a provision within  the  Rules  to
    make an application in-country.  The Appellant applied  while  she  was
    still on her visit visa.  She did not wait  to  become  an  overstayer.
    There was no legitimate aim in excluding consideration of her Article 8
    rights to remain here with her husband and family.  Finally,  the  test
    was one of "reasonableness" in the context of paragraph EX.1,  and  the
    IDI's, stated that "Save in the cases involving criminality it will not
    be possible to take a decision in relation to a  parent  of  a  British
    citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to  force  the
    child to leave the EU ..." (see paragraph 7).

 8. On 6th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Medley-Daley submitted that the  Appellant
    was the only carer of her son, L

10.  If she were to be removed this would split the family up.   The  IDI's
    had to be applied here and he has made it quite clear that, in  a  case
    that did not involve criminality, a  British  citizen  child  could  be
    impacted by the judgment in Zambrano.  The Secretary of State was  duty
    bound to follow his own IDI's.  Moreover, the  recent  decision  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 where it was stated,

         "The consideration of  the  child's  best  interests  must  not  be
         affected by the conduct or immigration history of  the  parents  or
         family carer, but these would be relevant to the assessment of  the
         public interest, including  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control ..." (paragraph 11).

    In the same way, Mr Medley-Daley submitted that the well-known decision
    in MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  also  does  not  address  the
    position of a British citizen child when it states that, in  assessing,
    whether it is "reasonable to expect" a qualifying child to leave the UK
    the focus must be exclusively upon the position of the child.  Be  that
    as it may, this is a "qualifying child", who is a British citizen,  and
    to that extent what was said in MA (Pakistan) remains intact.

11. For her part, Ms Pettersen submitted that she had  nothing  further  to
    add.  She would recognise that this was  a  case  where  there  was  no
    criminality involved.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

13. First, the Appellant is in a relationship with a British  citizen,  and
    now has a British citizen child, whereby a  decision  taken  to  remove
    her, would engage the Zambrano principle, and this is clear in the  IDI
    itself (at paragraph 7).  She is the sole carer of her child.

14. Second, there is no criminality  involved.   There  is  no  attempt  to
    undermine the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant  made  her  application
    when she already had valid  leave.   She  was  entitled  to  make  that
    application because the Rules allow for an in-country application to be
    made.

15. Third, there is no legitimate aim to the Appellant leaving the  UK  and
    applying from Algeria, given that there is a provision  that  expressly
    allows her to make an in-country application.  The suggestion that  any
    separation between herself and her remaining family in the UK would  be
    short is speculation.  One has to look at the situation as it under the
    applicable provisions.

16. Fourth, in any event, given that the Appellant's partner, Mr  G  is  on
    benefits and not able to meet the financial requirements,  it  is  more
    probable than not that she would face difficulty in returning  back  to
    the UK, which would further bring into effect the Zambrano  principles.



17. Finally, the position of the Secretary of State is expressly set out in
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions (Appendix FM 1.0, family  life
    as a partner or parent - ten your routes, August  2015),  which  states
    that,

         "If the family could all go to the country of return  together  but
         they choose  to  separate  this  would  not  in  itself  constitute
         exceptional circumstances.  However, the decision-maker should  not
         usually make a decision that forces a family to be split  if  there
         is no criminality to add weight to the public interest in removal".

Remaking the Decision

18. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed.

20. No anonymity direction is made.

21. This appeal is allowed.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019















