
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08251/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 11 April 2019                   |On 1 May 2019                      |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                 FATEMA [L]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Miah (for Crystal Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is Fatema [L], a citizen of India born  29  August  1996,
    who appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  5
    September 2018 to dismiss her appeal on human  rights  grounds,  itself
    brought against the refusal of her application on 19 March 2018.

 2. Her immigration history is that she entered the UK on 14 September 2015
    with leave as a visitor until  25  February  2016,  on  which  day  she
    applied for leave outside the Rules, an application that was refused on
    15 September 2016; a similar application was then made in November 2016
    and refused on 13 October 2017. Following judicial  review  proceedings
    the decision was reconsidered and maintained, leading to this appeal.

 3. The Appellant's claim arises from the care needs of her younger brother
    [B] who suffers from quadriplegic cerebral palsy and requires full time
    care. She has lived with him and the rest of the UK-based  family,  her
    parents, paternal grandmother, and her brothers.  Her  help  was  vital
    given that her father has  been  too  unwell  to  work  regularly;  her
    grandmother, [JL], also had mobility problems, asthma  and  depression.
    Other family members had  been  granted  leave:  her  parents  and  her
    brothers [B] and [A], though the application of her other  brother  [M]
    remained outstanding, and by the time of the appeal before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, had been refused but was  subject  to  ongoing  judicial
    review proceedings.

 4. The Appellant's mother [Z] has visited the UK on  four  occasions  from
    2008, and was granted leave until 8 August 2016 and  then  until  March
    2019, on the basis that [B] needed her care. The Appellant's father had
    lived in the UK with [B] since 2003, [B] having been granted leave as a
    medical visitor which was then extended  via  discretionary  grants  of
    leave, their father presently holding leave until 18 February 2019. The
    Appellant had previously lived with her maternal  grandmother  but  she
    had died; she could not be expected to return to India  to  live  alone
    given the social pressures on lone women.

 5. A letter from Sayeed Medical Centre  in  Leicester  stated  that  [B]'s
    condition required a multidisciplinary team to look after him, assisted
    by his carers at home. The Appellant's mother witness statement set out
    that Fatema is fit and healthy which is  why  we  need  her  ...  [she]
    provides us with the emotional support that we need."

 6. The country evidence included  a  report  from  Open  Democracy  of  12
    January 2017 Seeking justice for rape by the  state  in  Bastar,  India
    which set out that for tribal women living  in  the  Bastar  region  of
    central India, sexual abuse at the hands of security forces had  become
    routine, a  problem  for  which  the  state  government  had  now  been
    challenged to take responsibility.  Paramilitary  forces  had  sexually
    mistreated women in one village in South Bastar in  2015,  an  incident
    that was said to be "common". In one month that year 13 rapes had  been
    reported in one village. A report by Women Against Sexual Violence  and
    State Repression (WSS), which conducted  an  independent  fact  finding
    mission in the region, said:

         "Sexual Violence in Chhattisgarh is reaching alarming  levels.  The
         combing operations of the security forces inevitably involve  large
         scale sexual violence against adivasi (tribal) women. The police on
         the other hand refuse to file even an FIR, thus all the  energy  of
         women is directed into getting their complaints heard. The  purpose
         of sexual violence then is not just to humiliate, but also  display
         physical control over the body of the subjugated by  male  security
         forces."

 7. The Secretary of State's Country Policy  and  Information  Note  India:
    Women fearing gender-based violence (July 2018) states:

         "4.8 Single women

         4.8.2 Relocation within India of single women, women with  children
         or victims of familial crime was reported to be  difficult  because
         of the need to provide details of their husband's or father's  name
         to access government services and accommodation [42]. Single  women
         faced difficulties in accessing housing [43]."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal heard the appeal (without a representative from
    the Respondent being present). Addressing her case under the Rules, the
    Judge concluded that the Appellant faced no very significant  obstacles
    to integration in India, given she was  in  good  health,  was  single,
    could return to live with her maternal grandmother and younger  brother
    in India with whom she had previously lived, could read and  write  and
    had skills readily transferable to life in India, and could  indeed  be
    accompanied back by her brother [M]  if  that  was  thought  desirable,
    given he had no leave in the UK.

 9. As to the claim outside the Rules, family  life  was  established  here
    between the Appellant and the rest of her family. It was clear that the
    Appellant helped to look after [B]. However, it was  difficult  to  see
    that the Appellant could be essential to  [B]'s  care  given  that  her
    mother's application had  already  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  she
    herself was the only  appropriate  carer.  There  was  extended  family
    living in Leicester and Bolton to call upon.

10. Her father had given inconsistent evidence as to his  ability  to  work
    (saying he was presently working in his witness statement but  in  oral
    evidence that he was not working), notwithstanding having been  treated
    for some health conditions. A  GP's  letter  stated  he  suffered  from
    cardiac  pain  and  was  under  cardiology  review.   The   Appellant's
    grandmother Mrs [L] did not appear to need a great deal  of  care;  the
    medical evidence did not confirm the  conditions  from  which  she  was
    claimed to suffer.

11. The Appellant's mother had lived mostly in India until 2015. Since 2003
    the family had kept in touch via visits; they  had  had  at  least  one
    family holiday in Dubai.

12. Applying the statutory criteria, whilst the Appellant spoke English she
    was not financially independent, and had established her family life in
    the UK during a time when her immigration status was precarious.

13. Grounds of appeal contended that the First-tier Tribunal had materially
    erred in law by

      a) Failing to make a finding on the Appellant's status as a lone woman
         in India given the country evidence showing the problems she  might
         face;

      b) Failing to take account of the fact that some  family  members  had
         been granted leave based on [B]'s care  needs,  and  that  [M]  was
         pursuing judicial review proceedings;

      c) Failing to take account of the fact that it was now  necessary  for
         the Appellant's mother to work full time to support the family, who
         had never had recourse to public funds;

      d) Failing to take account of  the  evidence  that  external  agencies
         could not meet [B]'s round-the-clock care needs and that there  was
         no evidence that extended family members were able to  meaningfully
         assist.

14. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 19 December 2018  on
    the basis that all issues  raised  in  the  grounds  were  sufficiently
    arguable to have an impact on the appeal's outcome.

15. Mr Miah submitted that there was no evidence to show that other  family
    members would step in: indeed the grants of leave since 2003.  [B]  had
    been granted leave as a medical visitor in 2003  and  had  subsequently
    been granted Discretionary Leave to Remain.  The  maternal  grandmother
    had passed away after the Appellant's arrival in the UK.  Applying  the
    Kamara test the dangers she faced was highly relevant to this.

16. Mr Jarvis submitted that

      a) It was not established that the Appellant's own home  area  was  as
         dangerous as she claimed and in any event Article 3 ECHR or  asylum
         had not been raised on the appeal;

      b) The Appellant entered as a visitor and ECHR Art  8  should  not  be
         interpreted to allow a family to migrate in stages  simply  because
         of the grant of leave to some members; there was a lack of evidence
         to show that the Appellant's presence was in itself vital to  [B]'s
         care regime.

Findings and reasons

17. I accept that there were indeed material errors of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Firstly, the Appellant has not previously lived in India alone, and  it
    is clear that in the part of the country from which  she  is  from  she
    might face real dangers.  The  Home  Office's  own  evidence  indicates
    problems for lone women lacking male relatives living in  the  country.
    One can  readily  imagine  that  a  mature  woman  with  experience  of
    independent living in an urban centre would be able  to  navigate  life
    well enough, but the Appellant is a  young  woman  who  does  not  have
    experience of living alone without  family  support.  The  Judge  below
    believed she could resume life with her grandmother, but  this  finding
    overlooked the evidence that that lady had passed away.

19. Mr Jarvis's submission was that these considerations  were  effectively
    ruled out of consideration because the Appellant  had  not  pursued  an
    asylum claim. One can readily envisage cases  where  an  asylum  claim,
    whether by reference to the Refugee Convention  or  Article  3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention, would not succeed,  for  example  because  the
    problems in question would not  reach  the  persecution  threshold,  or
    might be defeated by the relatively high threshold represented  by  the
    test for unduly harsh internal relocation. However  those  same  issues
    might  nevertheless  be  arguable   as   matters   representing   "very
    significant obstacles to integration" or circumstances amounting  to  a
    disproportionate interference with private and  family  life.  To  shut
    those matters out of consideration would deprive the ground  of  appeal
    raising incompatibility with the Human Rights Act 1998 of effect.

20. Secondly, some family members have been granted leave on the  basis  of
    [B]'s care needs. As Mr Jarvis submitted,  this  does  not  necessarily
    entitle the entire family unit to migrate to the UK. However, this is a
    case where the Secretary of  State  has  granted  leave  to  remain  to
    parents and siblings in recognition of the care needs and  family  life
    of a vulnerable young person. Adequate  support  arrangements  were  in
    place for the Appellant herself in India so long as her grandmother was
    alive. However, her death clearly potentially leaves the  Appellant  in
    the situation of a "stranded sibling" abroad without the  close  family
    support that she would otherwise receive. I do not  consider  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal can simply make a decision on the basis that  [M]'s
    application has been refused, given  that  there  is  a  pending  legal
    challenge  to  that  decision.  Besides,  Tribunal  appeals   must   be
    determined on their merits, not simply on the basis of the legality  of
    Home Office decisions, and so  all  relevant  considerations  fall  for
    assessment within their compass.

21. For these reasons I consider that  the  appeal  needs  to  be  re-heard
    afresh.

Decision

The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.


Signed      Date 24 April 2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
