
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08538/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd July 2017                          |On 11th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              mr Khagendra rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer New delhi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by GIL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nepal, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  dated  16th
    September 2015 to refuse his application for entry clearance to  settle
    in the UK as the adult dependent son of his mother who is the widow  of
    an ex-Ghurkha soldier (the appellant's  father).   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J Holmes dismissed the appeal in a  decision  dated  30th  June
    2016.  The Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  on
    1st November 2016.

 2. A renewed application for permission to appeal was granted by the Upper
    Tribunal on 4th May 2017 on the basis that the grounds  raise  arguable
    issues including that the key finding that the Appellant would not have
    settled in the UK when a child appears to go  unexplained.   The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge also suggested that in light  of  the  decision  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Jitendra Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ  320  it  may  be
    that the judge was wrong  to  place  weight  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's mother chose to move to the UK.  The Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    also pointed out that it may be that  the  Appellant  faces  formidable
    obstacles to making out his case  in  light  of  the  apparently  sound
    finding that the Appellant and  his  mother  could  not  satisfactorily
    maintain and accommodate themselves without resort to public funds.

The background

 3. The Appellant's father was a Ghurkha who was  discharged  before  1997.
    The Appellant was born on 12 June 1995. The Appellant's father died  in
    2002. As his widow, the Appellant's mother became entitled to settle in
    the UK in 2009. The Appellant, as an adult child,  became  entitled  to
    apply for settlement in January 2015. She and the Appellant applied for
    entry clearance in August 2015. The  Appellant's  mother's  application
    was granted and she entered the UK.  The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused.

 4. The appeal was determined without a hearing. In his decision the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge considered the  documentary  evidence  taking  into
    account that the Appellant is single and unemployed and that he and his
    mother were living together in Nepal and that they made an  application
    for entry clearance together and he found that  there  is  family  life
    between the Appellant and his mother. The judge  went  on  to  consider
    proportionality,  taking  into   account   the   historical   injustice
    identified in the case law including Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.
    The judge  found  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
    proportionate to the Respondent's legitimate aim.

 Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Jafar  expanded  on  the  grounds  and  his
    skeleton argument.  Mr Jafar submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 16 of the decision that there  is  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and his mother was not challenged and is not in dispute.   He
    pointed out that it was  also  not  in  dispute  that  noted  that  the
    Appellant's father was a Ghurkha who was  discharged  before  1997  and
    died in 2002 and that his wife (the Appellant's mother) became eligible
    to enter the UK in 2009.  The Appellant himself only became eligible to
    apply to enter the UK in January 2015 under Annex K of the  Immigration
    Rules.  He relied on the decision in Rai and submitted that  the  judge
    erred in taking into account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  mother
    voluntarily  left  Nepal  in  his  assessment  of  proportionality.  He
    submitted that this was similar to  the  reasoning  criticised  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Rai.

 6. Mr Jafar submitted that the real  nub  of  this  case  is  the  judge's
    consideration  of  the  issue  of  the  historic   injustice   in   the
    proportionality assessment.   He  submitted  that  the  real  issue  is
    whether the Appellant's father would have settled in the UK had he  had
    the opportunity to do so.  He referred to the covering letter submitted
    by the Appellant along with his application  and  referred  to  by  the
    judge at the end of paragraph 19 of the decision.   He  submitted  that
    this letter was sufficient to show an intention  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant's father to settle in the UK.  He submitted that it should be
    taken into account that the Appellant's father died in 2002  but  that,
    although he would have acquired the right to settle in the UK  in  1972
    upon his discharge from the army, that opportunity was not  offered  to
    him before his death in 2002 and indeed it was not offered  to  him  or
    his wife until 2009.  He submitted that the passage of time  should  be
    taken into account in  looking  at  the  intentions  expressed  by  the
    Appellant's father.  He  submitted  that  the  assertion  made  by  the
    Appellant as to his father's wishes has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Respondent and that that was  a  sufficient  reason  to  accept  it  as
    highlighted by the Tribunal in  at  paragraph  5  of  the  decision  in
    Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight) [2013]  UKUT
    567 (IAC).  He submitted that in light of the death of the  Appellant's
    father in 2002 and the passage of time as a result of the delay on  the
    part of the Home Office in acknowledging the  rights  of  the  Ghurkhas
    that the Appellant's father could not have expressed his intentions  as
    fully as if he had been alive when the right had been given to him.

 7. Mr Jafar pointed out that the Appellant was born in 1985, he turned  18
    in 2003 after the death of his father.  In terms of the  other  aspects
    of the proportionality assessment Mr Jafar submitted that there are  no
    adverse factors weighing against the Appellant, his mother has  a  good
    immigration history and she has been employed since coming  to  the  UK
    and there is an expectation that the Appellant himself will be employed
    too.  Mr  Jafar  referred  to  the  last  paragraph  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal and submitted that the  lack
    of financial independence is not a necessary requirement under  Article
    8 or the policy which was updated in January 2015.  He  submitted  that
    the factors set out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 should be considered in  the  round  and  that  if  the
    evidence were properly assessed the balance  falls  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

 8. In his  submissions  Mr  Kandola  accepted  that  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 16 that there was family life between the Appellant  and  his
    mother.  As the Rules were not being considered the judge looked at the
    steps under R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He accepted  that
    the real nub of this  appeal  is  whether  the  historic  injustice  is
    engaged by any evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  of  an
    intention on the part of the Appellant's father to  settle  in  the  UK
    when he was alive with his dependent child who is  now  an  adult.   He
    relied on paragraphs 41 and 42 of the decision in Rai  and  highlighted
    that the burden is on the Appellant to establish that there had been an
    intention to settle in the UK.

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that in this  case  the  judge  did  look  at  the
    evidence before him and this is referred to at  the  last  sentence  of
    paragraph 19 so this is not a case where the judge has failed  to  have
    regard to material evidence.   He  submitted  that  the  only  evidence
    before the judge as to the  Appellant's  father's  intentions  was  the
    Appellant's covering letter and that this did not include  an  explicit
    reference to an intention to settle, it just referred to  an  intention
    to visit the UK.  In those circumstances Mr Kandola submitted  that  it
    was open to the judge to come to the conclusion he did.   He  submitted
    that, as the evidence was so limited, there was no error of law.

10. Mr Kandola accepted that, if the historic injustice issue is engaged in
    this case, there needs to  be  more  than  a  concern  in  relation  to
    maintenance and accommodation to outweigh the historic  injustice.   He
    accepted that there was no criminal history.  He noted that  there  was
    no evidence in relation to the Appellant's ability to speak English but
    accepted that, even combining these factors, there  is  not  enough  to
    outweigh the historic injustice.

11. In his reply Mr Jafar reiterated his submission that  the  consequences
    of delay in this case meant that, not only had the  Appellant's  father
    not been offered the opportunity to settle in the UK, but he  also  had
    not had the opportunity to express a choice in relation to  whether  he
    would settle as it had never been offered to him.  In  his  submission,
    in the circumstances the choice made by the Appellant's mother, as soon
    as she had the opportunity to  do  so,  is  evidence  of  the  father's
    intentions.  Mr Jafar submitted that the judge here placed too  high  a
    threshold on the evidence establishing that point in the  circumstances
    of this case.

Findings

12. As identified by the parties, the key issue here is  the  treatment  of
    the historic injustice issue.  The  judge  dealt  with  this  issue  at
    paragraph 19 where he said:

         "A further consideration with relevance to proportionality, which I
         take into account, is  the  historical  injustice  that  the  Court
         acknowledged in Gurung and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  At  paragraph
         38 the court observed that "the historic injustice is only  one  of
         the factors to be weighed against the need to maintain a  firm  and
         fair immigration policy.  It is not necessarily determinative.   If
         it were, the application of every  adult  child  of  a  UK  settled
         Gurkha who establishes that he has a family life  with  his  parent
         would be bound to succeed".  At paragraph 42 the  court  held  that
         "If a Gurkha can show that, but  for  the  historic  injustice,  he
         would have settled in the UK at a time  when  his  dependant  (now)
         adult child would have been able to accompany him  as  a  dependant
         child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that
         it is proportionate to permit the adult child to  join  his  family
         now".  However, I am not satisfied that any such  facts  have  been
         shown in the present appeal, even taking into account what is  said
         in  the  covering  letter  that  the  appellant  claims   to   have
         accompanied his application."

13. It is clear from paragraphs 5 and 19  that  the  judge  considered  the
    Appellant's covering letter (contained in a small  unpaginated  bundle)
    in looking at the Appellant's father's intentions to settle in the  UK.
    The letter is dated 21st August 2015 and appears  to  have  accompanied
    the application form and all of the other evidence submitted along with
    the application. This letter is the only evidence as to the Appellant's
    father's intentions and contains the following:

         "Moreover, my father served UK with his full responsibility and got
         retired and married with my mother.  As per my mother  he  used  to
         recite the stories of Ghurkha bravery and dreamland for Ghurkha UK.
          He wished that one day he would visit the nation  whom  he  served
         with my mother. With different reasons, he  could  not  do  on  his
         lifetime.  Later on, the British government allows the family of ex-
         British Army to settle in the UK and it would be a great moment for
         a family if my father was alive, unfortunately it wouldn't  happen.
         Now, my mother is 60 years and I wanted to be with her  in  the  UK
         the very land my father used to tell my mother.  I want  my  mother
         to see UK and enjoy her good time in the UK.  So, to  support  her,
         care her and remain with her is my  primary  motive  to  apply  for
         settlement visa with my mother."

14. The issue really is  whether  this  is  sufficient  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father would have settled in the UK but  for  the  historic
    injustice.  At paragraph 19 the judge concluded that this letter is not
    sufficient to demonstrate that the Appellant met the test  set  out  in
    Gurung. However, the difficulty here is  that  the  judge  rejects  the
    contents of that letter in one sentence.  The judge has failed to  give
    any reasons for  rejecting  the  assertions  in  that  letter  and  for
    concluding that they do not demonstrate an intention on the part of the
    Appellant's  father  to  settle  in  the  UK  had  he  been  given  the
    opportunity to do so.  In my view, given that this issue is central  to
    the assessment of the historical injustice,  the  conclusion  that  the
    test has not been  met  is  inadequately  reasoned.  In  light  of  the
    centrality of the Appellant's father's intentions to the  determination
    of the weight to be given to the historic injustice  I  find  that  the
    failure to give reasons for the conclusion in relation  to  this  issue
    amounts to a material error of law.

15. In these circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  There was no challenge to the findings of fact made by
    the judge and those findings are preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

16. Mr Jafar indicated that there was no further evidence and he was  happy
    to rely on the evidence already submitted and submissions in  terms  of
    remaking the decision.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  finding  that  there  is  family  life
    between the Appellant and his mother has not been challenged. There  is
    no challenge to the Judge's conclusion that the first  four  stages  of
    the Razgar steps have been answered in the  affirmative.  There  is  no
    dispute that, as this is an application for entry clearance by the  son
    of a former Ghurkha, the historic injustice is a  factor  to  be  given
    weight in the assessment of proportionality.

18. I have considered the witness statement from the Appellant  dated  15th
    June 2017 and note that, although there appears  to  be  an  assumption
    that the Appellant's father would have applied to settle in the UK  had
    that right  been  given  to  him  before  his  death,  the  Appellant's
    statements contain no assertion that his father expressly  voiced  that
    intention before his death.  The Appellant's  mother's  statement  also
    appears to imply that her husband would have sought to settle in the UK
    but again contains no express report of his intention to  that  effect.
    Therefore the only reference to anything the  Appellant's  father  said
    about this issue is that contained in the Appellant's  covering  letter
    of 21st August 2015.

19. I take into account the passage of time and the fact  that  before  his
    death in 2002 the Appellant's father had not been given  any  right  to
    settle in the UK nor had any of his  Ghurkha  colleagues.  He  may  not
    therefore have been able to express his desires or intentions in  terms
    of settlement. I take into account that it is  clear  from  the  letter
    that English is  not  the  Appellant's  first  language  and  there  is
    therefore the possibility that the expressions  of  intention  are  not
    entirely accurate.  I note that, although the Appellant refers  to  his
    father wishing that he would one day visit the UK, he  also  says  that
    when the British Government allowed the family of a Ghurkha  to  settle
    in the UK "it would be a great moment for our family if my  father  was
    alive".  I have considered the entire letter  in  the  context  of  the
    subsequent  statements.  I  take  into  account  the  fact   that   the
    Appellant's mother came to the UK to settle as soon as she was able  to
    do so as being a strong indication of the intentions of the Appellant's
    father.

20.  In  these  circumstances  I  accept  on  balance  that  the   evidence
    establishes that, but  for  the  historic  injustice,  the  Appellant's
    father would have settled in the UK prior to his death in 2002.  At his
    death in 2002  the  Appellant  would  have  been  under  18  and  would
    therefore have been able to accompany his father as a dependent  child.



21. In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 00567 (IAC) the Tribunal gave the following  guidance  as  to  the
    weight to be attached to the  historic  wrong  in  the  proportionality
    assessment:

         "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article
         8 is held to be engaged and the fact  that  but  for  the  historic
         wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

                 "were prevented from settling in the U.K. That is why  the
                 historic injustice is such an important factor to be taken
                 into  account  in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why  the
                 applicant dependent child of a Gurkha who  is  settled  in
                 the UK has such a strong claim to have  his  article  8(1)
                 right  vindicated,  notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the
                 countervailing public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm
                 immigration policy". [41]

          In  other  words,  the  historic  injustice  issue   will   carry
        significant weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is
        likely to outweigh the matters relied on by the  Respondent,  where
        these consist solely of the public interest just described.

         60. Once this point is grasped, it can immediately  be  appreciated
         that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the "public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy", which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed.    But,
         if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour. "

22. Mr Kandola properly accepted that there are no factors over  and  above
    the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration  policy  in  this
    case. He accepted that, although it is not clear whether the  Appellant
    speaks English and there is a question in  relation  to  the  financial
    independence, even cumulatively these issues  would  not  outweigh  the
    weight to be given to historic injustice in this case.

23. In the circumstances and  in  light  of  my  findings  above  I  attach
    significant weight to the historic injustice in this case  and  I  find
    that the decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  in  this  case  is  not
    proportionate to the Respondent's legitimate aim.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing it on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid  or  may  be  payable  because  the  evidence
relied on to remake the decision was before the ECO.


Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

