
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08668/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 January 2018                         |On 7 February 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                JC (AKA IFF)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Parker instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on  [  ]  1975.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in 1996  as  a  visitor.   After  his  leave
    expired, the appellant overstayed.

 3. On 31 March 2011, the appellant was convicted  on  fourteen  counts  of
    supplying a class A drug and was sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
     After he was released  on  licence,  and  during  the  period  of  his
    licence, the appellant again  offended.   On  25  April  2016,  he  was
    convicted at the Southwark Crown Court, following a jury  trial,  of  a
    money laundering offence arising out of the supply by him  of  class  A
    drugs.  He was sentenced to 54 months' imprisonment on 27 May 2016  but
    that sentence was subsequently reduced on appeal to one of  30  months'
    imprisonment.

 4. On 21 June 2016, the appellant was notified that he was  liable  to  be
    deported as a result of his offending.  Although, it would appear,  the
    appellant did not respond to the invitation to  submit  representations
    why he should not be deported, the Secretary of State  treated  him  as
    having made a human rights claim.  On 28 July 2017,  the  Secretary  of
    State refused the appellant's human rights claim based upon  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Lal  on  18  September  2017.   Before  the  judge,  the
    appellant and his partner ("NH") who is a  British  citizen  gave  oral
    evidence.  The evidence included that the appellant  and  NH  had  four
    children who were British citizens born respectively on [ ] 2003,  [  ]
    2006, [ ] 2010 and [ ] 2016.

 6. The judge made a number of findings.  First, at para 18, he found:

         "the Appellant to be overall  a  poor  witness  of  truth  and  the
         Tribunal  was  under  the  distinct  impression  he  was   actively
         misleading the Tribunal when he described the various  reasons  why
         he wanted to stay in the UK".

 7. Secondly, the judge noted (at para 22) that:

         "The best interests of  the  children  have  at  all  times  to  be
         considered and the usual starting point is that it is in  the  best
         interests of the child to be brought up by both their parents".

 8. Then, at paras 25-27, the judge gave his reasons for finding  that  the
    appellant's deportation would not breach Art 8 as follows:

         "25. The Tribunal finds that the Appellant  has  a  limited  family
             life in the UK.  The evidence suggests that he is  actually  a
             drug dealer mainly based in London but  with  children  and  a
             partner in Birmingham.  The Tribunal noted  the  letters  from
             his children but it also noted that he has not  seen  them  in
             the previous 17  months.   The  Tribunal  finds  that  in  all
             probability he is a fairly 'hands off' father and he has spent
             large parts of time from 2011 in custody in any event.

         26.  The Tribunal noted the remarks of the  sentencing  judge  that
             the Appellant had travelled to London to deal in  drugs  while
             still  on  licence.   The  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that   the
             convictions represent the serious end of offending  behaviour.
             The Tribunal finds that taken at  its  highest  the  Appellant
             only has the potential of establishing a family life in the UK
             on the basis that he indicated a  commitment  to  be  involved
             with his children but that he has in fact no meaningful family
             life at present.

         27.  In the alternative, removal would be arguably proportionate in
             light of the fact of  the  Appellant's  appalling  immigration
             history in the UK and  the  serious  offences  for  which  the
             Appellant has been convicted of.  He  has  never  enjoyed  any
             sort of relationships where it could be  said  currently  that
             his removal would have a disproportionate  impact  on  him  or
             others.  In fact, it is arguable that removing him from the UK
             will lessen the risk to society in general from a man who  has
             serious convictions for offences that have a  negative  impact
             on society at large, namely the supply of Class A drugs.   The
             public interest in this case clearly out weighs  any  negative
             impact to his partner or their  children.   The  Tribunal  has
             seen  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  contact  could  not  be
             maintained by visits and phone calls as it has been  when  the
             Appellant has been living in London prior to being  sentenced.
             The Appellant  is  apparently  an  electrician  and  he  could
             presumably do this in Jamaica.  He is  in  good  health.   The
             Tribunal dismisses the Article 8 appeal".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 13
    October  2017,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Keane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal in essence on the basis that  the  judge
    had failed to accord "adequate or indeed any  weight  to  the  hardship
    which the appellant's children might  experience  consequent  upon  his
    removal from the United Kingdom".

10. On 10 November 2017, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

11. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Parker  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed properly to consider the best interests of the appellant's  four
    children with his partner, NH.  She submitted that the judge had failed
    to accord any or any adequate weight  to  the  effect  his  deportation
    would have upon them and had made no relevant  findings  of  fact.   Ms
    Parker relied upon the case of  MK  (best  interests  of  child)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC) at [19] and [20] emphasising the importance  of
    considering  and  reaching  findings  on  the  best  interests  of  any
    children.  In  her  oral  submissions,  Ms  Parker,  relying  upon  her
    skeleton argument (in particular at para 9), contended that it  was  an
    insufficient consideration of the children's best interests simply:

      a) to make a  general  statement  about  the  best  interests  of  the
         children to be brought up by both parents at para 22;

      b) to comment that "in all probability he  is  a  fairly  'hands  off'
         father" at para 25;

      c) to note at para 27 that contact could be maintained by  visits  and
         phone calls; and

      d) to conclude at para 27 that  the  public  interest  outweighed  any
         negative impact on the appellant's partner or his children.

    Ms Parker submitted that the judge had only made a passing reference to
    letters written by the children and it could not,  therefore,  be  said
    that he had properly taken into account their views.   Ms  Parker  also
    submitted that the judge had not given any detailed reasons for finding
    at para 26 that there was "no meaningful family life" at present.

12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  judge  had
    reached a sustainable conclusion.   He  submitted  that  there  was  an
    absence of a  protracted  analysis  of  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    children for good reason.  First, the judge had found the appellant  to
    be a poor witness of truth at para 18 of  his  decision  and  that  the
    appellant had actively misled the Tribunal when he said why  he  wanted
    to stay in the UK.  Secondly, the judge  had  recognised  that  it  was
    generally in the best interests of children to be brought  up  by  both
    parents but that  was  not  what  had  happened  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant's children.  He relied upon the judge's finding  at  para  25
    that the appellant was a "'fairly hands off' father"  and  at  para  26
    that there was "no meaningful family life  at  present".   Mr  Richards
    submitted that was a conclusion properly open  to  the  judge  and  was
    adequately reasoned.  He submitted that there could be no circumstances
    where the judge could find that the appellant's deportation, given  his
    offending and the public interest reflected in that offending, would be
    outweighed by the children's best interests or could, if  s.117C(5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was applied,  be  said
    to be "unduly harsh".  Mr Richards submitted that although the  judge's
    determination was brief, it was brief for a reason, namely,  given  the
    stark findings of fact made by the judge there was only one  conclusion
    that  could  be  reached   that   the   appellant's   deportation   was
    proportionate.

Discussion

13. The appellant's claim to remain in the UK was  firmly  and  exclusively
    based on Art 8 of the ECHR.  At para 24 of his determination, Judge Lal
    set out the five-stage test in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  at
    [17].  Reading  Judge  Lal's  reasons  at  paras  25-27,  he  made  two
    principal findings.  First, he appears to find, in para  26,  that  Art
    8.1 is not engaged because there was "in fact no meaningful family life
    at present".  That factual finding, though questioned by Ms  Parker  in
    her oral submissions, was not challenged in the appellant's grounds  of
    appeal which are restricted to a challenge to  the  judge's  assessment
    and findings in respect of the children's best interests.  Secondly, in
    any event, the judge went on in para 27 to find  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would be proportionate.

14. As I have indicated, the appellant  has  not  formally  challenged  the
    judge's finding in para 26.  The actual finding is that  there  is  "no
    meaningful family life at present".  Whether this should have  led  the
    judge to find that Art 8.1 was not engaged is, as I have already noted,
    not challenged in the grounds.

15. The factual findings concerning the appellant's  involvement  with  his
    children made at paras 25 and 26 cumulatively are, in my judgment, ones
    properly open to the judge on the evidence.  The judge simply  did  not
    believe the appellant's evidence concerning his reasons for wanting  to
    stay in the UK.  That, in my judgment,  reflected  on  the  appellant's
    claimed relationship with his children.  He had not, in fact, seen them
    for the previous seventeen months.  During that time he had, of course,
    been in prison or immigration detention.  I was told that he  had  been
    released  from  his  custodial  sentence  on  24  July  2017  but  had,
    thereafter, been in immigration detention  until  December  2017.   The
    fact of the matter was that during that time he had not been visited by
    his children and had not seen  them.   He  and  his  partner  gave  the
    explanation that this was due to their finances or  due  to  the  cost.
    She had, however, visited  him  three  times  during  the  most  recent
    sentence.  The evidence was also that the appellant had been living  in
    London previously where, as the sentencing judge found, he had  been  a
    drug dealer.  His denial of that in cross-examination  in  this  appeal
    ran counter to the basis upon which  he  was  sentenced  following  his
    conviction for money laundering.

16. Although the judge does  not  set  out  the  letters  provided  by  the
    appellant's children, and indeed his mother-in-law, he  made  reference
    to them at paras 12 and 18 of his determination, in the latter instance
    stating that they "do not assist" the appellant  in  showing  that  his
    deportation would be proportionate.  I have read the letters  and  they
    cumulatively,  perhaps  not  unexpectedly,  contain  pleas   that   the
    appellant be allowed to remain in the UK.  I do not accept Ms  Parker's
    submission that the judge failed adequately to consider  these  letters
    simply because he did not set out their detail.  It is clear to me that
    he did take them  into  account.   However,  looking  at  the  evidence
    overall, it was not irrational for  the  judge  to  find  (particularly
    given his adverse  view  as  to  the  appellant's  veracity)  that  his
    relationship  with  the  children  was  "hands  off"   and   that   any
    relationship was not "meaningful" at present.

17. In the light of this, I accept Mr Richards'  submission  that,  despite
    the lack of detailed reasoning, it is plain that  the  judge  took  the
    view that he had not established that  his  deportation  would  have  a
    sufficient negative impact on his  children  (or  indeed  his  partner)
    which would outweigh the clear  public  interest  demonstrated  by  the
    seriousness of the  appellant's  offending  arising  out  of  his  2016
    conviction for money laundering  of  funds  whilst  supplying  class  A
    drugs.  That was a very serious offence  that  entailed  a  significant
    public interest in his deportation (see, e.g. s.117C(2) of the NIA  Act
    2002).  There was, before the judge,  little  or  no  evidence  of  any
    impact upon the  children  of  his  deportation  beyond  the  'limited'
    relationship with them and the  heart-felt  pleas  contained  in  their
    letters.

18. In my judgment, it was not only reasonable, but was in fact inevitable,
    that the judge would conclude that the best interests of  the  children
    (given his findings) could not outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation.

19. In substance, therefore, I accept Mr Richards' submissions  and  reject
    those of Ms Parker that the judge materially erred in  law  by  failing
    properly to take into account the children's best interests in reaching
    his finding that the appellant's deportation was  proportionate.   That
    is sufficient in itself to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal on the basis of the grounds.

20. One final matter, which I raised during  the  course  of  the  hearing,
    concerns s.117C of the NIA Act 2002.  Section 117C(3) provides that  in
    the case of a foreign criminal who has not been sentenced to  a  period
    of four years or  more  (which  includes  the  appellant),  the  public
    interest requires that individual's deportation unless Exception 1 or 2
    in s.117C(4) or 117C(5) applies.   The  latter  (Exception  2)  applies
    where the individual has a:

         "... genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
         child, and the effect of [the individual's] deportation on the  ...
         child would be unduly harsh".

21. Judge Lal made no reference to this provision which, on the face of it,
    may have applied to the appellant.  Certainly, his  four  children  are
    each a "qualifying child" because they are all  British  citizens  (see
    s.117D(1)).  It may be,  however,  that  the  judge  did  not  consider
    s.117C(5) because, on the basis of his findings in paras 25 and  26  as
    to the nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    children, he took the view that there was not a "genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship" with  them.   However,  even  if  s.117C(5)  did
    apply, the requirement to demonstrate that the effect upon the children
    would  be  "unduly  harsh"   imposed   a   high   threshold   requiring
    consideration of the public interest (see MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450).  If it did not apply, then the appellant would  have  to
    establish "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above  those  in
    Exception 1 to outweigh the public interest (see NA (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662).   In  both  instances,  the  children's  'best
    interests' would again be relevant although not  determinative.   Given
    the judge's findings, even if s.117C(5) applied, I see  no  possibility
    that a rational conclusion could have been reached that the impact upon
    them would be "unduly harsh" or, alternatively, that  there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances" to outweigh the public interest.

22. For these  reasons,  the  judge  did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.   That  decision,
    therefore, stands.

24. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             5 February 2018

