
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08272/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 29th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe of Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zambia  born  17th  November  1972.   He
    appeals against a decision of Judge Dhaliwal (the judge) of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 29th March 2018.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK as a student on 15th September  2002.   He
    was subsequently granted further leave to remain as a student until 2nd
    July 2009.  He was joined by his wife in May 2006 and she  was  granted
    leave in line with the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant and his wife have three children born in the UK  on  27th
    October 2009, 6th September 2011, and 9th July 2013.

 4. On 2nd August 2011 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK
    outside the Immigration Rules.  This was refused on 23rd September 2011
    with  no  right  of  appeal.   Judicial  review  proceedings  followed.
    Eventually the application was refused by the Respondent on  21st  July
    2017 with a right of appeal.

 5. The Respondent did not accept  that  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules could be satisfied,  and  did  not  accept  that  the
    application disclosed any exceptional circumstances which would lead to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences if the application  was  refused.   It
    was accepted that the Appellant's middle child, to whom I  shall  refer
    as D, suffers from autism, but the Respondent's view was that  adequate
    facilities are available in Zambia to treat children who are autistic.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. The judge found that Article 8 was engaged and found  at  paragraph  27
    that the best interests of the children would be  served  by  remaining
    with their parents.   In  that  paragraph  the  judge  found  that  the
    "children are not of an age that they  have  put  firm  roots  down  in
    friendships, such aspects are subject to change".  The judge found that
    the children had no right to future education and healthcare in the UK.



 7. The judge found that the eldest child, to whom I shall refer as J, is a
    qualifying child having  accrued  more  than  seven  years'  continuous
    residence in the UK at the date of  hearing  and  therefore  considered
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).

 8. The judge went on to consider whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the child to leave the UK, and had regard to MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705  on the basis that she was entitled to take into account public
    interest considerations when assessing the question of  reasonableness,
    which included the immigration history of the parents of the qualifying
    child, and their conduct in the UK.  The judge also took  into  account
    the Respondent's own guidance, which states that where  a  child  is  a
    qualifying  child  by  reason  of  at  least  seven  years'  continuous
    residence, there must be strong reasons for refusing leave.

 9. The judge considered significant factors in relation to  reasonableness
    at paragraph 33(i)-(xii).

10. The judge concluded that it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant
    (presumably the judge meant reasonable for  the  qualifying  child)  to
    return to Zambia.

11. The judge went on to find the Respondent's decision to be proportionate
    and the appeal was refused on human rights grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. In summary, it was contended that the  judge  had  made  an  irrational
    finding, or alternatively  made  a  material  misdirection  of  law  in
    finding at paragraph 27, that the children were not of an age  to  have
    put down firm routes in friendships.  The judge had failed to  properly
    consider the cumulative long residence of the  children  and  the  best
    interests assessment was flawed.  The  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    paragraph 46 of MA (Pakistan) which makes reference  to  the  need  for
    strong reasons for refusing leave to  a  child  who  has  seven  years'
    continuous residence.

13. It was submitted that the finding  at  paragraph  27  contradicted  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 15 in which she found that  the  Appellant
    and his family "have established a strong family and  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom".

14. It was submitted that at paragraph 23 the judge had failed to recognise
    that eight years' residence  creates  a  strong  presumption  that  the
    child's best interests will be served by remaining in the UK  with  his
    parents.

15. It was submitted that the judge's treatment of the  Respondent's  delay
    in making a decision, between August 2011 and July 2017 was inadequate.
     The judge had failed to realise that the delay materially reduced  the
    public interest in removing the Appellant and his family.

16. It was submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  background
    evidence contained in section B of the Appellant's bundle, in  relation
    to the care of autistic children in Zambia.  That evidence demonstrated
    a lack of understanding of  autism,  a  lack  of  education  provision,
    superstition leading to ostracism, and  a  prevailing  situation  which
    would lead to the child's health and wellbeing being harmed in  Zambia.
    The judge had not properly engaged with that evidence.

17. The judge had failed to consider material matters, by failing  to  give
    proper consideration to the extent of D's autism.

18. The judge had made an irrational finding at paragraph 36 by  concluding
    that there were strong reasons for refusing leave to  remain,  and  the
    decision did not identify the required strong or powerful reasons.

Permission to Appeal

19. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Storey  in  the  following
    terms;

         "It is arguable that in assessing the issue of  the  reasonableness
         of expecting the eldest child to leave the UK, the judge failed  to
         apply the guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)
         requiring strong reasons to be shown for why the child  should  not
         remain in the UK.

         I do not exclude any of the grounds from being argued".

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - Error of Law

20. Mr Pipe relied upon the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted.  I was asked to note that subsequent to the FtT decision,
    the decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 had been published which Mr
    Pipe submitted demonstrated that the judge had been wrong in  law  when
    considering reasonableness.  The  judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    behaviour and immigration  history  of  the  parents,  including  their
    overstaying, and KO  made  it  clear  that  that  was  not  a  relevant
    consideration.

21. Mrs Aboni relied upon the Respondent's response dated 1st October  2018
    submitted  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, contending that the judge  had  fully  considered
    the position of the children in assessing the question  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable for them to leave the UK.  The judge had  correctly
    considered the best interests of the children.  The judge was  entitled
    to find that D, who suffered with autism, could be adequately  provided
    for in Zambia.

22. In my view the FtT decision is comprehensive and  prepared  with  care.
    However, I was persuaded that the judge had erred in law  although  she
    could not be blamed for this.  The judge had followed the  guidance  in
    MA (Pakistan), in taking into account the  behaviour  of  parents  when
    assessing whether it would be reasonable to expect a  qualifying  child
    to leave the UK.  This approach was found to be legally incorrect by KO
    (Nigeria).  I set out below paragraphs 16 and 17 of KO (Nigeria);

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to
             the position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor  DP5/96  it
             contains  no  requirement  to  consider  the  criminality   or
             misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing  factor.   It   is
             impossible  in  my  view  to  read  it  as  importing  such  a
             requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the same  effect.   The  question
             again is what is 'reasonable' for the child.  As Elias LJ said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B sets out a number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them.  Section 117B(6) is on its
             face free-standing, the  only  qualification  being  that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation.   The  list
             of relevant factors set out  in  the  IDI  guidance  (para  10
             above) seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)".

23. Further guidance on this  point  was  given  in  AB  (Jamaica)  and  AO
    (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 and I set out below paragraph 59 of  that
    decision;

         "59. Accordingly the position has now been reached  in  which  this
             Court is not only free to depart from the  approach  taken  by
             Laws LJ in MM (Uganda) but indeed is  required  to  do  so  in
             order to follow the binding decision of the Supreme  Court  in
             KO (Nigeria).  That can be done  by  following  the  preferred
             approach of Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan), at para  36,  where  he
             said:

                  'Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority,  I  would
                  favour the argument  of  the  Appellants.   The  focus  on
                  paragraph (b)  is  solely  on  the  child  and  I  see  no
                  justification for reading the concept of reasonableness so
                  as  to  include  a  consideration  of  the   conduct   and
                  immigration history of the parents as part of  an  overall
                  analysis of the public interest.  I do not deny that  this
                  may result in some cases in undeserving  applicants  being
                  allowed to remain, but that is not in my view a reason for
                  distorting the language of the section.  Moreover,  in  an
                  appropriate case  the  Secretary  of  State  could  render
                  someone liable to  deportation,  and  thereby  render  him
                  ineligible to rely on this provision, by  certifying  that
                  his or her presence would not be conducive to  the  public
                  good'".

24. It is clear that the judge when considering reasonableness of J leaving
    the UK, took into account the immigration history  of  his  parents  at
    paragraph 33.  KO (Nigeria) makes it clear that this  is  an  incorrect
    approach, and I must conclude that this amounts to a material error  of
    law.  The decision of the FtT was set aside.  Having set aside the  FtT
    decision I was invited  to  re-make  the  decision  without  a  further
    hearing, which I agreed was appropriate.

Re-making the Decision - My Conclusions and Reasons

25. It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he  could  not  satisfy
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   I  am  asked  to  consider
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention outside the  Rules.   I  find
    that Article 8 is engaged.  The Appellant has established  family  life
    with his wife and children, and the  family  have  established  private
    lives.  There would be no interference with their family life  if  they
    were removed to Zambia together, but there would be  interference  with
    their private lives.

26. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in the UK, and to establish that family and private  life
    exists which engages Article 8, and why  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    human rights claim interferes disproportionately in family and  private
    life rights in this country.  It is for the Respondent to establish the
    public interest factors weighing against the Appellant.   The  standard
    of proof is a balance of probabilities throughout.   In  deciding  this
    appeal I take into account the balance sheet  approach  recommended  at
    paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

27. The factual matrix is that the first Appellant has resided  in  the  UK
    since 2002 when he arrived as a student.  He was joined by his wife  in
    May 2006.  The couple have not had leave since 2nd July 2009.

28. The couple have three children, all of whom were born in the  UK.   The
    children are now aged 9, 7, and 5.  Two of the children  are  therefore
    qualifying children by reason of having accrued seven years' continuous
    residence in the UK.  The middle child, D, is autistic and has  special
    needs which are being catered for in the UK.

29. If it were not for the children, I find  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    would fail.  Because the appeal involves children I must consider their
    best interests as a  primary  consideration.   This  does  not  mean  a
    paramount  consideration  or  the  only  consideration,  and  the  best
    interests of the children can be outweighed by other considerations  if
    appropriate.

30. At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan) it is stated  that  the  fact  that  a
    child has been in the UK for seven  years  must  be  given  significant
    weight because of the relevance in determining the nature and  strength
    of the child's best interests, and because it establishes as a starting
    point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to
    the contrary.  The latest  Home  Office  guidance  on  this  issue  was
    published on 11th April 2019.  At page 68 there is reference to a child
    who has lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  at  least  seven
    years, and it is recognised

         "that over time children start to put down roots and  to  integrate
         into life in the UK.  The starting  point  is  that  we  would  not
         normally expect a qualifying child to leave the UK.  It is normally
         in a  child's  best  interests  for  the  whole  family  to  remain
         together, which means if the child is not expected to  leave,  then
         the parent or parents or primary carer of the child will  also  not
         be expected to leave the UK".

31. The length of residence is therefore  relevant.   Factors  relevant  to
    considering the best interests of a child are set out in  paragraph  35
    of  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.   The  factors   involve
    considering the age of the child, the length of time the child has been
    in the UK, how long the child has been  in  education  and  what  stage
    their education has reached.  There must also be consideration  of  the
    extent to which the child has been distanced from the country where  it
    is proposed they return, how renewable the connection with that country
    may be, and to what extent the child will have linguistic,  medical  or
    other difficulties in adapting to life in that country, and the  extent
    to which the course proposed would interfere with the private  life  of
    the child or the child's  rights,  if  there  are  any,  as  a  British
    citizen.

32. The three children were all born in the UK.  I must take  into  account
    that the eldest two children have lived in this country for  in  excess
    of seven years.  Both are in education although it could  not  be  said
    they are in a critical stage of their education.  However,  the  second
    child, D, does have significant special needs which are  being  catered
    for.  Background evidence does indicate that there are some  facilities
    for autistic children in Zambia, but it is clear that those  facilities
    are of a significantly lower standard than the facilities available  in
    the UK.

33. Because of the length of continuous residence, and the autism of  D,  I
    conclude that the best interests of the eldest child J, and the  middle
    child D, would be to remain in the UK where they were born.  The  third
    child is younger, and their best interests would be served by remaining
    with their parents.  Because I find that  the  best  interests  of  the
    elder children would be served by remaining in the UK,  I  conclude  it
    would be in the best interests for the third child to  also  remain  in
    the UK.

34. Having found that it would be in the best interests of the children  to
    remain in the UK, that does  not  however  mean  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal  must  be  allowed.   I  must  consider   any   other   relevant
    considerations, including the public interest.

35. I must have regard to the considerations in section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, which confirms  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

36. In particular I  must  consider  section  117B(6)  which  for  ease  of
    reference I set out below;

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)      it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.'

37. The Appellant is not liable to deportation.  It is accepted that he has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  children.   J
    and D are qualifying children because they have resided continuously in
    the UK for a period in excess of seven years.  J  has  now  accrued  in
    excess of nine and a half years' residence and D in excess of seven and
    a half years' residence.

38. I therefore have to decide whether it would not be reasonable to expect
    J and D to leave the United Kingdom.  The guidance in MA (Pakistan)  to
    the effect  that  seven  years'  continuous  residence  must  be  given
    significant weight because it establishes  as  a  starting  point  that
    leave should be granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary  (paragraph  49)  remains  good  law.   The  Respondent's  own
    guidance indicates that the Respondent  would  not  normally  expect  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK.   KO  (Nigeria)  confirms  that  when
    considering reasonableness, I must focus  on  the  child,  not  on  the
    immigration history of the parents.

39. I do not find that there are any powerful or  strong  reasons  why  the
    qualifying children should not be granted leave to remain.  The  length
    of residence is significant, as is the treatment that  D  receives  for
    autism.  I conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  two
    qualifying children to leave the  UK  where  they  have  resided  since
    birth.

40. Having made that decision, it follows that the public interest does not
    require the Appellant's removal, as he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his children.  It also  follows  that  leave
    should be granted to the Appellant's wife and youngest  child  so  that
    the family unit can remain together.

41.  As  section  117B(6)  is  satisfied,  I  find   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove the Appellant from  the  UK  as  the  public
    interest does not require his removal,  and  therefore  his  appeal  is
    allowed with reference to section 117B(6) and Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.


Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant's children are minors, and  is  made
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date         13th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.   The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  matters
considered by the Upper Tribunal following Supreme Court case law which  had
not been published when the initial decision was made.


Signed                              Date         13th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
