
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08951/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MOHAMMED SHAHID
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr H Sarwar, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed from the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Caroline Andrew sitting Sheldon Court, Birmingham on  1
    July 2016) whereby the Tribunal allowed  the  claimant's  human  rights
    claim outside the Rules, on the basis that section 117B(6) of the  2002
    Act made it clear that it was not in the public interest to require his
    removal in circumstances where he had a genuine  and  subsisting  step-
    parental relationship with seven  British  national  children,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect  the  British  national  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom with their mother, his  partner,  to  continue
    family life in Pakistan.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  made  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  the  claimant  or  his
    family members require anonymity for these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. Seb Kandola settled the SSHD's application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  He said the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  allowed
    the appeal because the claimant had been step-father to  seven  British
    children for 18 months.  She had allowed the appeal  on  the  erroneous
    basis that the section 117B(6) was a stand-alone  provision.   She  had
    failed to follow the Court of Appeal decision in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ at paragraph [45], which stated that section 117B(6) was not a
    stand-alone provision, and required judges  to  undertake  an  holistic
    assessment. Accordingly, the Judge failed to have any or  any  adequate
    regard to the following matters, which fell within section 117B(6)  and
    Article 8, namely that:

      i. The claimant arrived in the UK in October 2011  as  a  student  and
         only had 14 months of lawful leave.  The majority of  his  stay  in
         the UK has been unlawful;

     ii. The claimant is not married to the mother of the British  children,
         but had an Islamic wedding 18 months ago;

    iii. The claimant admits gaining leave to remain by  deception  using  a
         false TOEIC certificate;

     iv. There is no evidence that the claimant can speak English;

      v. There is no evidence that the claimant would not be a burden on the
         state financially - his partner is on  benefits  and  there  is  no
         evidence that  he  is  capable  of  working  in  the  UK  or  being
         financially independent;

     vi. The claimant failed to meet  the  Immigration  Rules  to  join  his
         partner under Appendix FM - there has been no regard to his failure
         to meet the Rules;

    vii. There has been no regard or assessment of his ability to gain entry
         clearance to rejoin his partner.

 3. If the Judge had directed herself in law correctly,  and  she  had  had
    regard to the plethora of public interest factors in favour of removal,
    she would have found that this is not a case that just tips the balance
    in favour of the claimant, as she held  at  paragraph  [31],  but  that
    removal was overwhelmingly justified on the facts of the case.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 2 November 2016 Designated Judge Shaerf granted the SSHD  permission
    to appeal, as  he  was  satisfied  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
    arguable.  He noted that the judgment in MA (Pakistan) had been  handed
    down six days after the Judge had heard the appeal.   It  was  arguable
    that in not having the benefit of this latest judgment in the Court  of
    Appeal, the Judge had  erred  through  no  fault  of  her  own  in  her
    treatment of the section 117B factors.  In addition,  while  the  Judge
    addressed the factors referred to  in  section  117B(6),  she  did  not
    proceed further to consider whether she needed to  address  Article  8:
    see SSHD -v- SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  This was also an arguable
    error of Law.

Discussion

 5. The Judge was alive to many of the proportionality issues raised by  Mr
    Kandola in the application for permission to appeal,  but  she  clearly
    regarded herself as fettered in her discretion.  The  pivotal  part  of
    her decision is at paragraphs [23] and [24].   At  paragraph  [23]  she
    said that in coming to her decision, she had  taken  into  account  the
    guidance in Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B) [2015] UKUT 674 (IEC).
      This  authority  is  arguably  per  incuriam  in  the  light  of  the
    authoritative analysis of Section 117B(6)  subsequently  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan).

 6. The Judge continued in paragraph [24]:

         I say now that, had the  [claimant]  simply  been  married  to  his
         British citizen wife I would have had no hesitation in saying  that
         he should return to Pakistan and  make  an  application  for  entry
         clearance to return to the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  a
         British citizen.  However, in this case I have to take  account  of
         the fact that there are seven British citizen children involved...

 7. The Judge went on to find that the claimant had established  a  genuine
    and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  stepchildren.    At
    paragraph [27] she said she had to consider therefore whether it  would
    reasonable to expect these children to leave the United Kingdom.   They
    would only leave the United Kingdom  with  their  mother  to  join  the
    claimant in Pakistan:

         However, in accordance with the Secretary of State's  own  guidance
         any  case  must  be  assessed  on  the  basis  that  it  would   be
         unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with
         his or her parent.

 8. The judge acknowledged that the  policy  had  qualifications,  but  she
    found that the claimant did not fall within them. He  did  not  have  a
    very poor immigration history. As the claimant was now a huge  part  of
    their lives, his deportation would be a devastating blow to Aamana  and
    her siblings, as well as making a huge impact on their life and  family
    unit.  So, the Judge held at paragraph [31] that this all  led  her  to
    find that the balance just tipped in favour  of  the  claimant,  taking
    into account the particular facts of the case.  At paragraph  [32]  she
    noted that there was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  claimant  spoke
    English, but she noted that there was an offer of employment  for  him.
    At paragraph [33] she said that, however, section 117B(6) made it clear
    that it was not in the public interest to require  a  person's  removal
    where he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, and it would not be reasonable expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK.  It was  for  that  reason  that  she  was  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal.

 9. This Judge erred in her application  of  section  117B(6)  and  in  her
    application of the policy guidance.  She did not have  the  benefit  of
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) when she made  her
    decision, but the law always speaks.

10. All the cases under discussion in MA are seven year rule cases. None of
    them relate to British national children.  However, it is apparent from
    a careful reading of the leading judgment of Elias LJ that the  general
    guidance which he gives about the proper approach to section 117B(6) is
    just as applicable to children who are qualifying children by virtue of
    being British nationals  as  it  is  to  children  who  are  qualifying
    children under the statute by virtue of  having  accrued  seven  years'
    continuous residence in the UK.

11. The contention of Counsel for the appellants in  MA  was  that  section
    117B(6) should be construed narrowly.  Ms Giovannetti on behalf of  the
    SSHD strongly disputed this.

12. At  paragraph  [35]  Elias  LJ  records  her  submission  that  if  the
    appellants were right, section 117B(6) would have to  be  construed  in
    essentially the same way as the rejected policy known  as  DP5/96.   It
    would allow those who  had  unlawfully  remained  in  the  UK  to  take
    advantage of the seven year rule.  The concept of  a  qualifying  child
    also included a child who is a British citizen  -  that  being  a  very
    important factor for the Court to take into account when having  regard
    to the child's best interests:

         Ms Giovannetti suggested that it would be relatively rare for it to
         be reasonable to expect a child who is a British citizen  to  leave
         the UK, and so the consequence of the appellant's approach would be
         to  allow  many  applicant  parents  who  have  unjustifiably   and
         unlawfully stayed in the UK to remain here by clinging to the coat-
         tails of the child.

13. At paragraph [37] Elias LJ held that Mr Giovannetti's  analysis  had  a
    number of difficulties.  The first was that  it  meant  that  the  only
    effect of sub-section 117B(6) would be to give some  additional  weight
    to the fact that the child has been resident in the UK for seven years:

         (Similarly, it would require the Court to give additional weight to
         the fact that the child is a British citizen, although  that  would
         need to be done quite irrespective of this  section,  as  ZH  makes
         clear.)  Save for that, the proportionality test is applied  as  in
         any other Article 8 case (my emphasis).  If that is right,  section
         117B(6) is, in my view, drafted in an extremely convoluted  way  to
         achieve so limited an aim.  The objective could have been  achieved
         much more clearly and succinctly.

14. The crucial point for present purposes  is  that,  notwithstanding  the
    difficulties in Ms Giovannetti's analysis,  in  the  end  Elias  LJ  at
    paragraph [45] decided that she was right in her  construction  of  how
    section 117B(6) operated, and should  operate,  having  regard  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in MM (Uganda).  The judge thus concluded,  at
    the end of paragraph [45], as follows:

         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct, and that the only significance of section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.

15. By a parity of reasoning, where the child qualifies on  the  additional
    or alternative basis that he or she is a British national  child,  this
    is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave to  remain  being
    granted to the irregular migrant, but it is not a decisive factor.

16. Elias LJ held that Section 117B(6)  is  a  stand-alone  provision:  see
    [19]. But he also held that in answering the question of whether it  is
    reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the UK it is necessary
    for the decision-maker to conduct an holistic assessment which embraces
    the full panoply of "wider public interest  considerations",  including
    those not mentioned in Sections 117B(2)-(5). This is evident  from  the
    fact that he cited with approval at [48] the  guidance  on  this  topic
    given by Clarke LJ in EV (Phillipines) including the following  passage
    at [35]:

         A decision as to what is in the best  interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British  citizens
         (my emphasis).

17. The significance of the highlighted passage is that  the  rights  of  a
    British national child are not determinative of  the  question  whether
    relocation is contrary to their best interests, particularly where  (as
    here) what is in contemplation is the relocation of the  children  with
    both active parents (the appellant and his partner), and  the  children
    are not going to be separated from a third parent with whom they have a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

18. At [36] Clarke LJ said that if it is overwhelmingly in the child's best
    interests to remain, the need to maintain immigration control may  well
    not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests
    to remain, but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
    way), the result may be the opposite. Clarke LJ continued in [37]:

         In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

19. The IDI on family migration ("the IDI") contains  at  paragraph  11.2.3
    guidance on answering the following question: "Would it be unreasonable
    to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK?"  The IDI  provides,
    inter alia, as follows:

         Save in cases involving criminality, the  decision-maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British citizen to leave the EU, regardless of  the  age
         of that  child.   This  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
         Judgment in Zambrano .....

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight as to justify separation, if a child could otherwise
         stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK  or
         in the EU (my emphasis).

20. In Miah (Section 117B NIAA [2002] - Children) [2016] UKUT 131  (IAC)  a
    Presidential panel made the following observations at paragraph [16]:

         Decision-makers and Judges should take care to  apply  the  correct
         prism  when  considering  this  IDI.   Its  legal  status  must  be
         appreciated.  It is not a statutory  measure.   It  is,  rather,  a
         policy  document.   Being  of  this  character,  it  attracts   the
         application of a series of  well-established  principles,  four  in
         particular.  First, it is an obligatory material  consideration  in
         the decision-making process.  Second, it  is  not  writ  in  stone.
         Rather, its contents are to be viewed as a series of  flexible  and
         inexhaustive requirements ....  We would further emphasise that the
         IDI is not, and does not claim  to  be,  an  exhaustive  code.   To
         approach it as a collection of rigid rules and/or  a  comprehensive
         edict would be erroneous in law.  Finally, it  is  trite  law  that
         IDIs and kindred instruments do not have the  status  of  law  and,
         thus are subservient to primary legislation, secondary  legislation
         and the Immigration Rules.

21. Appendix FM is an expression of the SSHD's policy as to how the balance
    should be struck in particular types of case.   Quite  deliberately,  a
    person in the claimant's position is excluded from being able  to  take
    the benefit of EX.1(a).  He cannot take the benefit of EX.1(a)  because
    he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with the mother  of  the
    British national children.  Equally, looking at  the  matter  from  the
    perspective of the stepchildren, their  British  national  status  does
    not, under the Rules, prevent them from  being  expected  (as  distinct
    from being required) to relocate with their mother  and  stepfather  to
    Pakistan in order to enable family life to be carried  on  there.   The
    higher test of "insurmountable obstacles" has to be satisfied under the
    Rules in order to prevent such an outcome.

22. It was not apparently argued that there are insurmountable obstacles to
    family life between the claimant and  his  wife  being  carried  on  in
    Pakistan with the seven children, and the Judge made no finding to this
    effect.  So the necessary starting point in her analysis of  the  claim
    outside the Rules was that the claimant needed to show  exceptional  or
    at  least  compelling   circumstances   to   render   his   removal   a
    disproportionate outcome. The policy guidance did not  demand  that  he
    should be allowed to stay, as he had used deception as well as being an
    overstayer, and there was also the option of  the  children  not  going
    with him but continuing to be looked after in the UK by  their  primary
    carer, their mother. The judge did not address the question whether, as
    an alternative to the entire family  relocating  to  Pakistan,  it  was
    proportionate for there to be a temporary separation while the claimant
    returned to his home country to regularise his status.

23. However, through Mr Mills, the SSHD has withdrawn  her  case  that  the
    lack of adequate reasoning was material to  the  outcome.   It  is  now
    accepted that it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion  on  the
    evidence  before  her  that  the  removal  of  the  claimant  would  be
    disproportionate to the legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved,
    and the SSHD no longer seeks to disturb that finding.  Accordingly, the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  not  vitiated  by  a  material
    error of law.



Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that the decision should be set aside and remade. Accordingly,
    the decision stands and the Secretary of State's appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

22.  I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 13 January 2017

    Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


