
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08012/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2019                             |On 31 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  DAVID [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Unigwe, Counsel instructed by Melvyn Everson &
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision on error of law and directions issued on 23 November 2018
    I found an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the  appeal
    and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  promulgated  on
    18 June 2018, to allow the appellant's appeal.   That  decision  as  an
    appendix to this decision and reasons.





Preliminary Matters

 2. Mr Unigwe also confirmed that he would be relying on Articles 3  and  8
    as well as paragraph 276ADE.  Although Mr Melvin submitted that Article
    3 had been refused by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    decision had been set aside including  due  to  the  lack  of  adequate
    reasoning/conflation of reasons on Article 3.

Hearing

 3. The appellant gave oral evidence in English and was  cross-examined  on
    that evidence.  The appellant's evidence and the  submissions  of  both
    parties are set out further in the Record of Proceedings.  At  the  end
    of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

The Respondent's Case

 4. It is the respondent's case, in a decision dated 7 July  2017  refusing
    the appellant's application for indefinite leave to  remain,  that  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  met  the  requirements  of
    either Appendix FM in relation to family life as he had  not  indicated
    either a partner or dependent children, and his application was refused
    under paragraph 276ADE.  Specifically, when considering  276ADE(1)(vi),
    although it was not argued that the appellant fell foul of any  of  the
    suitability requirements, namely S-LTR.1.2 to 2.3  and  S-LTR.3.1,  the
    respondent did not  accept  that  276ADE(vi)  was  met.   Although  the
    refusal letter erroneously considered a previous version of  276ADE  it
    was not disputed that the correct wording at the time of decision was:

         "(vi)    is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
             UK for less than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK".

 5. The respondent further considered whether there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances  and  considered  Article  3  including  the  appellant's
    medical conditions; these included  essential  thrombocytosis,  a  bone
    marrow  disease  where  the  bone  marrow  creates  too  many  abnormal
    platelets leading to high platelet counts in the blood with a  risk  of
    clotting and stroke.  The respondent noted that the appellant  received
    injections three times a week to lower his platelet count  as  well  as
    blood thinning medication, aspirin, to reduce the  risk  of  a  stroke.
    The appellant has also been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes and is  seen
    every one to two months in the haematology clinic as well as  follow-up
    appointments with vascular surgeons as a result of  the  amputation  of
    his right big toe in September 2016.  It was noted that the appellant's
    consultant haematologist stated that the appellant had a  heart  attack
    on 7 February 2015 and also  received  treatment  for  pericarditis  in
    March 2015.  The respondent considered that  the  very  high  threshold
    considered in N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and D v United Kingdom [1997]  24
    EHRR 423in Article 3 medical cases was not met.

Burden and Standard of Proof

 6. In relation to Article 3 it is for the appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    the appellant's removal would result in a  breach  of  Article  3.   In
    respect of Article 8 it is for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate,  on  a
    balance of probabilities that private or family life exists and for the
    respondent to demonstrate that any interference would be proportionate.



Immigration Rules

 7. Although there is no ground of appeal in  respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, I have considered the appellant's appeal through  the  prism  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Appendix FM was not pursued by  the  appellant.
    In respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), although Mr Melvin conceded that
    in considering whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration I had to consider all the factors including the
    appellant's health,  it  was  his  submission  that  all  the  factors,
    including the appellant's extended family in Tanzania and his  contacts
    there together with the evidence that there was treatment available  in
    Tanzania  did  not  suggest  that  there  would  be  very   significant
    obstacles.

 8. The appellant confirmed in oral evidence that he is from  a  polygamous
    family and that his father had five  wives  and  that  the  appellant's
    siblings as well as his parents reside in Tanzania.  He also confirmed,
    as was confirmed before the First-tier Tribunal that his  children  are
    in Tanzania.  Although the appellant gave oral evidence in relation  to
    the  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  job  in   Tanzania   and   referred,
    anecdotally, to his alleged inability to live outside  of  his  village
    without employment, there  was  nothing  before  me,  for  example  any
    attempts by the appellant to apply for jobs  or  any  information  that
    might  suggest  any  such  difficulty  in  obtaining  accommodation  or
    obtaining employment.

 9. Equally, although the appellant stated that a number of  his  relatives
    were teachers and were poorly paid, there was nothing  before  me  that
    might support this including from his relatives who might have been  in
    a position to provide written confirmation of their  employment  and/or
    of  their  salary.   Although  I  do  not  require  corroboration,  the
    appellant has not produced information/evidence  where  such  ought  to
    have reasonably been available to him.

10. In any event, even if I accept that earnings in Tanzania  may  well  be
    lower than what might be earned  in  the  UK,  there  was  no  adequate
    information or evidence to  support  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
    family would be unable to assist  him  in  reintegrating  including  in
    assisting him, if such was necessary,  in  accessing  treatment  and/or
    medication.  The appellant lived the majority of his life  in  Tanzania
    and has a large extended family there, as  well  as  friends,  and  the
    appellant gave oral evidence of his continued contact with friends  and
    family.  I am satisfied, and it was not argued to the contrary, that he
    continues to have social, cultural and family ties  there.   I  am  not
    satisfied that it has been demonstrated that the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.   The  fact
    that the appellant does not, in my findings, meet the  requirements  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  is  relevant  to  my  consideration   of   the
    appellant's human rights appeal.

Article 3

11. In N [2005] UKHL 31  the  court  considered  the  issue  of  Article  3
    specifically in relation to a sufferer of HIV and AIDS.  The  House  of
    Lords established that the threshold in Article 3 cases is high.  In GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 the court held that a person whose life will
    be drastically shortened by the progress of natural disease if  removed
    to his home state did not fall within the paradigm of  Article  3.   As
    discussed in the error of law decision the case of Paposhvili v Belgium
    [2017] Imm AR 867  was  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
    Paposhvili's claim was dismissed by the European Court of Human  Rights
    by a majority by reference to the test in N v United Kingdom [2008]  47
    EHRR 39 under which the category of  exceptional  situations  in  which
    Article  3  would  prevent  removal  to  another  country  with  lesser
    standards of healthcare was  confined  to  "deathbed  cases".   On  the
    evidence at the time Mr Paposhvili was stable and was not  at  imminent
    risk of dying and the court considered that although there were  limits
    on treatment available in the country to which he would be returned the
    appellant was not without resources which might help.

12. The Court of Appeal in SL (St Lucia) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 considered the  subsequent  progression
    of the jurisprudence as follows:

         "21. The application was referred to the Grand Chamber.  The effect
             of its judgment was considered by this court in AM  (Zimbabwe)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ
             64.  First, of course, the court emphasised that the  position
             in domestic law was authoritatively settled in favour  of  the
             criteria in N.  In  N  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2005] UKHL 31; 2005 2 AC 296, the House  of  Lords
             case which was endorsed by the European Court.   But,  in  any
             event, in AM (Zimbabwe) Sales LJ (with whom Patten  LJ  and  I
             agreed) considered  that,  in  substantive  terms,  Paposhvili
             'only  intended  to  make  a  very  modest  extension  of  the
             protection under Article 3 in medical cases'" (see [39]).   He
             said (at [28]);

                       'So far as the ECtHR and the [ECHR] are concerned the
                  protection of Article 3 against removal in  medical  cases
                  is now not confined  to  deathbed  cases  where  death  is
                  already imminent when the applicant  is  in  the  removing
                  country.  It extends to cases where  'substantial  grounds
                  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the  applicant],
                  although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a  real
                  risk on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
                  the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment,
                  of being exposed to  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
                  decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
                  suffering  or  to  a   significant   reduction   in   life
                  expectancy' (paragraph 183).  This means cases  where  the
                  applicant  faces  a  real  risk  of  rapidly  experiencing
                  intense suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in  the
                  receiving state because of  their  illness  and  the  non-
                  availability there of treatment which is available to them
                  in the removing state or faces a real risk of death within
                  a short time in the receiving state for the  same  reason.
                  In other words, the boundary of Article 3  protection  has
                  been shifted from being defined by imminence of  death  in
                  the remaining state (even  with  the  treatment  available
                  there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely
                  'rapid' experience) of intense suffering or death  in  the
                  receiving state, which may only occur because of the  non-
                  availability in that stage  of  the  treatment  which  had
                  previously been available in the removing state".

13. There has therefore been only a 'modest extension' to  the  test,  from
    imminence of death in the removing state even  with  treatment  to  the
    imminence  of  intense  suffering  or  death  in  the  receiving  state
    occurring because of the lack of treatment previously available in  the
    removing state.  I am not satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated
    that he falls within either tests.

14. Mr Unigwe referred me to the evidence that had been before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and before the Upper Tribunal in respect of the error  of
    law hearing.  Mr Unigwe confirmed that there  was  no  further  updated
    medical evidence in  respect  of  the  appellant's  medical  condition,
    although I accept that the  appellant's  medical  conditions  were  not
    specifically disputed.  I have considered all of the evidence and  this
    included, but was not limited to, a letter dated 17 May 2018  from  the
    appellant's GP confirming the appellant's complicated  medical  history
    and confirming that he has three Interferon injections a  week  and  is
    under regular review by the haematologist, and that he has a history of
    heart attacks with ischaemic heart disease and has been reviewed by the
    cardiology team, and is also under review by the diabetic team.  It was
    the GP's view that if this treatment was  withdrawn  it  would  have  a
    negative impact on the appellant's health and that "he will be more  at
    risk of developing blood clots, heart  attacks  -  due  to  history  of
    essential  thrombocythemia".   I  was  referred  to  page  46  of   the
    appellant's original bundle, a letter  from  Bedford  Hospital  NHS  in
    relation to a clinic of  24  May  2017  which  listed  the  appellant's
    conditions.  I note that  this  letter  indicated  that  the  appellant
    "feels generally fine in himself at the moment".

15. At page 44 of the original bundle, I was referred to a letter from  the
    consultant haematologist in relation to a clinic dated 25  April  2018;
    again this refers to the appellant feeling generally fine and  that  he
    has started insulin because of his diabetes and that  he  is  known  to
    have ischaemic heart disease with previous heart  attacks:   "otherwise
    he feels generally fine in himself".  At this stage the  appellant  was
    given a prescription for Interferon injections three times a week which
    it was stated would be reviewed in three  months'  time;  his  platelet
    count was slightly raised but stable.  I note that there was no further
    up-to-date evidence produced  for  the  resumed  hearing  including  in
    relation to any review of the appellant's condition in the interim.

16. Mr Unigwe also referred me to page 19 and 20 of  the  original  bundle,
    the letter dated 17 May 2018 in respect of the appellant's  conditions.
    Page 27 of the original bundle contained  a  medical  report  from  the
    cardiology department dated 13 June 2018.  This noted  the  appellant's
    history  of  heart  disease  that  "he  needs  very  good  risk  factor
    management and  continuing  medical  therapy  to  minimise  chances  of
    further heart attacks".  At page  17  of  the  supplementary  bundle  a
    report typed on 31 October 2018 from  Watford  General  Hospital  again
    sets out the  review  of  the  appellant's  conditions  and  notes  the
    appellant felt tired with symptoms of poor glycaemic control.

17. It was the appellant's oral evidence that he lives two days' travel  by
    public transport from Dar es Salaam which the appellant stated was  the
    only place where he felt  he  could  access  the  necessary  treatment.
    However, despite the fact that the respondent refused  the  appellant's
    case, on 7 July 2017, including because the respondent was of the  view
    that the background country information indicated  that  treatment  for
    the appellant's conditions is available in Tanzania; and that the error
    of law  decision  contained  specific  directions  including  that  the
    Tribunal would benefit from up-to-date medical evidence, there  was  no
    information or evidence which might support the appellant's claims,  in
    relation to the  limitations  in  respect  of  accessing  both  medical
    treatment and medication in Tanzania, where such  ought  to  have  been
    available.

18.  The  appellant,  in  oral  evidence,  made  a  number  of  unsupported
    assertions including vague claims about speaking to doctor  friends  in
    Tanzania who told him treatment/medication would be only  available  in
    one central hospital in Dar es Salaam.  He also made a number of  vague
    claims in relation to fake medication and citizens of  Tanzania  having
    to go to India for treatment.  None of these allegations were supported
    by background country information or otherwise which, it is  reasonable
    to expect, ought to have been available, and which might have supported
    such a claim.  Although I take into account that the respondent in  the
    refusal letter indicated that the  World  Health  Organisation  reports
    that  facilities  are  more  readily  available  in  the  large   urban
    conurbations than rural areas the appellant's claim that it was only in
    Dar es Salaam that treatment could be accessed was unsupported, as  was
    his claim that he had no access to any transport and that none  of  the
    members of his family had any access to any transport other than public
    transport.

19. The only background information produced by the appellant was a 3  page
    2008  report  setting  out  10  year  strategies  for  non-communicable
    diseases in Tanzania.  The appellant's representative highlighted  from
    that report, at page 51, of the supplementary bundle that:

         'Tanzania faces the challenge  of  lack  of  human,  financial  and
         infrastructure  resources  as  well  as  a  high  burden  of   CDs,
         especially malaria and HIV/AIDS.  Training programmes for  specific
         NCD and implementation of this strategy  will  need  to  take  into
         consideration and adopt measures accordingly.'

    Although Mr Unigwe did not refer to this report in his oral submissions
    the tenor of the reports suggests  a  much  more  developed  healthcare
    system than the appellant reported in his oral evidence, to the  extent
    that long term strategies for dealing with diseases were clearly  being
    developed over ten years ago.  Whilst there  was  no  specific  dispute
    from the respondent in relation to the fact that the medical system  in
    Tanzania might not provide the level of care provided by  the  NHS  and
    that poverty is a factor, which is noted in the report, at page  52  of
    the appellant's supplementary bundle,  it  is  evident  that  (and  the
    report refers to) the health system in Tanzania is  functioning  and  I
    note that  non-communicable  diseases  listed  in  the  report  include
    cardiovascular disease and cardiac issues together with diabetes,  both
    of which are issues the appellant suffers from.

20. I am satisfied that the appellant's evidence, such as it was,  falls  a
    very long way short of the test confirmed in SL (St Lucia).  Although I
    accept that the appellant  has  ongoing  health  issues,  as  described
    above, it cannot be  said  that  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the
    appellant is at imminent risk of dying.  Such was not argued.   It  was
    further not demonstrated that the appellant would face a real  risk  on
    account of absence of appropriate treatment or access of such treatment
    of being exposed to a "serious, rapid and irreversible decline" in  his
    state of health.  Indeed, in my findings the appellant  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that he will not be able to access treatment.

21. I found the appellant's oral evidence to be generally vague and  in  my
    findings evasive.  I did not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness with regards to  his  claimed  situation  on  return.   If  the
    treatment that the appellant needs is  not  available  or  indeed  only
    available in one central hospital in Dar es  Salaam  (which  I  am  not
    satisfied has been established) I do not  find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant would not have been able to  produce  some  information  from
    Tanzania which  might  have  supported  such  a  claim.   Even  if  the
    appellant is right (which has not been established) the appellant could
    access treatment in Dar es Salaam.  He was unable to adequately explain
    why he could not relocate there.  I do not accept  his  claim  that  he
    would not be able to relocate without employment  and  he  was  further
    unable to adequately explain why he could not,  even  with  his  health
    conditions (and as noted above he  is  described  in  the  most  recent
    medical evidence as tired but  also  'generally  fine')  either  obtain
    employment and/or receive assistance  from  his  many  extended  family
    members (and it was the appellant's own  evidence  that  at  least  two
    members of his family are teachers).  Again, although he  claimed  that
    they received low  salaries,  there  was  no  adequate  explanation  to
    support his claim that his family were  unable  to  assist  him  should
    relocation to  Dar  es  Salaam  be  required  (which  was  not  shown).
    Additionally,  the  appellant  has  provided  information  that  he  is
    currently supported, including financially, by his church  in  the  UK,
    Vision Gospel Ministries Int.  There was  no  adequate  information  or
    evidence to suggest that such financial support could not  continue  on
    return to Tanzania, if such were required

22. I am not satisfied that it has been  demonstrated  that  the  appellant
    will not be able to access  the  treatment/medication  he  requires  on
    return to Tanzania.  Considering all  the  factors  in  the  round  the
    appellant's evidence falls a long way short  of  establishing  that  he
    faces a real risk of being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible
    decline in his state of health on account of the absence of appropriate
    treatment in the  receiving  country.   The  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 3 cannot succeed.



Article 8

23. Although Mr Unigwe also sought  support  from  Paposhvili  and  SL  (St
    Lucia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  in  aid  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 case, at [27] the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SL  (St
    Lucia) were entirely unpersuaded that Paposhvili had any impact on  the
    approach to Article 8 claims.

24. I have considered and applied the five stage test set out in Razgar.  I
    remind myself as the First-tier Tribunal did, of what was  said  in  GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 that a person whose life will be drastically
    shortened by the progress of natural diseases if removed  to  his  home
    did not fall within the paradigm of Article 3.  The court  went  on  to
    hold that if the Article 3 claim failed, Article 8  could  not  prosper
    without some separate or additional factual element which  brought  the
    case within the Article  8  paradigm.   The  core  value  protected  by
    Article 8 is quality of life and not its continuance.  That meant  that
    a specific case must be considered under Article 8.

25. I must identify whether Article 8 is  engaged  in  respect  of  private
    life, it not being contended that it was engaged in respect  of  family
    life.  It was Mr Unigwe's submission that the appellant's long stay  in
    the UK was sufficient to engage Article 8 and Mr Unigwe referred to the
    appellant's  "productive  life".   Rather  surprisingly  Mr  Unigwe  at
    paragraph 17 of his skeleton referred to the  appellant's  "established
    family and private life".  However, there was no evidence  and  nothing
    relied on in relation to family life. In respect of  private  life,  Mr
    Unigwe stated that  the  appellant  had  put  down  roots  in  the  UK.
    However, there was no adequate information or evidence to support those
    roots.  The appellant in his updated witness statement  indicated  that
    he had come to study but stopped studying in 2010 and  did  not  obtain
    any qualifications.

26. The  appellant's  witness  statement  relies  largely  on  his  medical
    conditions, although he also referred to his active involvement in  the
    UK in charity organisations including  his  church  community  (and  he
    refers to the letter enclosed with his original application)  which  is
    now supporting him financially.  Although the appellant claimed that he
    has 'almost lost ties' with Tanzania, I rely on my findings above  that
    this is not accepted.  Mr Unigwe also relied  on  a  supporting  letter
    from Vision Gospel Ministries which was at page  137  of  the  original
    bundle.  This letter is dated 4 May 2018 and refers  to  the  appellant
    being an active member of the church since 2007 and that the church  is
    supporting him financially.

27. It is significant that  the  appellant  provided  no  further  adequate
    information evidence in relation to his private life and there  was  no
    witness statement or oral evidence from anyone who  might  support  the
    quality or otherwise of that private life.

28. However, given the low threshold I am prepared to accept that Article 8
    is engaged to the extent that the length of the appellant's stay in the
    UK would indicate that he has established  some  private  life.   I  am
    further satisfied, given that  low  threshold,  that  the  respondent's
    decision may interfere with that private life.   Such  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law as the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and is  for  the  legitimate  purpose  of  the
    maintenance of immigration control.

29. Turning to the final proportionality question  I  have  considered  all
    aspects of the appellant's private life.   This  includes  his  medical
    conditions and the adequate treatment that he clearly is  obtaining  in
    the UK.  I further accept the  appellant's  claim  that  he  wishes  to
    remain in the UK, although as already noted  he  has  provided  limited
    evidence of his private life, other than his involvement in the  church
    and their assistance to him.  There  was  no  adequate  information  to
    suggest that he could not maintain  those  links  when  he  returns  to
    Tanzania including the continuance of financial support  if  that  were
    required.

30. I have also considered Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 200.  I take into account that the appellant  cannot  in  my
    findings  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    The
    maintenance of Immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest.   I
    further take into account that although there was a  letter  confirming
    that the church provide him with financial  assistance,  there  was  no
    adequate evidence that the appellant is financially independent.   Even
    if I am wrong this is no more than a neutral factor for the  appellant.
    Although the appellant speaks English that  is  also  no  more  than  a
    neutral factor.  I also must take into consideration that little weight
    must be accorded to  private  life  established  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant's immigration status was precarious and little weight must be
    attached to private life when the appellant had  no  leave  to  remain.
    The appellant's immigration status has been  at  most  precarious,  his
    initial leave to remain was as a student, the appellant arriving on  28
    January 2007, and for the majority of his time in the UK  he  has  been
    here unlawfully (since December 2009).

31.  In  considering  Article  8  and  the  public  interest  consideration
    applicable in all cases I have  I  have  applied  the  'balance  sheet'
    approach.  The Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of  state
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 SC and R  (Agyarko);  R  (Ikuga)
    [2017] UKSC 11 confirmed that the question to be determined is  whether
    a fair balance  has  been  struck  using  the  structured  approach  to
    proportionality.  I have reminded  myself  that  there  are  situations
    where private life might be accorded more than little weight.   I  have
    taken into account as an  additional  factor,  to  be  weighed  in  the
    balance with other factors, that the  appellant  is  receiving  medical
    treatment here in the UK and wishes to continue to do so.   However,  I
    rely on my findings that there is no adequate evidence that he will not
    be able to continue receive any necessary treatment in Tanzania.  I  am
    not satisfied therefore that the appellant's evidence  has  established
    that this is such a case.

32. Although the appellant indicated in evidence before me that he was from
    a small country village rather than Mwanza which was a larger town  and
    as cited above he stated he would have a long way to go for  treatment,
    for the reasons already given, although I accept he may well come  from
    a rural village, I am satisfied that he could still continue to receive
    treatment, including in moving to an urban area if required.  I do  not
    accept his evidence in relation to claimed  difficulties  in  accessing
    treatment, which I find to be overstated, vague and unsupported,  where
    such documentary support ought reasonably to have been available.

33. I am satisfied that any interference with the appellant's private  life
    is proportionate, taking into account as I  do  my  findings  that  the
    appellant's claims in relation to the difficulties he would  experience
    are not established.  Although treatment may not be of a  level  he  is
    receiving in the UK I am not satisfied it has been established that  he
    will not be able to access treatment.  I am further satisfied that  the
    appellant has a network of family and friends who  can  assist  him  if
    necessary in Tanzania and I accept  Mr  Melvin's  submission  that  the
    appellant had some education in Tanzania which enabled him to  come  to
    the UK to study.  This will assist him on integrating into Tanzania  on
    return.  The appellant's appeal cannot succeed under Article 8.

34. Taking into account all the evidence, including having fully considered
    the medical evidence, I am further not satisfied  in  the  round,  that
    this amounts to exceptional or compelling  circumstances  or  that  the
    refusal of leave would result in unjustifiably harsh circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  such  that
it  is  set  aside.   I  substitute  my  decision  re-making  the   decision
dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

                                  APPENDIX

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc/DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/08012/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  David [M]
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Unigwe, Counsel instructed by Melvyn Everson &
Co


                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent is  Mr  [M].
    However, for the purposes of this decision I refer to  the  parties  as
    they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  Mr  [M]  was  the
    appellant.

 2. Mr [M] is a citizen of Tanzania born on 1 April 1982.  He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 7 July 2017 refusing him leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis
    of private and family life.  In a decision promulgated on 18 June 2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beg allowed the appellant's appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals on the following grounds:

      1) Failure to resolve a material conflict of fact in relation to where
         the appellant lives, relevant to his access to medical treatment.

      2) Material misdirection of law:

          a) in respect of alleged reversal of the burden of proof;

          b) there is little evidence to suggest that the  removal  of  the
             appellant would result in  intense  suffering  or  significant
             reduction in life expectancy and the judge appears to conflate
             the Article 3 threshold with Article 8;

      3) The judge failed to adequately consider the public  interest  given
         the appellant's overstaying in the UK since 2009 and his  treatment
         on the NHS.

Background

 4. The appellant entered the UK on 8 January 2007 as a student,  his  visa
    expiring on 31 December 2009 after which he became an overstayer.   The
    appellant made an unsuccessful application for leave to remain in 2010.
    He applied for leave to remain on the basis of his private  and  family
    life on 29 July 2013.  This application was also refused.   He  made  a
    further application on 13 February 2017 which was the  subject  of  the
    appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  respondent  refused   the
    appellant's application noting that he did not meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM and did not have a partner or dependent children in the UK.
     In respect of private life, the respondent considered paragraph 276ADE
    and was satisfied the appellant had not  been  in  the  UK  for  twenty
    years.  The respondent noted that the appellant had lived  in  Tanzania
    for most of his life and did not accept that he did  not  have  social,
    cultural or family ties there because his  parents  and  children  live
    there.   The  respondent  considered  that  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  Tanzania.
    The respondent also  considered  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances including the appellant's health problems.

 5. There was evidence before the respondent and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant has  been  diagnosed  with  thrombocytosis,  a  bone
    marrow disease and that he is required to have three injections a  week
    to lower his platelet  count.   The  respondent  also  noted  that  the
    appellant had a heart attack on 7 February 2015 and received  treatment
    for pericarditis.  The respondent considered N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL  31
    and was satisfied  that  the  appellant's  health  had  not  reached  a
    critical  stage  of  his  illness.   The  respondent  also  took   into
    consideration that the appellant in the entry clearance application was
    submitted on 21 November 2006 provided an address in Mwanza, the second
    largest city in Tanzania and the respondent  noted  that  although  the
    healthcare systems in the United Kingdom and in Tanzania were  unlikely
    to be equivalent and although it was accepted the  appellant  may  face
    significant  difficulties  upon  return,  this  did   not   amount   to
    exceptional or insurmountable circumstances.  The respondent noted  the
    appellant was sponsored by his brother and would have his  support,  as
    well as the support of his parents and children,

Submissions

 6. In respect of ground 2 paragraph 2, Mr Whitwell submitted that  it  was
    appropriate to consider relied on what was said by the Court of  Appeal
    in SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ  1894.   The  approach  to  Article  8
    health  claims  is  the  same  as  before  Paposhvili,   Lord   Justice
    Hickinbottom at paragraph 27 stating as follows:

         "However, I am entirely unpersuaded that Paposhvili has any  impact
         on the approach to Article  8  claims.  As  I  have  described,  it
         concerns the threshold of severity for Article 3  claims;  and,  at
         least to an extent, as accepted in AM  (Zimbabwe),  it  appears  to
         have altered the European test for such threshold.  However,  there
         is no reason in logic  or  practice  why  that  should  affect  the
         threshold for, or otherwise the approach to, Article  8  claims  in
         which the relevant individual has a medical condition.  As  I  have
         indicated and as GS (India)emphasises,  Article  8  claims  have  a
         different focus and are based upon entirely different criteria.  In
         particular, Article  8  is  not  Article  3  with  merely  a  lower
         threshold: it does not provide some sort  of  safety  net  where  a
         medical case fails to satisfy the Article 3 criteria. An absence of
         medical treatment in the country  of  return  will  not  in  itself
         engage Article 8. The only  relevance  to  Article  8  of  such  an
         absence will be whether this is an additional factor in the balance
         with other factors which  themselves  engage  Article  8  (see  (MM
         (Zimbabwe)at [23] per Sales LJ). Where an individual has a  medical
         condition for which  he  has  the  benefit  of  treatment  in  this
         country, but such treatment may not be available in the country  to
         which he may be removed, where (as here) Article 8 is not  engaged,
         then the position is as it was before  Paposhvili,  i.e.  the  fact
         that a person is receiving treatment here which is not available in
         the country of return  may  be  a  factor  in  the  proportionality
         balancing exercise but that factor cannot in itself give rise to  a
         breach of Article 8. Indeed, it has been  said  that,  in  striking
         that balance, only the most compelling humanitarian  considerations
         are likely to prevail over legitimate aims of  immigration  control
         (see Razgar at [59] per Baroness Hale)."

 7. Mr Whitwell noted that the judge cited Paposhvili at [24] and submitted
    her conclusions at [26] were  problematic  as  the  judge  appeared  to
    conflate Article 3 and Article 8 finding as follows:

         "I find in taking the evidence as a whole, that the appellant is  a
         seriously  ill  person  and  there  are  substantial  grounds   for
         believing that he, although not at imminent risk  of  dying,  would
         face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
         treatment in Tanzania or the lack of access to such  treatment,  of
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  his
         state of health which is likely to result  in  a  stroke  or  heart
         attack which could be fatal.

         ..."

 8. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge found the appellant's health was a
    large part of his private life and although the judge directed  herself
    to GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and reminded herself at [21]  that  an
    Article 8 appeal could not prosper  without  some  separate  additional
    factual element which brought  the case within the Article 8  paradigm,
    the core  of  value  protected  being  the  quality  of  life  not  its
    continuance, Mr Whitwell submitted that it was difficult to see how the
    Article 8 case could prosper without the health  issue.   In  addition,
    although the judge posed the  Razgar  questions  at  [12],  it  was  Mr
    Whitwell's submission that the judge failed to  even  identify  whether
    Article 8 is engaged.

 9. In respect of ground 1, the judge found that  the  appellant  lived  in
    Tanzania at [11] although she did not resolve the  conflict  identified
    in the refusal letter that the appellant had  provided  an  address  in
    Mwanza in his entry clearance application submitted in 2006.   At  [22]
    the judge recorded that the respondent referred  to  the  World  Health
    Organisation report that there is medical treatment available in  large
    urban areas rather than rural areas.  Mr Whitwell  submitted,  in  that
    context, it was incumbent on the judge to resolve the  conflict  as  to
    where the appellant lived, whereas the judge simply recorded  that  the
    appellant gave evidence that the nearest large town of Mwanza  was  300
    kilometres away from his home.  He submitted that was a failure to make
    findings on material facts.

10. In respect of ground 2, the first paragraph argued that the  judge  had
    reversed the burden  of  proof  stating  that  there  was  no  credible
    evidence the appellant would be able to receive the three injections he
    required.  However, the burden was on the appellant to demonstrate,  on
    a balance of probabilities that the treatment would not be available.

11. In relation  to  ground  2,  the  third  paragraph,  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality, Mr Whitwell submitted that the public interest had not
    been adequately factored in and that the final  question  in  Razgarhad
    not been properly addressed by the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge  was
    aware, in her findings,  that  the  appellant  had  availed  of  health
    services in the UK at  considerable  cost  and  that  he  had  been  an
    overstayer since 2009 although he had been attempting to regularise his
    stay.  The judge failed to identify what weight was being given to  the
    public interest.

12. Mr Unigwe referred to the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  set
    out at [15] and [16], of Dr Almusawy dated 25 May 2017 and 19 July 2017
    and referred to the other reports.  Mr Unigwe relied on the appellant's
    list of medications at pages 107 to 110 of the appellant's bundle (AB).
     The judge heard evidence from the appellant and had the opportunity to
    assess credibility; his medical conditions go to the core of his claim.
     He emphasised that the appellant was seriously  ill  and  it  was  his
    submission that this was what the  judge  had  in  mind.   Although  he
    conceded that he was not suggesting that SL (St Lucia) had been wrongly
    decided by the Court of Appeal, he continued to submit that  the  judge
    had not erred in her approach to Article 8.

13. In respect of ground 1, although he accepted that  the  judge  had  not
    made a specific finding he submitted that she did not need  to  resolve
    the conflict between the refusal letter, which the judge was  aware  of
    and cited in her findings, and the appellant's claim  as  to  where  he
    lived.  In his submission this was implied in her  subsequent  findings
    about the medical treatment.

14. In relation to the alleged reversed burden of proof, Mr  Unigwe  relied
    again  on  the  medical  reports.   Although  he  speculated  that  the
    appellant would have provided evidence of  the  unavailability  of  the
    treatment as  I  indicated  at  the  hearing,  the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings indicates that the appellant stated that he  had  not  made
    any such enquiries.  This  is  specifically  recorded  at  [8]  of  the
    decision and reasons: 'He said he has not  made  enquiries  about  what
    treatment         is          available          in          Tanzania'.



15. However, Mr Unigwe submitted that the judge must  have  relied  on  the
    evidence before her and although he accepted that there was no evidence
    to show the treatment is not available he further  submitted  that  the
    judge must have also taken into consideration the affordability of this
    medication.

16. In respect  of  the  public  interest  Mr  Unigwe  submitted  that  the
    appellant had come as a student and that all  his  illnesses  had  been
    developed in the UK  and  therefore  it  was  right  that  he  received
    treatment in the UK.  Although the judge may not have given reasons  in
    respect of the public interest, he submitted that she was influenced by
    the medical reports and was right to allow the appeal under Article  8.
    In respect of 276ADE(vi) Mr Unigwe submitted that it would be difficult
    for the appellant to integrate although the judge did not  specifically
    make findings on this.  It was clear she had it in mind  and  therefore
    there was no error in law.

17. In reply Mr Whitwell submitted that any reliance by Mr  Unigwe  on  the
    claim that the appellant's evidence as to  difficulties  in  living  in
    Tanzania with his illness went to quality of life  and  that  this  had
    been implicitly considered by the judge in her consideration of Article
    8 did not salvage the decision.   Although  the  judge  may  have  been
    sympathetic this ignores that Article 8 is  not  a  general  dispensing
    power.

Discussion

18. I am satisfied that the grounds do disclose errors of law.  As set  out
    above, SL (St Lucia) reminds that Paposhvili does not have  any  impact
    on the approach to Article 8 claims.  The judge however, at [24]  cited
    Paposhvili including as follows:

         "The court considers that the 'other very exceptional cases' within
         the meaning of the judgment in N which may  raise  an  issue  under
         Article 3 should be understood to refer to situations involving the
         removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds have
         been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at  imminent
         risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence of
         a probate treatment in the receiving country or the lack of  access
         to such treatment, of being exposed to serious, rapid, nervous  and
         will decline in his or her state of  health  resulting  in  intense
         suffering or to a significant reduction in  life  expectancy.   The
         court points out that these situations correspond to high threshold
         for the application of Article 3" [183].

19. The judge then went on at [26] (the decision  containing  no  paragraph
    [25]) to find that although the appellant was not at imminent  risk  of
    dying there would be  a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
    appropriate  treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a  serious  and  rapid
    irreversible decline.  That conflates Article 3 and Article 8,  whereas
    the judge purported to allow this  case  under  Article  8,  making  no
    specific findings on Article 3.  Although the judge  reminded  herself,
    at [20], of what was said in GS (India) that  if  an  Article  3  claim
    failed Article 8 could not prosper without some separate or  additional
    factual element and that although the courts have not  said  Article  8
    can  never  be  engaged  by  health  consequences   of   removal,   the
    circumstances would have to be truly exceptional before such  a  breach
    can be established, the judge failed to engage with these issues in her
    findings.

20. Equally, although the judge set out the five-stage test  in  Razgar  at
    [12] of her decision and reasons, she failed to identify how Article  8
    was engaged in respect of private life, if indeed that was the case, in
    terms of addressing the first and second questions in Razgar i.e.  will
    the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
    exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private and family
    life and (2) if so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as to potentially engage the operation of Article 8.

21. The judge's error is further compounded by her finding  at  [27],  that
    although she took into account the length of  time  the  appellant  had
    been in the UK and that he had support from his church and  friends  in
    the United Kingdom, his health was a "large part of his private  life".
    The First-tier Tribunal failed to identify any separate  or  additional
    factual element which brought the case within the Article  8  paradigm.
    The judge materially erred in her approach and in erroneously  applying
    Paposhvili as she did.  As highlighted most recently by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SL (St Lucia), Paposhvili does not have  any  impact  on  the
    approach to Article 8 claims, which have an  entirely  different  focus
    based upon different criteria, rather than 'Article  3  with  merely  a
    lower threshold' which is the error that the  First-tier  tribunal  has
    fallen into in this case

22. In relation to the remaining grounds the judge also erred in failing to
    resolve the issue as to where the appellant lived, given that  in  2006
    he gave Mwanza as his contact address, as relied on by the  respondent.
    In addition, including given what the judge recorded at [8] in  setting
    out  the  appellant's  evidence,  that  the  appellant  had  "not  made
    enquiries about what treatment is available  in  Tanzania",  the  judge
    erred in reversing the burden of proof and finding that there  was  "no
    credible evidence before me that he will be able to  continue  to  have
    three interferon injections every week".  It was for the  appellant  to
    establish, on a balance of probabilities, that this was the  case.   It
    is difficult to see how he could have done so, given that he  had  made
    no enquiries.  In any event the judge had acknowledged that  there  was
    medical treatment in Tanzania.

23. I am further satisfied that the judge further erred in failing to  make
    adequate findings in respect of  the  public  interest.   Although  the
    judge indicated that she had  taken  into  account  Section  117B,  she
    failed to say what weight was given to the  public  interest  including
    given the appellant's overstaying, that his stay in the UK  had  always
    been precarious at best and for the majority of the time  unlawful  and
    therefore little weight would be attached to that private life.

24. Although Mr Unigwe tried valiantly to defend the judge's decision,  his
    submissions amounted to no more than a repetition  of  the  appellant's
    case before the First-tier Tribunal as to the alleged strength  of  the
    medical evidence about the appellant's medical conditions  in  the  UK,
    rather than addressing the errors in the judge's approach.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  Although I  was  minded  to  re-make  the  hearing  on  the
    evidence before me, Mr Unigwe requested and Mr Whitwell did not object,
    that the case be re-listed on another day given that both Mr Unigwe and
    instructing solicitors had only been instructed in the days leading  up
    to the Upper Tribunal hearing.

Notice of Decision on Error of Law

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.  The decision  on  the
appeal will be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

                                 Directions

     A. The appellant is to file and serve a consolidated bundle of evidence
        so that it is received no later than 10 December 2018. The bundle is
        to separately tabulate: (i) the  evidence  relied  upon  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal; and, (ii) the additional evidence  that  it  is
        now sought to rely upon before the Upper Tribunal.  The bundle  must
        include a skeleton argument on behalf of the  appellant  identifying
        the issues relied on. The Tribunal would be assisted  by  up-to-date
        medical evidence.  It is also anticipated  that  the  aforementioned
        bundle will include an updated witness statement for the  appellant,
        to stand as his evidence-in-chief, which should address  the  issues
        in dispute including the appellant's address  in  Tanzania  and  the
        availability of treatment.

     B. The Secretary of State is to file and serve, by  no  later  than  17
        December 2018, any evidence relied upon that is not contained within
        the bundle he relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal.

Failure to comply with  any  these  directions  may  lead  the  Tribunal  to
exercise its powers to decide the appeal without a further oral hearing,  or
to conclude that the defaulting party has no relevant information,  evidence
or submissions to provide.

No anonymity direction was sought is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
