
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08635/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 APRIL 2019                     |On 15 APRIL 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Burrett
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 6 February 2019, I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant was born in 1983 and is  a
         male citizen of Turkey.  He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Spencer) against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  27
         July 2017  to  refuse  his  Article  8  human  rights  claim.   The
         appellant had been served with a deportation order on  30  November
         2016.  He is married to a British citizen and the couple  have  two
         children, E J who was born in 2009 and A G who was  born  in  2014.
         The appellant is not the biological  father  of  E  J  but  is  the
         biological father of A G.  The appellant's wife, A G and  the  E  J
         are British  citizens.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 12 December 2017, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary
         of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  turned  on  whether
         the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would   have   unduly   harsh
         consequences for his wife  and  the  children.   I  note  that  the
         hearing before the Upper Tribunal took place  very  shortly  before
         the handing down of  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
         (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. I  find  that  the  judge's  analysis  is
         inadequate.  The judge refers in detail to ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  2
         AC 166) at [29].  At [30 - 31], the judge found that it  would  not
         be appropriate or  reasonable  for  the  children  to  relocate  to
         Turkey.  He found that there would be "linguistic disruption  (sic)
         for both children and social disruption for the elder  child."   He
         considered that there would be a "loss of educational opportunities
         that are available to the children in the UK" and stated that there
         was "no evidence ... that there is suitable education facility  for
         the child in Turkey." It is not entirely clear what the judge means
         by that  last  sentence.   The  judge  also  found  [31]  that  the
         children, if they move to Turkey, would have no direct contact with
         the mother's family in the United  Kingdom.   Having  rejected  the
         scenario by which the entire family would relocate to  Turkey,  the
         judge wrote:

         I find that the children should in  no  way  be  punished  for  the
         appellant's criminal  behaviour.   I  find  it  is  in  their  best
         interests for them to remain in  the  UK  and  be  close  to  their
         mother's family.  I find that if the appellant  has  to  return  to
         Turkey this would break up the close family unit and this  will  be
         unduly harsh on both children.

         3.   The judge has failed  to  show  why,  on  the  facts  of  this
         particular case, the separation of the children from  their  father
         could have  unduly  harsh  consequences  going  beyond  what  would
         necessarily be involved in the separation  of  parent  from  child.
         The focus of the judge's analysis is upon the  children  travelling
         to Turkey to live with  the  appellant;  the  alternative  scenario
         whereby the appellant is deported to Turkey and the children remain
         in the United Kingdom has been given inadequate consideration.

         4.   I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  This  is
         an unusual case in that the drugs offence for which  the  appellant
         was convicted did not concern the supply of drugs to others as  His
         Honour Judge Mort observed in his Sentencing Remarks.  The  unusual
         nature of the  offence  was  clearly  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's mind when he  considered  whether  the  separation  of  the
         appellant from the children by way of deportation would have unduly
         harsh consequences  (see  paragraph  [25]).   The  severity  of  an
         appellant's offending should not be considered when determining the
         best interests of the children (see KO (Nigeria).  Both the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge and Mr Burrett, who appeared before  the  Upper
         Tribunal on the appeal, made much of the fact  that  the  appellant
         had imported drugs for his personal use and that,  in  consequence,
         his offence was in some way less serious than  convictions  involve
         the sale of drugs. In the light of  KO  (Nigeria),  it  may  be  no
         longer be arguable that 'softer'  offending  should  influence  the
         assessment  of  undue  harshness  in  a  manner  which  favours  an
         appellant. The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal;  none
         of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.  As
         indicated, the Upper Tribunal will wish to hear  submissions  inter
         alia on the application of KO (Nigeria).  Both parties  may  adduce
         evidence provided that any documentary  evidence  is  sent  to  the
         other party and to the Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days prior to
         the resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

         Notice of Decision

         5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which was promulgated
         on 12th December 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact
         shall stand.  The decision will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         following a resumed hearing at Bradford  on  a  date  to  be  fixed
         before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane."

 2. The resumed hearing took place before me at Bradford on 10 April  2019.
    I heard evidence from a number of  witnesses  including  the  appellant
    himself, his partner, the partner's aunt  and  both  of  the  partner's
    parents. I heard oral submissions from both  representatives  and  then
    reserved my decision.

 3. The evidence of the witnesses was not controversial. There was an issue
    as regards whether the younger child A of the appellant and his partner
    was attending an infant school but it seems clear that he has  had  his
    entry delayed until September 2019. Otherwise, the facts were very much
    as  they  had  been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  save  that  the
    appellant's partner is now in an advanced stage of pregnancy.

 4. The issue in the appeal is a relatively narrow one. It focuses upon the
    application of section 117C of the 2002 Act:

         'Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship of qualifying partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of C's
         deportation on the partner or the child would be unduly harsh.'

 5. Both parties accept that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner L and with that the children E and A  who
    are all British citizens.

 6. What constitutes undue harshness is now clearer following guidance from
    the senior courts. Undue harshness must  involve  something  more  than
    difficulty or inconvenience or the generally  anticipated  consequences
    of separating a parent from children for whom he/she cares and his'/her
    removal from a family bound by ties of love and affection. The test  is
    a child-focused one; the offending of the appellant whether  aggravated
    or, as in this case, possibly mitigated by unusual circumstances should
    not be a factor in the analysis. The difficulty in a case such as  this
    exists in setting aside evidence of the likely  impact  of  deportation
    upon children which would clearly be very distressing but  which  would
    be likely to occur in the vast majority of deportations  in  which  the
    deportee is a much-loved and active  member  of  a  family  from  which
    he/she will be separated. One needs to distinguish evidence of such  an
    impact from more unusual and (very likely) more disturbing consequences
    which can properly fall into the category of undue harshness.

 7. I am assisted in this appeal by fresh evidence from the various  family
    members involved but also, perhaps more significantly, by evidence from
    the head teacher of E's school and from A's doctor. It has to  be  said
    that the evidence is not particularly detailed but it does  show  that,
    in the case of the child A, the stress  of  being  separated  from  his
    father during the latter's imprisonment appears to have contributed  to
    medical difficulties from which he is now suffering,  including  facial
    tics. In the case of E, the headteacher provides some  details  of  the
    support which child  required  from  the  school  pastoral  team.  This
    evidence shows that when the appellant was  imprisoned  the  separation
    had a negative impact upon the children's well-being. Mr  Burrett,  who
    has appeared for  the  appellant  throughout,  submitted  that  it  was
    unnecessary for the tribunal to speculate as to the  likely  effect  of
    separation upon these children; evidence was available to show how  the
    children had suffered when separated from the appellant  as  they  were
    during his recent imprisonment. In addition, there is evidence that the
    partner L had suffered mental difficulties and that the child  E's  own
    distress at being separated from her father was compounded  by  worries
    about her mother's state of health which, it is submitted,  are  likely
    to be further aggravated following  the  birth  of  another  child.  Mr
    Burrett submitted that it was likely that the  children's  distress  is
    likely to be even greater given that they have  had  the  advantage  of
    being reunited with the appellant for some period of time following his
    release from prison; a second separation following on  relatively  soon
    from the first would be likely to intensify the impact on the children.
    Viewed as a totality, all these circumstances amounted, in Mr Burrett's
    submission, to undue harshness for the children as a consequence of the
    deportation.

 8. This is an appeal which is finely balanced. Mrs Pettersen, who appeared
    for the Secretary of State, is justified in drawing  attention  to  the
    brevity of the evidence from witnesses outside  the  immediate  family.
    The filtering out of the 'normal' consequences of separation  from  the
    particular and the more severe is not straightforward.  However,  there
    exists clear evidence that both children have  experienced  severe  and
    negative impacts upon their  mental  well-being  as  a  consequence  of
    separation from the appellant. Further, that impact was serious  enough
    to require the intervention of the medical services and the school  and
    appears likely,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  family  is  now
    reunited, to have had a lasting impact in terms  of  residual  symptoms
    for the child A. There is force in Mr Burrett's  submission  that  such
    problems arose when the children were  aware  that  the  appellant  was
    physically not far away and at a time when they were able to visit  him
    in prison on a very regular basis. If he is  deported  to  Turkey  then
    such regular visits will simply not be  possible  and  contact  may  be
    restricted to Skype, telephone  calls,  electronic  correspondence  and
    occasional visits. That the children will feel upset sad that they  are
    separated  from  their  father  is,  frankly,  to  be  expected  as   a
    consequence of deportation; that they should, as  I  find  as  a  fact,
    suffer a diminution in their mental health possibly of a lasting nature
    and possibly impacting upon their development is out  of  the  ordinary
    and can properly be described as unduly harsh. In the  final  analysis,
    therefore, I am satisfied that the evidence reveals that  the  test  of
    undue harshness is satisfied in respect of both children. Consequently,
    the appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
    claim consequent upon the making of a deportation order is allowed.




Notice of Decision

 9. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 27 July 2017 to refuse his human rights claim is allowed.


Signed                              Date 11 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

