
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08020/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |                              |
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 28 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             mr mahad muse ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Eden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who was born in May 1994 is a national  of  Somalia.   He
    arrived in this country in 2002 with  leave  to  be  here  and  he  has
    remained in this country lawfully ever since.   Regrettably  he  has  a
    very bad criminal history of which the two most recent convictions were
    on 15 May 2015 when he was sentenced to  24  months'  imprisonment  for
    various counts, including  inflicting  grievous  bodily  harm,  affray,
    possessing an offensive weapon in a  public  place  and  one  count  of
    assault by  beating.   Following  this  conviction  the  appellant  was
    convicted on 23 June 2016 of a count of possessing  a  controlled  drug
    Class A, crack cocaine, with intent to supply together with a count  of
    possessing a controlled drug of Class B, cannabis  or  cannabis  resin.
    For  these  offences  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment to be served consecutively to the sentence for  inflicting
    grievous harm.  Accordingly, the total sentence  which  this  appellant
    had to serve was one of five years' imprisonment but for  the  purposes
    of the immigration decision under challenge he received  two  sentences
    of between one year and four years' imprisonment.  These sentences have
    now been served and the appellant is currently in  immigration  custody
    pending the resolution of this appeal.

 2. Following the convictions the respondent made a decision to deport  the
    appellant against which decision the appellant  appealed.   His  appeal
    was heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan  sitting  at
    Harmondsworth on 20 September 2017 but in a decision promulgated on  10
    October 2017 Judge  Khan  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals to this Tribunal against Judge Khan's  decision,  leave  having
    been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott-Baker  on  31  October
    2017.

 3. The substance of the appeal as argued before  this  Tribunal  (although
    this is not made clear in the grounds of appeal which were not  settled
    by Mr Balroop who has represented the appellant  at  this  hearing)  is
    that the judge failed to consider properly (or at the very least failed
    to give adequate reasons for his decision) whether or not the appellant
    satisfied the  requirements  set  out  within  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules or (which  is  in  substance  the  same)  whether  he
    satisfied the requirements  set  out  within  Section  117C(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which  were  inserted  by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  with  effect  from  July  2014
    onwards.  I set out first the relevant parts of the  Immigration  Rules
    as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and

              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
                  been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  4
                  years;

              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and the public interest because they have
                  been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have  been
                  sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less  than  4
                  years but at least 12
                  months; or

              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in
                  the view of the Secretary of State, their  offending  has
                  caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
                  shows a particular disregard for the law,

              The Secretary of State in assessing that claim will  consider
              whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,
              the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
              other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances
              over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

              ...

        399A.     This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                  of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is  proposed  he
                  is deported."

 4. Although in his decision, Judge Khan referred to an earlier version  of
    the Immigration Rules and then referred to the provision of 399A(a)  as
    399A(b) it is common ground that at  least  in  the  substance  of  the
    decision he did accept that the appellant had been lawfully resident in
    the UK for most of his life (although at the end  of  paragraph  49  he
    wrongly stated that "the appellant in this case had a limited leave  to
    remain in the UK as a visitor").  It is also  common  ground  that  the
    deportation claim in this case was pursuant to paragraph 398(b) because
    the sentences of imprisonment have to be  considered  individually  and
    although the cumulative total of the imprisonment which  the  appellant
    had to serve was five years, each of his sentences was between one  and
    four years and so the provisions of paragraph 399A have effect.

 5. The Rules give effect to what is now provided within the new part VA of
    the 2002 Act as referred to above, of which the relevant provisions are
    as follows:

         "117A: Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)  in all cases, to considerations listed in  Section  117B,
                  and

             (b)  in cases concerning deportation of foreign criminals,  to
                  the considerations listed in Section 117C.

             ...

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             [which as already noted, is the case here] the public interest
             requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or  Exception  2
             above applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

 6. Accordingly, and as set out by Judge Scott-Baker  when  giving  reasons
    for granting permission to appeal, it was incumbent on  Judge  Khan  to
    reach findings, and also arguably adequately to explain these  findings
    as to whether or not Exception 1 as set out in the Section  117C(4)  of
    the 2002 Act or paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  now  in  force
    apply.  The argument now advanced on behalf of the  appellant  is  that
    although the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life he made no findings
    with regard to whether he was socially and culturally integrated in the
    United Kingdom or whether there would be very significant obstacles  to
    his integration into Somalia which was where it was proposed  he  would
    be deported.

 7. On behalf of the respondent Ms Everett very fairly accepted as she  was
    obliged to that the judge did not explicitly set out the findings which
    he made with regard to integration and nor did he explicitly lay out in
    terms what the test was with regard to integration, but  she  submitted
    nonetheless that it was clear from his decision what he had found  with
    regard to both these requirements.  With regard to whether or  not  the
    appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
    Ms Everett referred in particular to what was set out by the  judge  at
    paragraphs 41 and 42 of the decision.  Effectively, what the judge  was
    saying was that the appellant had not  "fitted  into  the  culture  and
    society in the United Kingdom" because he was essentially an outlaw, in
    the sense that his whole life has been one of causing harm  to  society
    through  his  criminality  and  that  he  has  made   "little   or   no
    contribution... to his environment,  surroundings  or  the  society  at
    large" in addition to causing "grief and pain to  the  victims  of  his
    crime".

 8. With regard to whether or not there would be very significant obstacles
    to his integration within Somalia, Ms Everett relies upon his  findings
    at paragraph 43 which is that the appellant speaks the Somali  language
    and that he has not established that there are no immediate or extended
    family members in  Somalia.   Accordingly,  Ms  Everett  submits,  even
    though there are not explicit findings to this effect,  the  judge  was
    effectively saying that the appellant was not integrated  into  the  UK
    and nor would there be very significant obstacles to his return.

Discussion

 9. Although this is perhaps a finely balanced decision and the appellant's
    case may ultimately be difficult for him to make out, in  our  judgment
    it was incumbent upon Judge Khan to make explicit findings  within  his
    decision as to  whether  the  appellant  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom and also whether there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Somalia on return.

10. With regard to whether or not the appellant was socially and culturally
    integrated within the United Kingdom, we note that at paragraph 49, the
    judge records that the appellant had lived in the  UK  since  2002  (he
    says as a dependent child of his sister who entered the UK as a spouse,
    which appears to be wrong) and continues by saying that "the  appellant
    has been settled in the UK lawfully since his entry to  this  country".
    He then states that under Section 117B(5) "little weight is to be given
    to a private life when the person's immigration status is  precarious".
    The judge suggests that the appellant's position was precarious because
    in this case he only "had a limited leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    visitor" which does not appear to be correct because  he  was  in  this
    country as a dependent child, but in any event that is as  much  as  he
    actually says about integration.

11. It may be that it would have been open to the judge to make  a  finding
    such as Ms Everett contends was implicit within the  decision,  but  as
    the Court of Appeal has previously made clear in  its  decision  in  NL
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844 (a decision also setting aside a decision
    written by this judge), it is incumbent on a judge to set out  properly
    his/her reasons for reaching a decision and maybe  even  especially  in
    cases where an applicant's claim is not strong, it  is  essential  that
    all parties understand precisely why this decision has been  made.   In
    our judgment, so far as the second and third of the requirements  under
    Section 117C(4), that is Exception 1 and paragraph 399A  of  the  Rules
    are concerned, it is simply not possible accurately  to  conclude  what
    the judge's findings were and his reasons for making them.

12. As to the issue of whether or  not  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Somalia,  although  this
    issue was not raised within the skeleton argument before the First-tier
    Tribunal and was not canvassed extensively in  the  grounds  before  us
    either, Mr Balroop has told us  that  he  made  oral  submissions  with
    regard to whether there were very significant obstacles and these  have
    not been referred to within the decision.

13. In all  the  circumstances,  and  with  some  reluctance,  because  the
    decision "could and should have dealt with the issues properly" we find
    that by reason of the lack of proper reasoning as set out above we  are
    obliged to set this decision aside.  In the circumstances  we  conclude
    that none of the findings of fact can be retained and there  will  have
    to be a complete rehearing.  In these circumstances the  fair  approach
    to take is to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  A  Khan
    and we so order.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan  is  set  aside  and  the
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Hatton  Cross  (or
such other venue as considered appropriate) for hearing by any  judge  other
than Judge M A Khan.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
                   Date: 22 February 2018
