
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08703/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 5 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  Whyen [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dean, counsel instructed via direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 29 June 1969.   He  came
    to the United Kingdom in November 1997 as a  visitor  and  subsequently
    met and married a British citizen on 5 May 1999.  He applied for  leave
    to remain as the spouse of a British national.

 2. On 12 June 2002 the Appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  five
    years' imprisonment for supplying crack cocaine.  A  deportation  order
    was made against him, against which he  appealed  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed on 11 April 2006.  For unexplained reasons  there  was  then  a
    delay until the Appellant was given discretionary leave, presumably  on
    27 January 2009, valid until  27  January  2012.   The  Appellant  then
    sought to extend his leave, but that application was refused on 14  May
    2013 and his appeal against that decision was dismissed.  By  the  time
    of that hearing the  Appellant  had  pleaded  guilty  to  a  charge  of
    possessing a controlled drug i.e. cannabis and  had  received  a  fine.
    The Appellant was unrepresented at that  appeal.   Subsequent  to  that
    decision further submissions were made.  These resulted ultimately in a
    refusal to treat the further submissions or to grant leave to remain on
    the basis of the Appellant's human rights.  The  refusal  is  dated  27
    March 2018.

 3. Notably there was no fresh decision to deport the Appellant, but rather
    his  human  rights  and  Appendix  M  applications  were   refused   on
    suitability grounds due to his criminal convictions.  The  decision  in
    that respect refers  to  S-LTR.1.3,  1.5  and  1.6,  in  light  of  the
    Appellant's sentence of imprisonment of five years on 12 July  2002,  a
    conviction on 10 May 2013 for possession of cannabis and  a  conviction
    on 4th July 2013 for possession of cannabis,  in  respect  of  both  of
    which  offences  the  Appellant  received  a   fine,   forfeiture   and
    destruction of drugs.

 4. The Appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff
    for  hearing  on  9th  November  2018.   In  a  decision  and   reasons
    promulgated on 21 November 2018 the judge made the  following  findings
    at 28, noting that:

         "28. As a legal principle it  is  not  clear  whether  or  not  the
             suitability  provisions  should  be  revisited  simply  as   a
             consequence of passage of time but in any event the  Appellant
             admitted before me that he still takes cannabis  on  what  was
             implied to be a relatively regular basis in particular to cope
             with managing dental pain.  That is an  admission  of  ongoing
             criminality  which  must  be  viewed  against   the   previous
             tribunal's  finding  that  it  was  extraordinary   that   the
             Appellant would take the risk of continuing to offend when  he
             was facing removal from  the  UK.   Whilst  the  Appellant  is
             engaged in illegal activity it seems impossible that he  could
             be held to be suitable for a grant of leave  to  remain  under
             the  Immigration  Rules.  The  suitability  provisions   would
             exclude the Appellant from a grant of leave to  remain  either
             as the husband of a British national or on the  basis  of  his
             private life.

         29.  Accordingly the  only  basis  on  which  the  Appellant  could
             possibly succeed would be outside the rules.  I note that I am
             in any event bound by the findings of the  previous  tribunal,
             which  included  an  alternative  finding  that  even  if  the
             Appellant  did  have  family  life  his   removal   would   be
             proportionate.

         30.  I do have different evidence  before  me  in  respect  of  the
             Appellant's relationship and in particular in respect  of  the
             health of his wife."

    At [31] the judge went on to find that the  Appellant  is  the  primary
    carer of his wife and he does provide the vast  majority  of  care  she
    currently receives.   However,  he  noted  that  Social  Services  have
    engaged with her in the past and if the Appellant were to be removed it
    is likely they would reassess her care needs and put in  a  package  of
    care if appropriate.

 5. The judge also took into account the fact that they live with her adult
    son who would be likely to be able to provide a degree of  support  and
    assistance if the Appellant was not available [33].  At [34] the  judge
    found that the Appellant and his wife have family life in the UK and he
    went on to find as follows:

         "34. I do find that the Appellant's wife has health problems  which
             present more of a complicating  factor  when  considering  the
             impact of removing  the  Appellant  from  the  UK  or  in  the
             alternative of  expecting  the  couple  to  make  a  life  for
             themselves in Jamaica.  However regardless of  the  levels  of
             difficulties for  the  Appellant's  wife  living  without  the
             Appellant in the UK or with him in Jamaica,  the  overwhelming
             factor in my assessment of this case is that the Appellant has
             admitted to ongoing criminality even if it is at a low  level.
             So long  as  cannabis  is  criminalised  in  the  UK  and  the
             Appellant is taking it without lawful reason he is engaged  in
             criminal conduct in the UK.  Even  if  the  Appellant  is  not
             dealing  in  drugs  himself  he  is  supporting  the  criminal
             enterprise of those he buys his drugs from.

         35.  Removing the Appellant from the UK may well interfere with his
             family life and it is entirely plausible that his  wife  would
             find that she was  unable  to  travel  to  Jamaica  with  him,
             however, given  the  very  serious  conviction  the  Appellant
             received in 2002, the subsequent  conviction,  the  tribunal's
             previous decision and the admission of ongoing  criminality  I
             find that any interference with family or private life  rights
             is entirely proportionate."

    At [36] the judge took  into  account  Section  117B  noting  that  his
    private life was formed when he was in the  UK  with  transient  leave,
    that he had chosen to become involved in serious  drug  offences  after
    being granted leave and that his subsequent drug use was  a  matter  of
    choice for him and he must bear the consequences.

 6. The judge then went on to consider Section 117C  of  the  2002  Act  at
    paragraphs 37 to [38].  This would appear to be in the alternative.

 7. Permission to appeal was sought, in time,  on  the  basis  that  having
    accepted the Appellant has a family life under  Article  8,  the  judge
    ought to have allowed the appeal outside the Rules and that the refusal
    was disproportionate given the Appellant's wife was unable to settle in
    Jamaica as her condition would not permit it.  The cannabis  found  was
    minimal and was solely for the Appellant's personal use.  His wife  has
    major problems with ill-health leaving  her  incapable  of  caring  for
    herself and that removal of the Appellant would severely impact on  his
    wife and the judge's assessment of the Appellant's use of cannabis  was
    disproportionate.

 8. In a decision dated 8 March 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that it was quite clear that  Section
    117C does apply to the case due to the fact the Appellant had  received
    a  sentence  of  five  years'  imprisonment  in  2002.   The  grant  of
    permission states:

         "It is quite clear that s. 117C does apply to this case, where  the
         appellant received a sentence of five years' imprisonment  in  2002
         for supplying class 'A' drugs:  the  question  for  the  judge  was
         whether there were 'very compelling circumstances' over  and  above
         those in the relevant Exception (2).   It  was  accepted  that  the
         appellant has a 'genuine  and  subsisting  relationship'  with  his
         wife, but not that the effect on her of his  deportation  would  be
         unduly harsh.  In the case of a child, that means unduly  harsh  on
         the child without consideration of the Appellant's  record.   Since
         it is not yet clear whether that is also the case with the partner,
         or what the approach should be where, as here,  an  appeal  against
         deportation was allowed (following that conviction, under  the  law
         as it stood in 2006), permission is granted, so  that  the  'unduly
         harsh' question can be considered in the light  of  the  answer  to
         those points."

 9. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for hearing on 2 April  2019,
    when it was adjourned at the agreement of both parties, due to the fact
    that the Presenting Officer, Ms Everett, had contacted the Respondent's
    policy unit but had not yet received a response and was thus not  in  a
    position to make submissions as to the Respondent's policy position  in
    light of the grant of  permission  to  appeal.   The  decision  by  the
    Tribunal to allow the Appellant's appeal against deportation  dated  11
    April 2006 was also absent from any of the court documents.  Thus,  the
    appeal was adjourned with directions in order to hear submissions  from
    the parties on the correct interpretation of Section 117C(5)  in  light
    of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53.



10. At  the  resumed  hearing  both  parties,  having  ultimately  provided
    submissions and skeleton arguments in accordance with  the  directions,
    Mr Kotas having consulted with colleagues, submitted that in  fact  the
    grant of permission  was  misconceived  as  there  was  no  deportation
    decision and no fresh decision to deport the Appellant.  Thus,  he  did
    not fall within the scope of Section 117C  of  the  NIAA  2002  as  the
    Respondent was not taking the position that the Appellant is a  foreign
    criminal.  His appeal against deportation having been allowed  in  2006
    and the extant decision of 27 March 2018 was to  refuse  to  grant  him
    leave to remain on the basis of his human rights because he was  unable
    to meet the suitability requirements.  On  that  basis  I  accepted  Mr
    Kotas' submission and the appeal proceeded on the basis of the  grounds
    as drafted.

11.  Mr  Dean  made  submissions  in  line  with  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    essentially maintaining that the judge had placed undue emphasis on the
    Appellant's ongoing use of cannabis for medical reasons  and  had  thus
    erred in his assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's
    removal, bearing in mind the judge's acceptance that the Appellant  had
    family life with his wife and that his removal to Jamaica would clearly
    impact on her given that he is her primary carer.

12. In his submissions, Mr Kotas submitted that the grounds  of  appeal  as
    pleaded are effectively simply a disagreement with the judge's findings
    of fact, which were open to him.  The judge had  accepted  the  medical
    evidence as to the existence  or  substance  of  family  life  and  the
    Appellant's long residence.  Mr Kotas submitted that the  crux  of  the
    judge's decision is at [35] and that is that  the  Appellant's  ongoing
    criminality  in  terms  of  his  cannabis  use  rendered  the   refusal
    proportionate.

13. Mr Kotas submitted that the issue is whether refusal  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.  He submitted that it  had  not  been
    argued that the  judged  failed  to  consider  any  material  facts  or
    considerations.  He had discharged his legal duty and the grounds  were
    not sufficiently particularised for the challenge to succeed.

14. In reply, Mr Dean submitted that the judge had placed reliance  on  the
    2013 decision, which was very much in  the  context  of  the  two  very
    recent convictions.  However, that these were of a different  level  of
    criminal culpability and that  ultimately  the  judges  had  placed  an
    irrational interpretation of the factual  matrix.   The  Appellant  had
    been honest as to his cannabis use and this should go  to  his  credit.
    It  was  disproportionate  to  regard  that  factor  as  so  important,
    particularly bearing in mind the Secretary of State had not  sought  to
    pursue any deportation action against the Appellant  since  his  appeal
    was allowed in 2006.




    Findings and reasons

15. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

16. The Respondent's position, which had changed since the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal on 2 April 2019, was that, given that there  was  no
    extant decision to deport the Appellant,  since  he  succeeded  in  his
    appeal against deportation on 11 April 2006 and given that the basis of
    the current refusal was that the Appellant did not meet the suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules viz S-LTR.1.3, 1.5  and  1.6,  in
    light of his previous conviction, consequently section 117C of the NIAA
    2002 did not apply because the Appellant is not  currently  subject  to
    deportation.

17. Having given careful consideration to this issue, I have concluded that
    the Respondent's position is incorrect. Section 32 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 defines a foreign criminal as follows:

         (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a)  who is not a British citizen,


             (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and




             (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


         (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months.


         (3)  Condition 2 is that-


             (a)  the offence is specified by order  of  the  Secretary  of
             State under section 72(4)(a) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal), and


             (b)  the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment."


18. Whilst the Appellant's conviction pre-dates the coming  into  force  of
    the UK Borders Act, in terms of  his  current  immigration  status  the
    provisions therein clearly apply to him, regardless of  the  fact  that
    the Respondent  has  not  sought  to  re-instigate  deportation  action
    against him following his successful appeal in  2006,  but  rather  has
    refused his human rights application on the basis that he does not meet
    the suitability requirements  of  the  Rules,  owing  to  his  previous
    criminality.

19. Sections 117A-D of the NIAA 2002 provide inter alia as follows:

         "117A Application of this Part


         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular)   have regard-


             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and


             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).






         117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
         criminals


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.






         117D Interpretation of this Part


         ...


         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a)  who is not a British citizen,


             (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
             offence, and


             (c)  who-


                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                  least 12 months,


                  (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                  serious harm, or


                  (iii)    is a persistent offender.


20. I find that the provisions are  somewhat  contradictory.  Section  117A
    makes clear that "this Part" ie. section 117A-D it is intended to apply
    to a human rights appeal  and  is  thus  applicable.  However,  section
    117C(7) appears to indicate that section 117C applies  only  where  the
    Tribunal is considering a decision to deport, which is  not  applicable
    in the extant appeal. However, the definition of "foreign criminal"  in
    section 117D would include the Appellant.  Consequently,  I  find  that
    section 117(C) of the NIAA 2002 is applicable.

21. I have taken account of the written submissions made on behalf  of  the
    Appellant. I have considered the question of the Judge's  consideration
    of whether it would be unduly harsh on the Appellant's wife for him  to
    be removed in light of the guidance set out by the Supreme Court in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and the  Presidential  panel  in  RA  (s.117C:
    "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  00123  (IAC)
    which provides inter alia:

         "(2) The way in which a court or tribunal should approach section
         117C remains as set out in the judgment of Jackson LJ in NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.


         (3)  Section 117C(6) applies to both categories of foreign
         criminals described by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 20 of KO
         (Nigeria); namely, those who have not been sentenced to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those who have."


22. NA (Pakistan) (op cit) provides inter alia per Lord Justice Jackson:

         "37. In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible
         first to see whether his case involves circumstances of the kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because the circumstances so
         described set out particularly significant factors bearing upon
         respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect for family life
         (Exception 2) and because that may provide a helpful basis on which
         an assessment can be made whether there are "very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2" as is required under section 117C(6). It will then be necessary
         to look to see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions
         1 and 2 are of such force, whether by themselves or taken in
         conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
         circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the
         test in section 117C(6)."


23.  In MS (s.117C (6): "very compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019]
    UKUT 00122 (IAC) the Presidential panel held inter alia as follows at
    [20]:

         "... we find the effect of section 117C is that a court or
         tribunal, in determining whether there are very compelling
         circumstances, as required by subsection (6), must take into
         account the seriousness of the particular offence for which the
         foreign criminal was convicted, together with any other relevant
         public interest considerations. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) demands a
         contrary conclusion."


24.  None of these judgments provide a definitive answer to the question  of
    whether "unduly harsh" when  applied  to  a  spouse,  means  that  this
    consideration  should  take  place  without  having   regard   to   the
    Appellant's record, however, applying a purposive  approach,  following
    the judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria)  (op  cit)  this  provision  should  be
    interpreted in the same manner when applied to a spouse as to a child.

25.  In respect of the "very compelling circumstances"  test,  it  is  clear
    from  MS  (op  cit)  that  when  considering  whether  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2, that the seriousness of the particular  offence  for  which  the
    Appellant was convicted must be taken  into  account,  along  with  any
    other relevant public interest considerations.

26.  In determining the appeal, First tier Tribunal Judge  Seelhof  did  not
    definitively decide whether section 117C was applicable  but  concluded
    even if it was, it would not have made any difference to  his  decision
    [38]. I find that, in light of the developments in  the  jurisprudence,
    the Judge failed to apply  a  purposive  analysis  of  the  Appellant's
    particular circumstances, through the prism of section 117C of the NIAA
    2002 and failed to give adequate reasons for his  conclusion  at  [38].
    Further, given that the Appellant does not qualify for leave under  the
    Rules pursuant to Appendix FM, there is no consideration given  in  the
    Judge's decision and reasons to GEN 3.2.(2)  and  whether  the  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  Appellant's
    wife. I find that these errors are material as they could result  in  a
    different outcome to the appeal.




    Decision

27.  I find material errors of law in the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Seelhof. I set that decision aside and remit  the  appeal  for  a
    hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 29 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

