
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/08377/2017
                                                               HU/08378/2017
                                                               HU/08380/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 11th January 2019   On 23rd January 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                 FATIMOH [M]
                                  AKEEM [S]
                                    [O S]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Mohzam of Burton and Burton Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs Eboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1. The appellant had been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal who, in a decision promulgated on 5th
      April 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
      decision refusing them leave to remain.

   2. The 1st 2 appellants are the parents of the 3rd appellant who was born
      in the United Kingdom on 10 August 2008. They have another child who
      was 5 years old at the time of the original appeal hearing. All are
      nationals of Nigeria.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge arguably erred
      in not allowing the appeal in the circumstance, where the 3rd
      appellant was a qualifying child. It was also arguable that the judge
      failed to take into account the argument about delay on the part of
      the respondent in dealing with a reconsideration request made in 2010.

   4. The 1st 2 appellants said they entered the United Kingdom in February
      2003. Their 2nd child was born on 10 August 2008. On 7 September 2010
      the 1st appellant applied for leave to remain with her husband and
      their child as dependents. This was refused on 22nd October 2010. The
      family continues to remain here and there was in a further decision
      refused leave on 20 July 2017. That decision is a subject matter of
      the present proceedings.

   5. First-tier Judge Somal considered the position of the children and
      concluded that at their age they were adaptable and can adjust to life
      in Nigeria. The judge referred to section 117 B(6) stating it was self-
      contained provision in the issue to be determined was whether it would
      be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.
      The judge considered the child removal was justified and referred to
      her age and the stage she was at in her education.

The Upper Tribunal hearing.

   6. At hearing I was provided with a copy of the British passport issued
      to the 3rd appellant on 27 November 2018. I was also provided with the
      latest instructions to decision-makers dated 19 December 2018 in light
      of the decision in KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.

   7. It is accepted by the respondent that the 1st and 2nd appellant's are
      in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the 3rd
      appellant. It is now confirmed that the 3rd appellant is a British
      citizen. The new Guidance poses the question whether the consequence
      of refusal will be that the child is required to leave the United
      Kingdom. In the present instance, given that the 3rd appellant is
      living with her sibling and with her parents as a family unit, if her
      parent's application is refused she most likely will go with them.
      Page 68 of the Guidance provides that where there is a qualifying
      child, as here, the starting point is that the child would not
      normally be expected to leave. It is in the child's best interests for
      the whole family to remain together. Therefore, if the child is not
      expected to leave then the parents will also not be expected to leave.

   8. In light of the above, Mrs Eboni accepts there is a material error of
      law in the decision in relation to article 8. She submitted that the
      appeal should be allowed and the decision remade by me allowing the
      appeals. The argument over delay is no longer an issue.

   9. Having considered the undisputed facts and the jurisprudence I am in
      agreement with this. First-tier Judge Somal did not have the benefit
      of KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53 and the updated guidance.
      However, I am required to apply the law as it is now understood and
      find the decision made is not sustainable.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Judge Somal is set aside. I remake the decision
allowing the appeals.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.                                       11
January 2019


