
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08949/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2021 and 18 March 2021 |On 10 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MABIKA MALAMbA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     On 12 January 2021: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home
                    Office Presenting Officer
                    On 18th March 2021: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Haseldine, Counsel instructed by Caulker & Co
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State with the permission
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Allen against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 17 April 2020  to  allow  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
    hereinafter the "claimant", against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State on 7 August 2017 refusing him leave to remain on  protection  and
    human rights grounds.  The claimant is a  national  of  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo and is subject to deportation.

 2.  The  appeal  has  previously  been  determined  unsatisfactorily,  the
    decision set aside and the appeal remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and it is an appeal against the decision in the remitted hearing that I
    now determine.

 3. I begin  by  considering  carefully  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.

 4. The judge began by setting out the uncontroversial facts.

 5. These include that the claimant was born in April 1981 and entered  the
    United Kingdom in July 1991 at the age of 10 years with his mother  and
    siblings.

 6. In February 1999 his mother was given indefinite leave to enter and the
    claimant was given similar status in line with his mother.

 7. However, the claimant has committed criminal offences.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge noted a total  of  seventeen  convictions  beginning  in
    February 1999 and continuing until July 2017.  The most serious offence
    was of attempted robbery for which he was  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment in April 2005.

 8. The convictions  are  summarised  at  paragraph  5  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and reasons and I set that out below because I find
    it is a concise synopsis of the history that is not easily improved:

       "His criminal offending includes the following:-
       o Between  February  1999  and  December  2003,  the  [claimant]  was
         convicted on six occasions of seven offences including assault on a
         constable, theft, criminal damage, possession of class B drugs, and
         failing to surrender to custody.
       o On 2 August 2004 he was sentenced and convicted  of  obtaining,  or
         conspiring to obtain, property by deception, handling stolen  goods
         and possession of a class B controlled drug.  He was  sentenced  to
         nine months' imprisonment.
       o On 28 April 2005, he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment  as
         referred to above, for attempted robbery.
       o Between 29 August and 22 December 2011, he was  convicted  on  four
         occasions of six offences including grievous  bodily  harm,  making
         false representations, public order  offences,  and  commission  of
         further offences during a suspended sentence order.
       o On 7  November  2012,  he  was  convicted  of  common  assault  and
         commission of a  further  offence  during  the  suspended  sentence
         order.
       o On 21 December 2012, he was convicted of intimidating a witness.
       o On 8 February 2013, he was convicted of common assault".

 9. On 5 November 2003 he applied for naturalisation as a  British  citizen
    but the application  was  refused  in  December  2003  because  of  his
    criminal convictions.

10. However, after his being convicted and sent to prison for  three  years
    for attempted robbery in April 2005 he was informed that the  Secretary
    of State had considered his position and had decided not  to  take  any
    action against him.

11. The decision not to take further action was made on 9  May  2006.   The
    claimant continued to offend and on 10 June 2015 the Secretary of State
    made a deportation order which appears to have prompted the application
    for leave to remain on protection and human rights grounds.

12. The claimant has enjoyed a close relationship with Ms  Agata  Sosnowska
    since 2014.  Ms Sosnowska is a Polish national  granted  settlement  in
    the United Kingdom on 19 June 2019.  She is the mother of two sons with
    the claimant, the first born in November 2017 and the second in October
    2019.  The claimant has two  other  children  with  a  former  partner.
    These are daughters born in April 2008 and November 2010.

13. All of the children are British citizens.

14. It is a feature of the case that when the Secretary of State  made  the
    decision complained of she was unaware of the  claimant's  relationship
    with Ms Sosnowska.  The children were born after the decision.

15. It was not the Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the  claimant  is  a
    "persistent offender".

16. The judge then  summarised  the  claimant's  case  drawing  heavily  on
    Counsel's skeleton argument.  Appropriately, because this  is  required
    by  Parliament,  the  judge  directed  himself  to  Part  5A   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  noted  it  was  the
    claimant's case that he fulfilled the requirements of Exception 1 under
    section 117C because he  had  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life and was socially and culturally integrated
    into the United Kingdom and there would be very  significant  obstacles
    for his integration into the Democratic Republic of Congo.  It was also
    the claimant's case that he fulfilled the requirements of  Exception  2
    because he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  both  a
    qualifying partner and with a qualifying child and the effects  of  his
    deportation would be unduly harsh.  It  was  also  his  case  that  the
    children's best interests supported the argument that the appeal should
    be allowed.  It was the claimant's case that paragraph 398  of  HC  395
    was not relevant because he had not been sentenced  to  at  least  four
    years' imprisonment and was not  a  persistent  offender  and  had  not
    caused serious harm but, if contrary to his  contention,  he  did  come
    within that scope then the exceptions under  statute  were  effectively
    also exceptions under the Rules.

17. The Secretary of State relied on the refusal letter as far  as  it  was
    still relevant but  of  course  recognised  that  the  arrival  of  the
    children did at the least require other things to be considered.

18. The judge's findings began at paragraph 34.  He recognised the claimant
    had a bad criminal record and at least until May 2017 was "classifiable
    as a persistent offender".  That was no  longer  the  case  because  it
    appeared that the claimant had stopped offending.  The judge  found  in
    the face of unchallenged evidence that  the  claimant  is  the  primary
    carer of his children with Ms Sosnowska and she  is  able  to  work  in
    employment as a consequence.  The judge found  that  the  claimant  had
    clearly built up a private life over a long  period  of  residence  and
    "accepted that he is integrated in the UK".  His removal  would  be  an
    interference in the private and family lives of the  claimant  and  his
    partner and their children.

19. The judge further found that the claimant's removal to  the  DRC  would
    entail "very significant obstacles" to integration in that country.  He
    built this conclusion on a matrix of reasons including his having  left
    the DRC when he was 10 years old and his having no adult experience  in
    that country, on being educated in the United Kingdom and  having  very
    limited ability in speaking Lingala and no ability to read or write the
    language.  The claimant knows no one in the DRC  and  has  no  property
    there.  His only employment had been in the United Kingdom.  The  judge
    could not see how the claimant could expect  to  obtain  work  and  his
    partner could not afford to maintain a home in the United  Kingdom  and
    support him in the DRC.

20. The judge found that the  effect  of  the  claimant's  removal  on  the
    partner and the children would be unduly harsh.  He based this  on  the
    claimant being the primary carer of the children and that removing  him
    would make the claimant's partner a single parent  with  a  significant
    adverse effect on her finances, that the children would be deprived  of
    contact with their father from a very young age and the judge found the
    consequence likely to be no  meaningful  contact  at  all  between  the
    children and their father.  The claimant could not support the children
    in any way financially.  It would not be in the interests of any of the
    children or partner to leave the United Kingdom to join  the  claimant.
    The judge found that the requirements of Exception 1 and  2  were  met.
    The judge found that statute provided that the public interest did  not
    require the claimant's removal.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    claimant's deportation would be disproportionate to the proper  purpose
    and the judge allowed the appeal.

21. I have read Mr Haseldine's skeleton argument.  I mean it no  disrespect
    when I say it needs no  additional  express  consideration  here.   The
    points were covered by the judge.

22. I now consider the Secretary of State's grounds.

23. Ground 1 is described as "making a material misdirection of law/failing
    to give adequate reasons for  findings  in  a  material  matter".   The
    contention is that the judge, in concluding the effects  of  separation
    would be "unduly harsh", has not given  adequate  reasons  for  finding
    that the consequences can be properly so described.  Reference is  made
    to the case of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  PG
    (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 at paragraph 46  referring  to  innocent
    children attracting sympathy but that is not  the  same.   The  Supreme
    Court in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  confirmed  that  the
    unduly harsh test is a high one and going beyond what is the  necessary
    consequence of separation.

24. The grounds also contended that there was no basis  for  concluding  as
    the judge did at paragraph 42 that separation would  be  an  inevitable
    consequence of deportation and  the  judge  had  given  no  reason  for
    finding it unduly hash for the children to remain in the United Kingdom
    with their mother where they would  be  able  to  avail  themselves  of
    Social Services support if that was required.

25. The finding that there were very significant obstacles  to  integration
    was also challenged.  The grounds refer to  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  [2015]
    UKUT 223 where the "very significant obstacles" test was  described  as
    an elevated threshold so that  mere  hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere
    hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience, even where multiplied  will
    generally be insufficient in its context.

26. It also referred to a case where the Upper Tribunal had decided on  its
    facts that there would not be very significant obstacles for  a  person
    with a long absence from the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  to  return
    there.  The grounds then contended that the judge had  failed  to  have
    regard to the case law concerning the public interest where,  following
    OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694  Wilson  LJ,  as  he  then  was,
    identified three facets of the public interest including  the  risk  of
    reoffending, the need to  deter  foreign  criminals  and  the  role  of
    deportation as expressing society's "revulsion".

27. The word "revulsion" is now seen as an infelicitous but there is  still
    a genuine public concern  about  foreign  criminals  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom.

28. Mr Haseldine had prepared a further skeleton argument for  the  hearing
    on 12 January 2021 which I now consider.

29.  The  skeleton  argument  points  out  that  the  claimant's   criminal
    activities were described by the Secretary of State as "low  level"  in
    the Deportation Order Explanatory Minute dated 9 July 2015.  That  does
    not seem entirely apt in the case of  someone  who  had  been  sent  to
    prison for three years  for  attempted  robbery  but  it  is  what  the
    Secretary of State chose to do and it is difficult for a  judge  to  go
    behind it.

30. On 9 May 2006 after, the claimant  had  been  convicted  for  attempted
    robbery, the Secretary of State wrote to say that no action  was  going
    to be taken.

31. With respect  to  Mr  Haseldine  I  have  checked  this  claim  in  the
    Deportation Order Explanatory Minute which appears in my  bundle  after
    the Deportation Order.  As is often the case with documents in the Home
    Office bundle I find the pagination either hard  to  find  or  hard  to
    understand but it is placed  after  the  Deportation  Order  marked,  I
    think, "Y1".  The policy justification for deportation is  said  to  be
    "aggregate low level offending".

32. A synopsis includes the background which I set out below because I find
    it illuminating:

       "Deportation action was not pursued against Mr Malamba following  his
       2005 conviction for attempted robbery for which he received  a  three
       year sentence and he was sent a  warning  letter.   In  view  of  his
       convictions on 7 November 2012 and 8 February 2013 he was issued with
       a notice of decision to make a deportation order  on  10  July  2013.
       Notice of appeal was lodged; however the  Home  Office  withdrew  the
       notice of decision to make a deportation order on 21 January 2014, in
       line with the then policy resultant from P (DRC) and R (DRC).   Given
       the  resumption  of  enforced  returns  to  the  DRC  and  a  further
       conviction on 23 January 2014 for breach of a non-molestation  order,
       the question of deportation is being revisited".

33. The skeleton argument then, appropriately, points out that there  is  a
    serious relationship with Ms  Sosnowska  and  two  children  from  that
    relationship.

34. The skeleton argument then rehearses the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    Decision and Reasons and  outlines  principles  of  law  and  statutory
    provisions.  It makes the point that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    given very clear reasons for his conclusion.  I have  alluded  to  them
    above and repeat them in outline.  The claimant never lived in the  DRC
    as an adult, he could not speak the language  there,  he  knew  no  one
    there and had no property there  and  no  obvious  means  of  obtaining
    employment there or existing without work and  his  partner  could  not
    support him outside the country.

35. This, it was contended, justified the conclusion that there  were  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration.

36. The judge then drew out the factual differences between  this  claimant
    and the appellant in Bossade.  He also pointed out that  the  Secretary
    of State had decided on an earlier occasion not to deport the  claimant
    but to take no action even though he had been to prison for robbery and
    it was the Secretary of State who described the offences as "low level"
    (I have explained this above). Against this background the judge  found
    it was rather difficult to see why the need to remove the claimant  was
    so very pressing even though there had been  further  offences,  albeit
    less serious than the ones that had been excused before.

37. Concerning the contention that the judge had not given adequate reasons
    for the finding that it was unduly harsh it was pointed  out  that  the
    judge had accepted the evidence that the claimant was a  primary  carer
    and not only was that important in the lives of the young children  but
    it also enabled the claimant's partner to  earn  a  living.   This  was
    within the scope of conclusions open to the judge.

38. I have indicated at the start of this hearing that the case came before
    me in January and March 2021.   The  hearing  in  January  was  aborted
    because of failings in the remote hearing mechanisms.  Mr Whitwell, who
    I do not suggest was in any way to blame, suffered the embarrassment of
    failure by his video camera but also by telephone when he tried to  use
    that as an acceptable but  less  satisfactory  alternative.   His  main
    point was that  the  facts  just  did  not  justify  the  unduly  harsh
    conclusion.  There was  nothing  to  explain  why  the  effect  on  the
    children or indeed the partner were worthy of the  description  "unduly
    harsh".

39. At the adjourned hearing Mr Melvin returned to this topic.  He  pointed
    out that although the First-tier Tribunal Judge identified  the  unduly
    harsh test there is no explanation about why the consequences satisfied
    the  test.   This,  he  submitted,  made  the   reasoning   inadequate.
    Similarly, the difficulties on return had been  elevated  to  a  degree
    that the facts did not warrant.  It was wrong to make too much  of  the
    partner being left as  a  single  parent,  that  is  a  consequence  of
    deportation; it is not unduly harsh but what deportation does.

40. Mr Haseldine said that the tests were identified,  the  conclusion  was
    explained and it was up to the judge. If the judge found  that  it  was
    "unduly harsh" then there was enough there to justify  the  conclusion.
    The finding was not plucked from the air.

41. The judge was also impressed by the difficulties the claimant had faced
    being unable to read or write Lingala and clearly attached considerable
    weight to that point as he was entitled to do.  He was not a persistent
    offender and should not be treated as one.

42. I have considered these things.  This may be a  case  that  could  have
    been decided rationally in a different way but that is not at  all  the
    same as saying the  decision  that  has  been  made  is  irrational  or
    otherwise unlawful.  It is conspicuously clear that the judge  had  the
    correct tests in his mind and conspicuously clear  why  he  found  them
    satisfied.  I do not accept that the reasoning is  inadequate  or  that
    the decision is perverse, although this was not expressly alleged.

43. I find that this is a case of a judge  identifying  the  test  and  the
    appropriate facts and evaluating them in a way that may not  have  been
    the only way possible but was clear and lawful and I dismiss the appeal
    brought by the Secretary of State.




    Notice of Decision

44. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 August 2021                  |

