
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08976/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     AOA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought with permission granted by the Upper Tribunal
    against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  following  a
    hearing  in  Manchester  Piccadilly  on  4  July  2019,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds against the decision of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's human rights claim.

 2. Before me this morning the appellant appears in person.  The respondent
    is represented by Mr Bates.  The appellant told me that he was involved
    in the events that took place at Fishmonger's Hall in London last week.
     He said that as a result some of the documents upon which he had  been
    working in connection with this case had been lost.  I asked him in the
    circumstances whether he was content for the hearing  to  go  ahead  or
    whether he would prefer for it to be  adjourned.   The  appellant  said
    that he wished the hearing to go ahead.  In the  event,  the  appellant
    represented himself ably.  He had before him the judge's  decision  and
    the materials that were before the  judge.   The  appellant  also  made
    reference to a number of documents that post-date the decision  of  the
    judge.  I shall refer to those again in due in due course.

 3. The judge noted that the appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed
    consequent upon the decision to make a deportation order  against  him,
    following his conviction for criminal offences of dishonesty for  which
    he was sentenced in September 2017 to  28  months'  imprisonment.   The
    judge noted that the case for the appellant turned upon the effect that
    his deportation would have upon the appellant's family.  The  appellant
    has a partner and children.  One of the children, who I shall  call  R,
    has certain problems.  In paragraph 20 of the decision, the judge  said
    that he had taken into account all  the  documentary  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle "and in particular that  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's son [R]".  I note that,  since  the  grounds  of  challenge
    contend that certain documentation to which I shall refer in due course
    has not been considered by the judge.  The judge  heard  evidence  from
    the  appellant  and  from  his  partner.   The  judge  also  noted  the
    submissions on behalf of the respondent and the appellant.

 4. Beginning at paragraph 50, the judge turned to set  out  his  findings.
    The judge noted that the appellant had entered the United Kingdom  with
    his wife as  a  visitor,  and  then  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.  The wife was not the same person as  the  current  partner.
    The judge observed that the appellant and his current partner had begun
    their relationship at a point when it was evident that his position  in
    the United Kingdom was, in effect, problematic.

 5. The judge recorded at paragraph 53 that, whilst the appellant had  been
    serving a sentence of fourteen months' imprisonment, he was not able to
    provide daily care for the four children who made up the  family.   The
    judge accepted that that  would  have  made  the  partner's  task  more
    difficult, as she was working full-time.  However, she had been able to
    cope, despite the difficulty.

 6. At paragraph 54, the judge made reference to the serious offences  that
    the appellant had committed. At paragraph 55, the  judge  said  it  was
    clear from the appellant's own testimony "that he sat at  his  computer
    and used his mobile phone to commit the offences when he claims he  was
    the primary carer of his children".  The judge did  not  consider  that
    this showed the appellant had regard  to  the  best  interests  of  his
    children at that time.

 7. At paragraph 57, the judge noted the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of
    appellant as saying that he had made one bad decision.  The judge  said
    that was not case, since the appellant had committed multiple offences.



 8. At paragraph 59, the judge turned to the issue of  the  children.   The
    judge said: "I had particular regard to  the  evidence  from  the  Team
    Around the Child".  That  is  a  team  that  includes  local  authority
    professionals  but  also,  the  appellant  says,  the  parents  of  the
    children.  I shall turn to  the  documentation  in  that  regard  in  a
    moment.

 9. At paragraph 60, the judge noted the  appellant's  contention  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for  the  family  if  following  the  appellant's
    deportation his partner had to give up work.  The judge disagreed.   He
    concluded that the family unit without  the  appellant  "would  not  be
    destitute but could receive  state  support.   Support  from  the  Team
    Around the Child would continue to protect [R's] best interests".

10. At paragraph 62, the judge concluded that it would be unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant's partner and children to return to Nigeria.   The
    issue, therefore,  was  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to be deported and for the family to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In that regard the judge said this at paragraph 63:-

         "I do not accept for the  reasons  I  have  set  out  that  if  the
         Appellant was removed to Nigeria alone that would cause  him  undue
         hardship  or  cause  his  partner  and  the  four  British  citizen
         themselves undue hardship.  I make that finding also in relation to
         the child [R].  The evidence indicates that although it caused some
         difficulty when the Appellant was in prison [R's] issues are  being
         addressed by the his  mother  and  the  multidisciplinary  agencies
         involved with the Team Around the Child."

11. At paragraph 74, the judge took  account  of  section  117C(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge  accepted  the
    appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying
    partner and child but he did not accept that the effect of  deportation
    on the partner or children would be unduly harsh.

12. The challenge to the judge's decision  was  settled  by  Counsel.   The
    grounds contended that R suffers developmental delay  and  that  autism
    spectrum disorder is suspected but remains undiagnosed,  for  what  are
    said to be clinical reasons.  Reference is made to AB45 and AB46, being
    documents emanating from  Cumbria  County  Council,  to  which  I  will
    return.  It is contended that the judge did not give  consideration  to
    AB45 in particular.  Accordingly, the judge had either failed  to  have
    regard to relevant evidence or alternatively had not  given  sufficient
    reasons for his findings.

13. Before me the appellant has relied upon those grounds and expanded upon
    them with some skill.  He refers to AB45, which is a document dated  13
    May 2019 composed by Mary Cooper, who is the Area  Special  Educational
    Needs Co-ordinator (SENCO) for Cumbria County Council.  The document is
    in the form of an update sheet written following a meeting at which the
    parents were present along with R and Ms Cooper and another SENCO  from
    [named] School.  The update noted amongst other things that R had  been
    allocated a place at the School from September 2019.  There is then the
    following:-

         "Parents are working together well at home to provide  the  support
         that R needs to help him continue to make  progress.   Since  [R's]
         Dad has returned to the family home R is much more settled.  Dad is
         tuned into [R's] needs and cares for him when he is not at  nursery
         and mum is at work."

14. The document also recorded that R was then awaiting an  appointment  to
    see a speech therapist.  Copies of  the  document  were  sent,  amongst
    other places, to a paediatrician.

15. AB46 is a document earlier in date, namely 11  December  2018.   It  is
    written from the NHS Cumbria Partnership by Lauren Show who is a Health
    Visitor.  It states that:-

         "[R] is requiring care above and beyond what a  child  of  his  age
         should require.  It would be detrimental to his progress to  remove
         him from this support at present, he is due to start  school  in  9
         months time and the support which is now in place from his team  of
         professionals and both his parents will maximise his  potential  to
         ensure his transition is as seamless as possible."

16. At paragraph 47, there is a document dated  24  September  2018,  again
    written by Mary Cooper.  Again, this noted previous advice  in  respect
    of how to handle R and help him in his  studies.   Amongst  the  agreed
    actions was the organisation of a Team Around the Child meeting.

17. At page 49, a further document from  Mary  Cooper,  dated  11  February
    2019, recorded that R was awaiting an appointment to see the  community
    paediatrician.  R was said to continue to do things very  much  on  his
    own terms and it took adults who know him well to work with  him  in  a
    certain way before he would do what they ask him to do.  He was said to
    be behaving very much as an individual and not as a member of  a  group
    of children.

18. The appellant made reference to the judgment of  Lord  Carnwath  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, where  he  addressed  the  issue  of  "unduly
    harsh" in the current context.  The appellant stressed the fact,  which
    is not in dispute, that in deciding whether something is unduly  harsh,
    one must look at the  effect  on  the  child  and  not  judge  that  by
    reference to the conduct of the appellant.

19. That conduct has, in effect, already been taken into account,  in  that
    as a  foreign  criminal  sentenced  to  between  one  and  four  years'
    imprisonment, section 117C(5) states that Exception 2 applies where the
    effect of deportation on a partner and child would be unduly harsh.

20. We are, therefore, looking at the position where  something  more  than
    harsh needs to be shown.  The  appellant  submits  that  this  test  is
    satisfied by the  materials  that  were  in  front  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  R was, in the  appellant's  submission,  not  just  an
    ordinary child; he had the issues described in  the  various  documents
    emanating from Cumbria County Council.  Those documents had  noted  the
    improvement in R's behaviour, since the  appellant  had  returned  from
    prison.  The appellant was then looking after the children full-time.

21. Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  challenge  was  in  the  nature  of  a
    disagreement rather than one which disclosed an error  of  law  on  the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Having considered the  decision
    and the challenge made to it, both in writing and by the  appellant,  I
    have to say that on the  evidence  as  it  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, I agree with Mr Bates.  I do not consider that there is
    an error of law in this decision, such as to necessitate it  being  set
    aside.  I have already noted that the judge made express  reference  to
    the Cumbria County Council documentation and said he had had particular
    regard to it.  It is trite law that the judge did not need to refer  to
    each and every item of evidence.

22. I consider that the judge has adequately  analysed  that  evidence  and
    given reasons for drawing conclusions from it, resulting in the  appeal
    being dismissed.  The main  problem  for  the  appellant  is  that  the
    documentation before the judge, whilst it notes various issues relating
    to R, does not include a clinical diagnosis from a  suitably  qualified
    medical professional.  I accept that at the time R was at an age  where
    that may not have been appropriate.  However, moves were being made for
    him to have appropriate  help  from  a  medical  professional  and  the
    appellant says that that has indeed just happened.

23. The appellant points in his position as a parent as being  an  integral
    part of the Team Around the Child.  Whilst  that  may  be  so,  in  the
    context of the evidence overall and having regard  to  the  appellant's
    own background, some degree of caution is required in accepting without
    more what the appellant says in that regard.  The  judge  came  to  the
    conclusion that for the reason  he  gave  in  paragraph  55  he  rather
    doubted the nature  and  extent  of  the  care  and  concern  that  the
    appellant had provided whilst he was the primary carer, given that  the
    appellant had been able during that time  to  expend  time  and  effort
    committing the criminal offences for which he was convicted.  The judge
    also gave reasons why, if the appellant were  deported,  he  considered
    that the mother of R and the other children  would  be  able  to  cease
    work. Albeit that this might require the  family  to  become  dependent
    upon benefits, it would provide a stable parental presence in the  life
    of R.

24. On the evidence before the judge, there was nothing to  show  that  the
    presence of the appellant, as opposed to the  appellant's  partner,  at
    home with R would still be something that was  necessary  in  order  to
    alleviate any problems that R might have.

25. I appreciate that this conclusion is disappointing to the appellant. As
    I pointed out in the  course  of  submissions,  however,  the  question
    before me is whether on the state of the evidence as it was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that judge was entitled, for the  reasons  he
    gave, to reach the conclusion he did.  I  have  explained  why  I  have
    found that this is the position.  However, the appellant tells me  that
    matters may well have moved on, such that we may be at or close to  the
    point when a relevant medical professional will give a diagnosis of  R.
    Along with  that  diagnosis,  there  may  well  be  evidence  from  the
    professional that goes to the heart of the matter; namely whether there
    is a need for R  to  have  the  continuous  physical  presence  of  the
    appellant in his life, as opposed merely to the presence of his mother.



26. Depending on what the reports in due course disclose, it  may  be  that
    the appellant can make submissions to the Secretary of State  that  his
    case is now to be viewed in  a  different  light.   As  matters  stand,
    however, for the reasons I have given, I find that there is no error of
    law in this decision such as to  necessitate  the  decision  being  set
    aside.

27. The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 11 December 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
