

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/08960/2017
      HU/08412/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|16 April 2019                                   |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HON. MR JUSTICE ANDREW BAKER
                    (sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge)

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                 SINDISO [M]
                                 DANZEL [M]
                          (No Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, instructed by Tann Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Lawyer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

    1.  The  appellants  ('Sindiso'  and  'Danzel')  are  Zimbabwean  half-
       siblings, having the same father but different mothers.   They  were
       both born in 1999, Danzel on 19 March and Sindiso on  22  September.
       Danzel's mother died in June 2006;  Sindiso's  mother,  Lindiwe  [M]
       ('Mrs [M]'), is married to the appellants' father,  Mr  Pearson  [M]
       ('Mr [M]').  Mr and Mrs [M] have been in the UK  since  2002.   They
       both sought, but were not granted, asylum.  However, they  now  have
       two further children, born in  the  UK,  and  at  the  time  of  the
       Decision that we were  asked  to  consider,  Mr  and  Mrs  [M]  were
       lawfully resident in the UK under limited leave to remain  that  was
       set to expire in January 2019.  (We were told at  the  hearing  that
       they have a pending application for the renewal or extension of that
       leave.)

    2. When Mr and Mrs [M] came to the UK in 2002, they left the appellants
       in Zimbabwe to be cared for and brought up by Mr [M]'s parents,  who
       lived  in  Kadoma,  some  140  km  or  so  south  of  Harare.    The
       grandparents  moved  to  Harare  in  2004  when  their  health   was
       deteriorating, taking the appellants with them, and Mr [M]'s sister,
       Florence [M] ('Florence'), moved to Harare to support them,  and  to
       bring up the appellants with them.  The grandparents  died  in  2008
       and Florence thereafter raised the appellants on her  own.   Mr  [M]
       went back to Zimbabwe for a  visit  in  2004.   That  was  the  last
       contact either of Mr or Mrs  [M]  had  with  Sindiso  or  Danzel  in
       person.

    3. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  did,  however,  include
       some evidence of ongoing contact over the  years,  and  evidence  of
       financial support throughout (i.e. support from Mr and  Mrs  [M]  to
       the grandparents and thereafter to Florence, to help them in looking
       after the appellants).

    4. The appellants made entry clearance applications,  with  a  view  to
       seeking indefinite leave to enter and remain in order to join Mr and
       Mrs [M] here for settlement.   The  applications  were  made  on  24
       February 2017 when the appellants were  still  minors,  although  in
       Danzel's  case  only  just.   The  applications  asserted  that  the
       appellants were the children of a parent (Mr [M])  who  was  present
       and settled in the UK for  the  purpose  of  paragraph  297  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

    5. There was never any basis for supposing  that  paragraph  297  might
       apply, however.  Mr [M] was not settled but had  only  discretionary
       leave to remain, expiring  in  January  2019,  as  we  have  already
       mentioned.  Nonetheless, since the appellants were Mr [M]'s children
       (and in Sindiso's case, also Mrs [M]'s child) seeking to  join  him,
       plainly consideration had to be given to Article 8 ECHR and/or  s.55
       of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

    6. Entry clearance was refused by decisions made by an Entry  Clearance
       Officer in July 2017, upon the basis that Mr [M] was not settled  so
       his circumstances  did  not  fall  within  the  Rules,  and  without
       considering  Article  8  or  s.55.   Separate  appeal   reviews   by
       (different) Entry Clearance Managers in  January  2018  upheld  both
       those decisions, and consideration was given to Article 8  and  s.55
       in those reviews.

    7. Following a hearing on 21 June 2018, and by a  Decision  promulgated
       on 29 June 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge A K Hussain dismissed the
       appellants' appeals.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  E  M
       Simpson on 14 August 2018, on the papers.  She concluded that it was
       arguable that:

         i.  the  Decision  gave  the  appearance  of  a  closed  mind   and
            partiality; and

        ii. the proportionality assessment under Article 8 was  flawed,  (a)
            because of (i) above, and (b) because of reliance on  the  time-
            limited nature of Mr and Mrs [M]'s then extant leave  to  remain
            and/or a failure to consider the interests of  the  two  further
            children, the appellants' British-born siblings  (full  siblings
            to Sindiso, half-siblings to Danzel).

    9. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

   Submissions - Error of Law

   10. For the appellants, it was submitted in  their  Grounds  of  Appeal,
       firstly, that FtTJ Hussain wrongfully treated the case as one of  "a
       tactical application to secure an appeal before [Danzel] reached his
       majority after which any opportunity of obtaining entry clearance as
       a dependent child vanished", in which "The Tribunal was  unashamedly
       being used to circumvent the [Immigration] Rules" (quoting, in  each
       case, from  the  Decision  at  [4]).   It  was  submitted  that  the
       'tactical application' finding was both  erroneous  in  itself,  and
       something that should not  have  played  any  part  in  the  Judge's
       consideration of the case.

   11. Secondly, the appellants submitted that the  'tactical  application'
       finding  had  materially  infected  the  Article  8  proportionality
       assessment, because  the  Judge,  it  was  said,  "carries  out  the
       proportionality exercise ... on the basis that these appellants  are
       seeking to circumvent immigration rules by pursuing a  human  rights
       appeal".

   12. Thirdly, the appellants submitted that the Judge failed to undertake
       his own assessment of proportionality under Article  8,  but  merely
       conducted a review of the underlying decision-making.

   13. Fourthly, and finally,  the  appellants  contended  that  the  Judge
       wrongly had regard to the fact that Mr and  Mrs  [M]  had  leave  to
       remain only until 21 January 2019 and wrongly speculated  that  they
       would then have to return to Zimbabwe. They did not take  the  point
       raised by FtTJ Simpson as to failure to consider  the  interests  of
       the British siblings; nor was there any suggestion in the First-tier
       Tribunal that a consideration of the siblings'  interests  would  or
       might lead to a different outcome.

   14. At the hearing, Mr Garrod advanced brief oral arguments  in  support
       of all Grounds (and also adopted the suggested  criticism  that  the
       British siblings' interests had not been taken into account).

   15. For the Secretary of State, Mr Jarvis conceded that  FtTJ  Hussain's
       opening remarks (about the timing of and motive for the  immigration
       applications)  were  unwarranted  and,  if  they  had  infected  the
       substantive  decision-making,  could  be  capable  of  creating   an
       appearance of pre-judgment on the part of the Judge.  He  submitted,
       however, that in fact the Decision was unaffected by those  comments
       and disclosed no error of law.  Findings of primary fact  were  made
       that were open to the Judge on the evidence, a proper assessment was
       made, in  the  light  of  those  findings,  of  whether  there  were
       exceptional circumstances justifying the grant of leave outside  the
       Rules, and a fair and careful assessment was made of  whether  there
       was a disproportionate  interference  with  family/private  life  in
       refusing the appellants leave to join their parents.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

   16. FtTJ Hussain's opening comments about  the  appellants'  immigration
       applications   were   intemperate,   unfounded    and    (therefore)
       inappropriate.  It is no abuse of immigration procedures  generally,
       or of the First-tier Tribunal in particular, to make an  application
       where the only real basis for it (if any) will be the possibility of
       leave being granted outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  Article  8
       grounds.  Of course, any such application faces the difficulty  that
       if it does not come within an Article 8 compliant set of Rules, that
       is to say a set of Rules  adherence  to  which  generally  will  not
       infringe Article 8, the applicant may legitimately  be  required  to
       show that the case presents  exceptional  circumstances.   But  that
       does not make it improper to make the application.

   17. To that extent, we agree with the first submission in support of the
       appeal.  However, turning to the second submission and  reading  the
       Decision as a whole, in our judgment the  Judge's  opening  comments
       were preliminary remarks only that did not play any material part in
       his  decision-making  as   to   whether   there   were   exceptional
       circumstances and/or a disproportionate  interference  with  family/
       private life.  This appeal must succeed, if at all, by showing  that
       decision-making to be flawed on its own terms, not by  reference  to
       the Judge's unfortunate opening comments.

   18. The third submission in support of the appeal, the  contention  that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to conduct his  own  assessment
       under Article 8 ECHR, is not arguable in our view.  In the Decision,
       at [16]-[29], the Judge plainly did conduct his own, full assessment
       of proportionality, reaching the conclusion that, "The decision  not
       to admit [the appellants] is proportionate. Consideration  of  their
       best interests does not yield a different result."  The  fourth  and
       final submission in  support  of  the  appeal  raises  the  question
       whether the Judge's assessment was flawed; but it was without  doubt
       the Judge's own assessment, on the merits, of the proportionality of
       refusing entry to the appellants, as an  interference  with  private
       and family life under Article 8, and not merely a review  for  error
       of the Entry Clearance Managers' conclusions.

   19. The Judge, firstly, made primary  findings  of  fact  on  a  central
       aspect of the appeal as presented to him, which was the  appellants'
       claim,  through  the  witness  evidence  of  Mr  and  Mrs  [M]  (but
       particularly that of Mr [M]),  that  there  had  been  tensions  and
       discord between the appellants and Florence since 2013 such that the
       appellants had suffered or might suffer harm.   The  Judge  reviewed
       the evidence in some detail, including evidence from a social worker
       in Zimbabwe, and after giving it a  fair  and  balanced  evaluation,
       held that the difficulties had been exaggerated and (at  [14])  that
       "there are no good reasons why the  appellants  cannot  continue  to
       live as they have done with the sponsor's sister".

   20. Having reached that conclusion, the Judge was properly  entitled  to
       assess whether the refusal of entry infringed Article 8 ECHR on  the
       basis that the appellants were safe as they were  in  Zimbabwe.   He
       concluded that it would  not  have  been  in  the  appellants'  best
       interests to uproot them from Zimbabwe and their family  life  there
       with Florence, just as they  were  completing  their  education  and
       becoming adults, to unite them in a fledgling family life in the  UK
       with their parents.  Thus, at [21]: "... it would not  be  in  their
       best interests either for that  education  to  be  curtailed  or  to
       remove them from an  environment  where  they  have,  through  their
       education, equipped themselves for employment  in  Zimbabwe  and  to
       instead supplant them into another country".

   21. The  Judge  reminded  himself  of  the  strong  public  interest  in
       maintaining an effective immigration system  by  normally  requiring
       applicants to satisfy the Immigration Rules before being given entry
       clearance.

   22. In finally striking a balance, the Judge did make reference  to  the
       fact that, as things then stood, Mr and Mrs [M]'s  leave  to  remain
       expired in January 2019 and it is right  that  he  should  not  have
       assumed (if he did) that their  leave  would  not  be  extended,  or
       speculate about that at all.  In our judgment, however, that did not
       materially impact the assessment the Judge finally made,  which  was
       as follows (at [28]):

           "The appellants' circumstances show, whether assessed when  they
           were minors or after they became adults, that  it  is  in  their
           best interests to remain in Zimbabwe.   They  have  spent  their
           entire life there and have grown up in the cultural  and  social
           norms of that society with their aunt who has raised  them  from
           when they were babies.  They have equipped themselves  for  life
           in Zimbabwe with their education.  Whilst  they  have  a  family
           life with [Mr [M]], I am satisfied they have a  stronger  family
           life with their aunt who has raised them.   Their  parents  have
           made little or no effort to visit them ... .   With  regards  to
           [Mr [M]], inevitably, over the lengthy  periods  of  separation,
           they have grown used to living apart.   Taking  everything  into
           account, the evidence does not suggest that it would be  in  the
           appellants' best interests to move to  the  United  Kingdom.   I
           have  seen  nothing   serious   and   compelling   about   their
           circumstances that suggests that they need to be brought to  the
           United Kingdom to be reunited with their parents."

   23. In our judgment, the conclusion in the light of that  evaluation  of
       the facts of the case that the decision not to admit the  appellants
       was  proportionate,  and  indeed  was  a  decision  in  their   best
       interests, was justified, if not inevitable; and that evaluation  of
       the facts was an evaluation that was supported by evidence and  open
       to the Judge.  It is true that no separate reference is made to  the
       position or interests of the appellants' young siblings here; but in
       our judgment there is no serious basis for suggesting that  separate
       consideration of their position could  affect  the  outcome.    From
       their perspective, their Zimbabwean older siblings were  staying  in
       Zimbabwe where they had always lived, never having been part of  the
       UK family household with them.  In short, their family  relationship
       would simply remain as it had always been.

          Decision:

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellants'
       appeals did not involve any error on a point of law.  The remarks  in
       the Decision at [4] should not have been made, but they do not affect
       the soundness in law of  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
       appeals.

    2. We therefore affirm that decision and dismiss this further appeal.


Signed:     Andrew Baker                           Date:   17 April 2019
                 The Hon. Mr Justice Andrew Baker





