
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/08876/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 March 2019                      |      On 16 April 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Mr n o w
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neil Garrod (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan, promulgated on 15th May 2018, following a hearing at Birmingham
    Priory Courts on 2nd May 2018.  In the decision, the judge allowed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary  of  State,
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.  For convenience I
    will refer to the parties as they were referred to  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and  was  born  on  29th
    February 1976.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 1st August 2017, against the making of the order for  deportation
    on 28th July 2017.

The Appellant's claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is based upon his family and private life in  the
    United Kingdom.  He first entered the UK with a student  visa  on  17th
    September 2005.  He was then 29 years of age.   Further  extensions  of
    leave to remain were given.  The Appellant's ex-partner is Miss A,  and
    is the mother of their two children.  The Appellant's son, Z, was  born
    on 14th June 2006.  The Appellant's  daughter,  S,  was  born  on  29th
    January 2010.  The Appellant's son was granted British  citizenship  on
    21st November 2016.  The daughter, however, remains a Nigerian citizen.
     Both the Appellant's children have a pending application for leave  to
    remain.  The Appellant himself is in a relationship  with  his  current
    partner, Miss D, a British citizen, and they are engaged to be married.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge began with the observation that it was not disputed that  the
    Appellant has established a family  and  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As far as his private  life  is  concerned,  he  had  entered
    legally in the UK in September 2005, and had remained here  for  twelve
    years, less the time spent in prison.  The bulk of  the  time  in  this
    country has been trouble-free for him.  He was convicted  in  September
    2016 and sentenced to a prison sentence of eighteen months.   That  did
    not, however mean that he was socially and culturally  integrated  into
    the UK.   The  question  remained  however,  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his return to Nigeria.  The Appellant had  not
    been back to Nigeria since his arrival here.  That did not mean to  say
    that he could not return.

 5. On the other hand,  it  was  the  case  that  both  the  children  were
    qualified children.  The Appellant's son was a British national and his
    daughter, having been born in this country, had been  in  this  country
    for more than seven years.  His partner also was a qualifying  partner,
    as she was a British citizen.  Although she was of Nigerian  origin  as
    well, she was 8 months old when she came to the UK and had not returned
    back to Nigeria.

 6. Ultimately, what this appeal rested upon was whether the return of  the
    Appellant to Nigeria would be "unduly harsh", taking into  account  the
    fact that the children would have to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant.  The judge had regard  to  an  independent  social  worker's
    report, by the name of Rachel Ravu, which was dated 19th December 2017.
     He makes it clear that he had considered the report "as a  whole"  but
    that in particular he referred to the fact that were  their  father  to
    return to Nigeria this would:-

         "result in a sense of grief and loss and disruption of the  routine
         of their lives.  This is likely to affect not only the physical and
         material wellbeing, but  also  their  self-esteem  and  confidence.
         Consequently, their health, emotional wellbeing, mental health, and
         resilience would all be negatively affected ..." (see paragraph  18
         of the decision).

 7. On the basis of the social worker's report, the judge concluded that it
    was apparent from this  report  that  "if  the  appellant  were  to  be
    deported it would have a significant impact on the children" (paragraph
    19).  Significantly, the social worker's report did take  into  account
    the views of the children (paragraph 20).  The judge concluded that the
    evidence made it clear, and in particular the  social  worker's  report
    made it clear, that the status quo was a major factor in the children's
    lives and that it was important  that  the  children  remain  with  the
    natural mother.  The parents had  an  amicable  understanding  for  the
    benefit of the children which  was  to  their  credit  (paragraph  20).
    Having considered the children's  best  interests  (paragraph  21)  the
    judge went on to state that the fundamental presumption in these  cases
    was  in  favour  of  deporting  foreign   criminals   (paragraph   22).
    Nevertheless:-

         "since the appellant's release from prison on 14 June  2017,  there
         is nothing to suggest that he has been in trouble again or that  he
         has not rehabilitated.  Indeed, in light of  the  letter  from  the
         probation service, it does seem he has rehabilitated and that he is
         of a low risk of reoffending" (paragraph 22).

    The judge concluded that it would be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the family life of the Appellant were he to be removed  (paragraph
    23).

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The Grounds of Application state that the  judge  erred  in  concluding
    that it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without
    the Appellant who was to be deported.  In this respect, the judge found
    that the Appellant satisfied exception (2) of Section 117C of the  2002
    Act.  However, the judge had failed to adequately reason  this  finding
    in order to satisfy the rigorous test of being unduly  harsh.   It  was
    necessary to identify factors that go  beyond  the  normal  father  and
    child interactions or the natural love exhibited between a  parent  and
    the child.  The judge had also relied upon a social worker's report  in
    support of the finding, adding weight to the finding that removal would
    "result in a sense of grief and loss and disruption of the  routine  of
    their lives", but this did not meet the high threshold required in such
    cases.

10. Second, the judge wrongly attached weight to the fact that there was no
    risk of reoffending because it is well-known that  deportation  appeals
    are one-dimensional, with reliance being placed on the public interest,
    which is wider than  other  considerations,  because  it  includes  the
    marking of public revulsion at the offender's conduct and the  need  to
    deter others.

11. On 13th July 2018, permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge's  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh to remove the Appellant was  inadequately
    reasoned.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 22nd March 2019, Mr Whitwell handed up  two
    decisions for the court's consideration.  The first  of  these  was  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  The second was the case of Lee v SSHD [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348.  Mr Whitwell then relied upon the Grounds of Application.
     He submitted that the judge's conclusion (at paragraph  22)  that  the
    letter  from  the  probation  service  makes  it  clear  that  "he  has
    rehabilitated and that he is of low risk of reoffending" (paragraph 22)
    was a misdirection because following the case of KO  (Nigeria)  it  was
    now clear (at paragraph 27) that such a matter was  irrelevant  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.  This is because what  was  said  in  KO
    (Nigeria) was that "unduly harsh" does not  amount  to  "uncomfortable,
    inconvenient,  undesirable  or   merely   difficult"   but   poses   "a
    considerably more elevated threshold" (paragraph 27).   This  being  so
    the judge was wrong to have concluded that the Appellant's return would
    indeed be unduly harsh.

13. Second, although the judge refers to the  independent  social  worker's
    report (which appears at C1 to C36 of the Respondent's bundle),  it  is
    plain that his citation of the report is selective.   The  judge  cites
    the opinion of the expert from section 9 of the report  (at  page  C11)
    and emphasises the fact that were  the  Appellant  to  be  removed  the
    impact of this on the children would be "a sense of grief and loss  and
    disruption of the routine of their lives" (paragraph 18).  If one reads
    the social worker's report in  its  entirety,  it  is  plain  that  the
    circumstances do  not  amount  to  it  being  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    Appellant to return.

14. Third, the case of Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348 also makes it clear that:-

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour. That is what deportation  does.  Sometimes  the  balance
         between its justification and its consequences falls the other way,
         but whether it does so is a  question  for  an  immigration  judge.
         Unless he has made a mistake of law in reaching  his  conclusion  -
         and we readily accept that this may include an error of approach  -
         his decision is final ...".

15. For his part, Mr Garrod, appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  relied
    upon the Rule 24 response drafted by his instructing  solicitor.   This
    makes it clear that there was no challenge made to the social  worker's
    assessment and conclusion (from paragraph 20) which was that:-

         "The impact of the separation between appellant  and  children  was
         unequivocally evidenced during the time  that  he  was  in  prison.
         Resounding evidence was shown how this short  period  affected  the
         two young children.

         It would be even  more  devastating  if  this  separation  is  made
         permanent by deporting the appellant."

16. Second, submitted Mr Garrod, it is not the case at all that  the  judge
    attaches undue and controlling weight to the  social  worker's  report.
    This is because prior  to  his  dealing  with  the  report,  the  judge
    concludes that the impact on the two children,  who  are  dependent  on
    their parents, would be unduly harsh (at paragraph 18).   He  is  clear
    that, "It is apparent from the above report that if the appellant  were
    to be deported it  would  have  significant  impact  on  the  children"
    (paragraph 19).  When the social worker's report is actually taken into
    account, it is plain that the views of the children are  also  elicited
    and taken into account, before the  judge  concludes  that  the  social
    worker's report is that "the status  quo  is  a  major  factor  in  the
    children's lives" (paragraph 20).




17. Third, the cases cited today by Mr Whitwell before this Tribunal do not
    assist the Respondent at all.  First, if one looks at the  case  of  KO
    (Nigeria), it is plain that the Supreme Court concluded  that  in  that
    case:-

         "it would be unduly harsh for either of  the  two  seven  year  old
         British citizen children concerned to  be  abruptly  uprooted  from
         their United Kingdom life setting and lifestyle and exiled to  this
         struggling, impoverished and plague stricken west African state. No
         reasonable or right thinking person would  consider  this  anything
         less that (sic) cruel" (paragraph 27).

    That conclusion was not interfered with by the Supreme Court.   Second,
    as far as the case of Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348  is  concerned,  although
    that case suggested that the occurrence of  "tragic  consequences"  was
    inevitable in deportation cases,  because  they  always  broke  up  the
    family, ultimately it is a question for the Immigration Judge and  that
    his decision is final, provided it is a permissible  conclusion.   That
    was the case here.

18. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge's reference to the  fact
    that the  letter  from  the  probation  service,  suggesting  that  the
    Appellant had rehabilitated and he is of low risk of reoffending, was a
    misdirection because that consideration is no longer relevant after  KO
    (Nigeria).

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  This is a  case  where  the  facts  in  themselves  are  not
    fundamentally  in  contention.   The  Appellant  has  a   genuine   and
    subsisting relationship with his partner  and  his  two  children.   He
    arrived in this country legally.  He was 29 then.  He is now  over  42.
    He is in a relationship with a lady who herself came  to  this  country
    when she was 8 months old.  There are two children.  Both of  them  are
    qualifying children.  The eldest is a British citizen, but the  younger
    one has now been in this country for over seven years.   The  Appellant
    was sentenced to imprisonment on 9th September 2016 for eighteen months
    for an offence of fraud.  He has complied fully with the Rules  of  the
    establishment.  He has  shown  remorse.   At  present  he  demonstrated
    motivation.  There  is  expert  evidence  that  there  is  no  risk  of
    reoffending.  The judge has emphasised that the fundamental presumption
    is for there to be deportation for a person such as the  Appellant  who
    has been guilty of the commission of offences.  However, the judge  has
    also considered individually and specifically the position of  the  two
    children.  He does so when he  considers  their  best  interests.   The
    children know of no other country.  They have not been to Nigeria.  The
    son is now 11 years of age and approaching 12.

20.  Against this background, the judge had to consider whether it would be
    "unduly harsh" for the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant.  It is not the case that  the  judge  has  quoted  from  the
    social worker's report in a selective manner.  He  is  clear  that,  "I
    have considered the report as a whole but, in particular,  I  refer  to
    the opinion of the social worker and the relevant  paragraphs  read  as
    follows" (paragraph 18).  It is clear  from  this  that  the  judge  is
    setting out to refer to  particular  aspects  of  the  social  worker's
    report, as he is entitled to do, after having read it in its  entirety.
    Nothing shows that what he  does  cite  is  inaccurately  stated.   The
    judge's conclusion then drawn from this report is that there would be a
    "significant impact on  the  children"  (paragraph  19).    The  social
    worker's report also draws attention to the fact that a short period of
    separation when the Appellant was in prison had a big impact  upon  the
    children (paragraph 20), and this being so, the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude as he did.  He remained open to the presumption in  favour  of
    deporting foreign criminals right to the very end (see  paragraph  22).
    Ultimately, however, it was a matter of his assessment of  the  balance
    of considerations, and he has concluded in the manner that was open  to
    him.  The decision is fully reasoned and is sustainable.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

22. An anonymity direction is made.

23. This appeal of the Secretary of State is refused.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019



