
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08391/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2021                           |On 4 March 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                         TRUPTIBEN SANJAYBHAI PATEL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed to a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  13  March  2018  refusing  her
    application for entry clearance.  She appealed  this  decision  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and permission was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal following a successful  Cart  judicial  review  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's earlier refusal of permission.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was set aside by the Upper Tribunal Judge in his decision
    of 23 April 2020.

2.   There was subsequently a CMR before me at which Ms Chapman,  instructed
    by Bindman & Co, appeared for the appellant and Mr P Deller appeared on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  Mr Deller undertook  to  review  the
    decision in the light of up-to-date evidence and having  done  so,  was
    content to agree that the First-tier Tribunal had materially  erred  in
    law such that its determination should be set  aside  and   the  appeal
    should be retained in the Upper Tribunal and allowed.   Subsequently  a
    consent order under Rule 39(1) has been provided in which, among  other
    things, the respondent made  her  position  clear  as  set  out  in  Mr
    Deller's note and asked for the Tribunal's consent to withdraw her case
    under Rule 17(2).

3.   I agree with the points made in  the  consent  order  and  provide  the
    Tribunal's consent to the respondent to withdraw her  case  under  Rule
    17(2).

4.   The  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date     3rd March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
