
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08034/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 January 2019                    |On 13 February 2019                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                            mr alisher khusainov
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Norman, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan.  He was born on 24  September
    1990.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  him  leave  to
    remain dated 27 March 2017.

 3.  Judge  Andonian  (the  Judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 July 2018.

 4. The grounds claim  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    respondent should have exercised discretion, adopted a flawed  approach
    to the new matter raised by appellant's Counsel and erred  with  regard
    to the Article 8 considerations.  I will address them in turn.

Ground 1

 5. The grounds claimed that the failure to consider whether there  existed
    any  exceptional  circumstances  which  prevented  the  applicant  from
    applying within the first 28 days of overstaying in accordance with the
    respondent's own policy amounted to an error  of  law.   The  appellant
    claimed that the application that was rejected causing him to  overstay
    for a period of 34 days was completed by an agent through his place  of
    study.  The appellant was not informed of that  rejection  and  had  no
    knowledge of it until his indefinite leave to  remain  application  was
    refused.  As he had no knowledge of the rejection and subsequent period
    of overstaying, he could not be said to be at fault which  should  have
    been considered an exceptional circumstance and the  respondent  should
    have exercised discretion accordingly.

Ground 2

 6. At the hearing it was submitted that the appellant met the  requirement
    for a grant of ILR on the basis of long residence if  counted  from  19
    July 2007 to the date of the hearing and that was accepted by the judge
    at [18] of the decision.  The failure to consider whether the appellant
    qualified for ILR under the long residence Rule  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing amounted to an error of law.  See MU (Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds - long residence  -  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  442
    (IAC).

Ground 3

 7. The  judge  accepted  the  appellant  had  accrued  ten  years'  lawful
    residence such that he was in error when he  found  there  was  nothing
    "exceptional" in the appellant's case.

 8. Judge Grimmett refused permission to appeal on 4  September  2018.   He
    said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The appellant says the judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider
             whether the respondent should have exercised her discretion in
             considering exceptional  circumstances.   Those  circumstances
             seem to  be  the  appellant's  failure  to  contact  his  then
             representative to ascertain the position with  regard  to  his
             application.  I could find no error in those circumstances.

         3.   Ground 2 suggests the appellant  should  succeed  as  a  s.120
             Notice could  have  been  issued  but  that  is  a  matter  of
             discretion for the respondent and shows no arguable  error  in
             the decision.  Ground 3 is difficult to follow as at paragraph
             1 it says that the appellant has  accrued  ten  years'  lawful
             residence but at paragraph 5 that it was twelve years save for
             a 34 day period.  As the appellant did not appear to  have  3C
             leave during those 34 days I could find no arguable  error  of
             law."

 9. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal and set out more clearly
    inter alia as follows:

         "1.  ... essentially the appellant made an application for leave to
             remain under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  on  the
             basis that he had had continuous lawful residence for over ten
             years.

         2.   The application was rejected on the basis that he had not  had
             lawful residence between 15 June 2007 and 19 July 2007.  There
             had been a "gap" of 34 days.  The  acceptable  maximum  is  28
             days.

         3.   However, by the date of the hearing which was  28  June  2018,
             this  gap  had  become  academic.   The  appellant   had   had
             continuous lawful residence from 19 July 2007 onwards.

         4.   The judge agreed that this formed part of the overall  Article
             8 assessment given that an appeal could no longer  be  brought
             under the Rules.

         5.   If an appellant is able to show that they meet the criteria of
             the Rules this  will  be  a  very  strong,  perhaps  decisive,
             indicator that the appeal should succeed under Article 8.

         6.   It is submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in  law.   At
             paragraph 18 he concludes rather confusingly that  'a  Section
             3C leave applies which I do not believe in it applies here ...
             he does not benefit  from  Section  3C  leave.   There  is  no
             question of the appellant having lawful leave on a  continuous
             ten year basis from 19 July 2007 to date.'

         7.   Taken with what is said at paragraph 17, it appears  that  the
             judge was making a finding that leave granted pursuant  to  an
             application made outside the currency of existing leave is not
             'lawful residence'.  If so, then that finding is  wrong.   The
             fact that the appellant did not have s.3C leave when  he  made
             his out of time application does  not  render  the  subsequent
             leave to remain unlawful in any way.

         8.   It follows that he had indeed had ten years continuous  lawful
             residence by the date of the hearing, which should have been a
             near  decisive  factor  in  his  favour  in  the   Article   8
             consideration as he met the criteria 276B.  This has not  been
             properly considered by the Immigration Judge.

         9.   It is submitted that in refusing permission the judge did  not
             engage with the argument.  MU (Bangladesh)  is  authority  for
             the proposition that a Tribunal may consider  the  ten  years'
             continuous lawful residence from the date of the hearing  back
             ten years.  There is no need for an  s.120  Notice  where,  as
             here, permission has been given by  the  judge  to  argue  the
             matter within the existing framework of an Article 8 appeal."

10. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted permission on 19  November
    2018 saying only that the grounds were properly arguable.

11. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

12. Ms Norman relied upon her skeleton argument.  Mr Walker  conceded  that
    the judge had materially erred in terms of the grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. Prima facie, the appellant did have leave to remain from 25  July  2007
    to date.  That included the period of the EEA residence  card  from  13
    April 2012 to 13 April 2017.  Since then, the appellant had the benefit
    of 3C leave.  The judge materially erred because  he  was  confused  in
    terms of the appellant's entitlement to s.3C leave.  See in  particular
    [17]-[18] of the decision.

Notice of Decision

14. The judge's decision is set aside in its entirety and will be remade in
    the First-tier following a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




