

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08486/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 December 2017                    |         On 11 January 2018         |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     P R
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
the appeal includes a protection claim.   It  is  therefore  appropriate  to
make a direction.  Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies amongst others to all  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Widdup  promulgated  on  25  October  2017  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 3 May 2017 refusing his protection and  human  rights
       claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He entered the UK in 2001
       and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused and  his  appeal  against
       that refusal dismissed.  In 2009,  the  Appellant  sought  leave  to
       remain and was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  -  it  appears
       following a "legacy" review - on 30 November 2010.  On  23  February
       2016, the Appellant was  convicted  of  burglary  and  sentenced  to
       thirty months' imprisonment.


    3. On 16 September 2016, the  Appellant  made  representations  to  the
       Respondent asserting that he remains at risk on return  due  to  sur
       place activity and prior interest by the Sri Lankan authorities.  He
       asserted that his removal would also be  disproportionate  in  human
       rights terms because of his family life in the UK with his wife, son
       and brother.  In his appeal, he also relied heavily on  his  medical
       condition, namely his  mental  health  problems  which  emerged,  it
       appears in September 2016.


    4. On 3 May 2017, the Respondent refused the claims and on 22 May  2017
       she made an automatic deportation order against the  Appellant.  The
       Appellant appealed on protection and human rights grounds.


    5. The Appellant did not give evidence in his appeal as he was said  to
       be unfit to do so.  Reliance was placed on medical evidence  showing
       that he was suffering from PTSD, moderate  depression  and  paranoid
       schizophrenia.


    6. The Judge gave little weight to the diagnosis of schizophrenia.   He
       rejected the medical evidence  as  providing  corroboration  to  the
       protection claim and, having regard to the findings in  the  earlier
       protection appeal, rejected that claim as not credible and not  made
       out on the evidence.  The Judge went on to consider the human rights
       claim with particular regard to the family life claim.  He  rejected
       the claim that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife and
       child to return to Sri  Lanka  with  the  Appellant.   Although  the
       Appellant's son is a British citizen, he found that the  Appellant's
       wife could choose to return with the Appellant and take their  young
       son with them; alternatively, that it would not be unduly harsh  for
       them to remain in the UK without the  Appellant  as  they  had  done
       during his incarceration.  The Judge  also  rejected  a  claim  that
       there would be very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Sri
       Lanka, based in particular on  the  Appellant's  medical  condition.
       The appeal was therefore dismissed  on  both  protection  and  human
       rights grounds.


    7. The Appellant's grounds focus in particular on his medical condition
       and an assertion that he was not properly treated by the Judge as  a
       vulnerable witness and/or  that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  the
       medical evidence properly.  Reliance is also placed on the  findings
       in the earlier asylum appeal that the Appellant was  assumed  to  be
       credible and the Appellant's family  background  in  Sri  Lanka  (in
       particular that one of the Appellant's  brothers  has  been  granted
       protection status  in  Australia  due  to  a  risk  on  return  post
       conflict).  It is also said that the Judge erred by failing to  make
       findings on the central core of the claimed risk based on sur  place
       activities.


    8. Permission was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Macdonald on 17 November 2017 in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
       relevant:-


           "...The grounds of application state that the Judge made no
           findings on whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness; the
           approach to the medical evidence was fundamentally flawed and
           other failures including a failure to properly assess the claim
           under Article 8 claim.  Reliance is placed on inter alia AM.
           The Judge does not appear to have considered whether the
           appellant was a vulnerable witness and not to do so was an
           arguable error in law.  In the circumstances there may be merit
           in the grounds for the reasons stated.  Permission is granted on
           all grounds."


    9. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Discussion and conclusions


   10. As Mr Lewis submitted, there are two  central  grounds.   The  first
       focusses on the treatment of the medical evidence, in particular the
       report of Dr Dhumad dated 10 October 2017.  Mr Lewis  accepted  that
       the Judge did  consider  that  report  but  criticised  the  Judge's
       approach on the basis that he had looked for a  reason  to  discount
       the consultant's conclusions.  The second concerns what is  said  to
       be a failure by the Judge to consider the  risk  on  return  to  Sri
       Lanka particularly in light of  the  earlier  consideration  of  the
       Appellant's protection claim and to make findings about the risk  in
       the light of country guidance in that regard.


   11. Dealing first with the medical evidence, Mr Lewis criticised what is
       said at [68] of the Decision  about  the  lack  of  a  statement  of
       qualifications by Ms Stephens who dealt with the  Appellant's  self-
       referral in her letter dated 22 May  2017.   Since  that  letter  is
       addressed to the Appellant and responds to  his  self-referral  (and
       was not written for the purposes  of  the  appeal),  it  is  perhaps
       unsurprising that she did not consider it  necessary  to  include  a
       statement of her qualifications in the letter.  As Mr  Lewis  points
       out, she is employed by the NHS within the prison In Reach team  and
       there is no reason to doubt that she is suitably qualified.  In  any
       event, the rather  more  important  point  to  be  taken  from  this
       evidence is that her concerns about the  Appellant's  mental  health
       were sufficiently serious for her  to  recommend  a  referral  to  a
       consultant psychiatrist.  However, I do not read the reference to  a
       lack of a statement of qualifications at [68]  of  the  Decision  as
       being a criticism by the Judge of that report so much as a statement
       of fact.  In the paragraph which follows the Judge has clearly taken
       account of the content of that report.


   12. A number of criticisms  are  made  in  the  grounds  concerning  the
       Judge's assessment of Dr Dhumad's report.  I do not set those out in
       full but confine myself to those on which Mr Lewis focussed  in  his
       submissions.


   13. The Judge dealt with Dr Dhumad's report  at  [70]  to  [80]  of  the
       Decision.  The focus of Mr Lewis's submissions were paragraphs [72],
       [73], [75] and [78] of the Decision.  Those read as follows (so  far
       as relevant):-
            "[72]      Dr Dhumad said that in his opinion the Appellant was
           suffering  from  a  psychotic  illness  most   likely   paranoid
           schizophrenia.....
            [73] I note that at various points in  Dr  Dhumad's  report  he
           refers to the Appellant feeling paranoid (11.3, 11.4, 18.2).  It
           is unclear whether the word "paranoia" was used by the Appellant
           or whether this  is  Dr  Dhumad's  interpretation  of  what  the
           Appellant was describing.  Bearing  in  mind  that  at  11.3  Dr
           Dhumad reported  that  the  Appellant  told  him  that  he  felt
           paranoid it seems more likely than not that  the  Appellant  was
           using that word.  I also take into account that  the  same  word
           was used by the Appellant in his witness statement.
            ....
            [75] Dr Dhumad also expressed the opinion  that  the  Appellant
           was suffering from moderate depression and PTSD and he  provided
           appendices which described these conditions.   His  reasons  for
           reaching these diagnoses must have been based  on  what  he  was
           told of the Appellant's history by the Appellant himself.  It is
           also unclear to me whether or not Dr Dhumad was  aware  that  no
           complaint of mental health issues had been made before September
           2016 and that the Appellant  had  self  referred.   It  is  also
           unclear  whether  he  took  into  account  that  the   Appellant
           participated in his trial and that he was fit to stand trial  in
           2016.
            .....
             [78]  I  am  concerned  about  the   diagnosis   of   paranoid
           schizophrenia.  At 18.2 Dr Dhumad reported as a  fact  that  the
           Appellant had been experiencing psychotic symptoms in  the  form
           of  auditory  hallucinations.   However,  whereas  he   provided
           appendices  to  his  report  about  his  diagnoses  of  moderate
           depressive episode and PTSD, he did not do so with his diagnosis
           of paranoid schizophrenia."


   14. Based on that reasoning, the Judge  reached  the  following  finding
       about the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia:-
            "[79]      The lack of a  more  detailed  explanation  for  the
           diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia together with the brevity of
           the appointment, and  the  scant  information  available  to  Dr
           Dhumad concerning the  medical  history,  means  that  I  attach
           little weight to that diagnosis."


   15. I accept  Mr  Lewis's  submission  that,  as  a  suitably  qualified
       consultant psychiatrist, Dr Dhumad's views  are  to  be  given  some
       weight.  That does not mean  though  that  a  Judge  has  to  accept
       without question all views  expressed  in  such  a  report.   As  is
       explained at [79], and as Ms  Everett  submitted,  the  lack  of  an
       appendix means that it is not clear what are  the  diagnostic  tools
       employed to show that the symptoms exhibited by the Appellant during
       his interview with  the  consultant  merit  the  diagnosis  reached.
       Coupled with the brevity of the interview conducted and the  reasons
       given in the preceding paragraphs, the Judge was  entitled  to  give
       the report more limited weight in relation to this diagnosis.


   16. Mr Lewis also criticised the treatment of the report  based  on  the
       Judge's consideration of the risk of suicide.  That is dealt with at
       [80] of the Decision as follows:-
            "[80]      Dr Dhumad's opinion (page 11 19.4) that there was  a
           significant risk of  suicide  was  based  on  his  diagnoses  of
           depression,  PTSD  and  psychosis.   I  also  note   that   when
           considering suicidal ideation (page 11 18.3) the Appellant could
           only describe one incident when the Appellant claimed that "once
           he wanted to drive fast and  crash  the  car".   It  seems  more
           likely  than  not  that  this  episode   occurred   before   his
           imprisonment having regard to the date of  the  report  and  the
           subsequent grant of bail".


   17. As Mr Lewis pointed out, that there has only been one example  given
       of suicidal ideation does not mean that the Judge does not  have  to
       engage with it or reach a finding on that risk.  It is possible that
       the Judge intended this paragraph to be read  with  [81]  where  the
       Judge reaches the view that the PTSD etc may have been brought about
       by the criminal proceedings and subsequent criminal detention rather
       than fear of return to Sri  Lanka.   That  is  though  difficult  to
       square with what the Judge says about the  timing  of  the  suicidal
       ideation to which he refers.  In any event, I accept that the  Judge
       still needed to reach a finding whether there is a risk  of  suicide
       on return, whatever the  cause  of  the  Appellant's  mental  health
       problems.


   18. I do not need to say more about the Judge's treatment of the medical
       evidence though because I am persuaded that there is an error of law
       disclosed  by  ground  two.   That  concerns  whether  there  is  an
       objectively well-founded fear of persecution on return to Sri Lanka.


   19. As the Judge pointed out at [86] of  the  Decision,  there  were  no
       adverse credibility findings made by the  Adjudicator  dealing  with
       the Appellant's previous appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of
       asylum ([86] of the Decision).  It had therefore been accepted  that
       the  Appellant  was  previously  arrested  and   detained   by   the
       authorities in Sri Lanka.   Of course, this Judge  was  entitled  to
       treat the earlier findings only as a starting point and it was  open
       to the Judge to take account of  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's
       account between what he said in 2001 and what he said to  Dr  Dhumad
       when reviewing that aspect of the claim (see [88] of the  Decision).




   20. The Judge did go on at [89] and [90] of the Decision  to  give  some
       consideration to the claim as put in  this  appeal,  namely  to  the
       Appellant's sur place activities.  However, this  is  not  the  only
       "new" factor relied upon by the Appellant.  Of greater moment is the
       fact that his brother has been recognised as a refugee in Australia.
        That occurred in 2010/2011 and  is  therefore  not  a  risk  factor
       considered in the previous appeal.  The Judge  has  failed  to  take
       this into account.  That the Appellant's brother has a history which
       the Australian authorities accept puts him at risk on return to  Sri
       Lanka is capable of raising the Appellant's profile and needs to  be
       factored into the  context  of  the  remainder  of  the  Appellant's
       current protection claim.  As such, I am satisfied that the  failure
       to take this into account is a material error.


   21. Both representatives accepted that if I  were  to  find  a  material
       error of law, the appropriate course might be to remit the appeal to
       the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing depending  on  the  basis  on
       which I found that error.  The Appellant did not give oral  evidence
       at the hearing before Judge Widdup (as Dr Dhumad concluded  that  he
       was not fit to give evidence).  As  such  the  findings  made  at  a
       further hearing are likely to be  made  based  on  the  evidence  of
       others, documentary evidence and submissions as before. However, the
       Judge failed to make findings on the issues which I  identify  above
       and it is appropriate to remit the appeal for a full  re-hearing  to
       include an assessment of those issues.


      DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup promulgated on 25  October
    2017 is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Widdup.


    Signed




    [pic]


                 Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Smith
Dated:  10 January 2018
