
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU084772015
                                                                 HU084812015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 August 2017                     |On 14 August 2017               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 FOUZIA [T]
                                    [M T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Raza counsel instructed by Fawad Law Associates
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The first Appellant (A1) was born on 21 June 1976 and is  a  national  of
   Pakistan and is the mother of A2 who was born on 5 October 2015.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge G Tobin promulgated on 21 November  2016  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  5
   October 2015 to refuse the Appellants application for leave to remain  in
   the UK based on their relationship with her British citizen younger child
   (HT)..
5. The refusal letters gave a number of reasons which were in  essence  that
   the Respondent did not accept that  HT  was  the  child  of  the  British
   citizen as the A1 had failed to provide DNA  evidence  as  requested  and
   therefore A1 could not succeed under the parent route of Appendix  FM  or
   EX.1; A1 could  not  succeed  under  the  private  life  requirements  of
   paragraph 276ADE1 (vi)  given the period she had spent in the  UK;  there
   were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the
   Rules taking into account the best  interests  of  the  children  as  the
   family would return together to Pakistan. In relation to A2he  could  not
   meet the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Tobin ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision under the Rules and on human rights grounds. Both parties before
   me conceded that there was no right of appeal under the Rules.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that  the  reasons  given  for  the  adverse  credibility  findings  were
   inadequate; that the Judge had failed to adequately address the rights of
   the British citizen child under s 117B6 of  the  Nationality  Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002.
8.  On 13 June 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Raza  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) The Judges assessment of section  117B6  was  inadequate  because  his
      assessment of whether HT was a British citizen was  wholly  inadequate
      failing to take into account the fact that there was evidence that the
      child had a British passport.

   b) The credibility findings were mere assertions without reasons.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He accepted that the reasons for the adverse credibility findings were
      inadequate at paragraphs 13, 14 and 15.

   b) He accepted that the nationality assessment was inadequate.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
13. In relation to the  adequacy  of  reasons  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
   Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) in it was held that (i) It was axiomatic
   that a determination disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a  tribunal's
   decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
   incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,
   it was necessary to say so in the determination and for such findings  to
   be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not believed
   or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to  satisfy  the
   requirement to give reasons.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.
15. By virtue of The British Nationality (Proof  of  Paternity)  Regulations
   2006 proof of paternity could be established for nationality purposes  by
   a birth certificate on which the person is named as  the  father  of  the
   child where the birth certificate was issued within one year of the  date
   of the child's birth.  Alternatively the SSHD had  to  be  satisfied  and
   might have regard to DNA  test  reports  or  Court  Orders.  The  British
   Nationality  (Proof  of  Paternity)  (Amendment)  Regulations   2015   SI
   2015/1615) which came into force on 10 September 2015 state that a  birth
   certificate issued within 12 months of birth will no longer be sufficient
   in itself to establish paternity for the purposes of British  Nationality
   does not to certificates issued before 10  September  2015  such  as  the
   birth certificate in this case.

16. The Judge therefore in suggesting that the issue of  the  HTs  paternity
   was unresolved because A1 did not provide DNA evidence failed to consider
   why this was required when she had  produced  both  a  birth  certificate
   naming the British citizen as father and by the time  of  the  hearing  a
   British passport. This was fundamental to a decision as section 117B6  of
   the NIA 2002 should have been considered.

17. In relation to the credibility findings generally I  am  satisfied  that
   Mr Harrison was right to concede that the findings were inadequate so foe
   example he found it incredible that she would start a relationship with a
   male without finding out if he was married  without  explaining  why.  He
   also found that it was incredible that the Appellant left HTs  father  to
   register the child and make the immigration application to be  incredible
   without giving reasons. I also note that at paragraph 16 he  states  that
   he 'did not believe a word she had to say' while  accepting  for  example
   that she had a proper parental relationship  with  her  children  as  she
   claimed. I have already indicated that given the provisions  of  the  law
   relating to proof of paternity his conclusion that  'he  was  unconvinced
   about the father of her second child' was not one that was open to him.

18. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. She must weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

19. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  and  determine  the
   issue of nationality and give reasons for the adverse credibility fndings
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise  the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

20. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. In this case the parties  were  all  agreed  that  the  case  should  be
   remitted as there were error sof law due to the failure  to  make  proper
   findings on a central feature of the case, HTs nationality. In this  case
   none of the findings of fact are to  stand  and  the  matter  will  be  a
   complete re hearing.

22. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination should be set aside and the case  remitted  to  the
   First tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Signed                                                              Date
13.8.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


























