
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08618/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               A--- N--- R---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Limbrey, Counsel instructed by BIDS
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  Like  the
    First-tier Tribunal which made a similar  order,  we  make  this  order
    because the case touched on  the  welfare  of  children  and  there  is
    invariably a risk in cases of this kind  that  publicity  will  created
    problems for them.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Fiji  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds consequent on his being the  subject  of  a  deportation  order
    under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act because his presence  in  the
    United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good.

 3. The Appellant's criticisms of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  are
    not entirely without merit but they do not become material.

 4. There is criticism of the Judge's finding that the Appellant knew  that
    his leave to remain had been extinguished.  We do not see that anything
    turns on this.  He was discharged from the army in 2003 and as a matter
    of fact he no longer had any right to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is an argument to be made that the endorsements on  his  passport
    taken on their own are equivocal.  It is right there  was  no  evidence
    directly before the First-tier Tribunal Judge about what the  Appellant
    was advised when he left the army but we do not criticise the Judge for
    saying it was so obvious that he would have been given advice  that  he
    did not accept that the Appellant did not realise his leave would  come
    to an end.  We make no further comment on that criticism because it  is
    not material.  The fact is he had no leave.

 5. The offence that got the Appellant  into  trouble  was  an  offence  of
    sexual assault by intentionally touching a female.  It is right to  say
    that this is not the worst example of its kind.  The touching  was  not
    penetrative but the offence was sufficiently grave to  attract  a  ten-
    month sentence of imprisonment and was clearly a serious matter.

 6. We find it significant that the Appellant has got into further  trouble
    on two occasions in 2015 when he  failed  to  honour  his  notification
    obligations under the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (so called sex  offences
    registration) and again for a similar offence in  January  2017.   Such
    offending, we find, is persistent. Importantly it  is  the  conduct  of
    somebody who keeps on offending.

 7. It is right that our attention was drawn to the decision in Chege  ("is
    a persistant offender") [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC) as was the  attention  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and it is right to say that  the  tests  listed
    there are not entirely precise. It follows that there is always room to
    argue  that  the  offences  are  not  sufficiently  proximate  or   not
    sufficiently persistent to be a persistent offender within the  meaning
    of the Rule but such submissions do not necessarily have any merit.  We
    find the Judge was perfectly entitled to reach the conclusion  that  he
    did.  The important things here are not simply the number  of  offences
    but the frequency.  The Judge was entitled to find, as he did, that the
    Appellant is a man who keeps getting into trouble.  He is a  persistent
    offender within the meaning of the Rule.

 8. However such a finding was not strictly necessary because there  was  a
    further finding by the Judge that the Appellant's removal is  conducive
    to the public good.  Given the nature of the offence coupled  with  the
    failure to honour his obligations as a sex offender we just do not  see
    how there can be any objection to  the  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    removal is conducive to the public good.  It follows that even  if  the
    Judge was wrong in other respects he gave a proper  and  lawful  reason
    for the Appellant's deportation.

 9. We know that it is the Appellant's case that  he  claims  not  to  have
    understood his obligations under the Sexual Offences Act.  These claims
    are inconsistent with his guilty pleas and inconsistent with the repeat
    nature of the offending.  We see no basis for criticising the Judge for
    rejecting that evidence.

10. The fact that the Appellant's removal is conducive to the  public  good
    is not the end of the matter.  What this Appellant did was to  rely  on
    his relationship with his children but the Judge concluded  that  there
    was no meaningful relationship at all.  That might be  going  too  far.
    There was evidence that there was contact and  there  was  evidence  of
    support from the former partner but this is not a nuclear family.  This
    is not a case of a man living with the children from whom he  would  be
    separated.  The Judge was perfectly aware that he was applying  a  test
    of undue harshness.   He  refers  to  it  expressly  in  paragraph  79.
    Although the best interests of the children may  very  well  involve  a
    close relationship with both parents the children are not  entitled  to
    their best interests being served by decisions of this kind and we  see
    no basis for criticising the Judge's finding that the  consequences  of
    removal in this fractured family would not be unduly harsh.

11. It follows therefore  in  our  judgment  that  although  we  have  been
    assisted by  carefully  presented  and  thoughtful  criticisms  of  the
    Decision and Reasons, they fail to show any  material  error  and  they
    particularly fail to make any impact at all on the finding that removal
    is conducive to the public good and that the  harshness  consequent  on
    removal would be no more than the harshness that the law requires.

12. It is for these reasons that we dismiss this appeal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 15 March 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |

