
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08802/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                  Decision & Reasons    |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 7th February 2018               |                  On 16th February 2018 |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lewis promulgated on 27th October  2017  in  which  he
       allowed the appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
       dated 9th August 2017, to refuse a human rights claim made by SG.


    2. The appellant in the appeal before us is the Secretary of  State  for
       the Home  Department  and  the  respondent  to  this  appeal  is  SG.
       However, for ease of reference, in the course of  this  determination
       we shall adopt the parties' status as it  was  before  the  FtT.   We
       shall in this determination, refer to SG as the  appellant,  and  the
       Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order  and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.   We  emphasise  at
       the outset that no report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the appellant.


 The background


    4. The appellant is a national  of  St.  Lucia.   As  set  out  in  the
       decision of the FtT, the appellant arrived in the UK shortly  before
       his twelfth birthday on 23rd August  1985  in  the  company  of  his
       sisters and was granted indefinite leave  to  enter  for  settlement
       with his mother.


    5. On 7th May 2016, the appellant was convicted of a number of offences
       including committing an offence during the operational period  of  a
       suspended sentence.  He was  sentenced  to  5  months  and  15  days
       imprisonment.  A Deportation Order was  signed  on  27th  July  2016
       after the respondent refused  a  human  rights  claim  made  by  the
       appellant. The respondent certified the  claim  under  s94B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").
       Further representations were made on  behalf  of  the  appellant  by
       letter dated 26th June 2017 and in light  of  the  decision  of  the
       Supreme Court in Kiarie & Byndloss -v-  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  42,  the
       respondent reconsidered the appellant's  human  rights  claim.   The
       respondent refused the claim for the reasons set out in a Notice  of
       Decision dated 9th August 2017 and it was that  decision  that  gave
       rise to the appeal before the FtT.


    6. The respondent seeks to  deport  the  appellant  and  to  that  end,
       applying paragraph  A  362  and  paragraphs  A398  to  399D  of  the
       immigration rules, concluded that the appellant is  unable  to  meet
       the  family  and  private  life  exception  to   deportation.    The
       respondent concluded that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances
       which outweigh the public interest in seeing the appellant deported,
       on Article 8 grounds.


    7. The Judge of the FtT allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The  Judge
       summarises his conclusion at paragraph [40] of the decision  in  the
       following way;


             "For the avoidance of any doubt in this context, although I am
             not satisfied that either Exemption 1  or  Exemption  2  under
             section 117C is applicable (see similarly paragraphs  399  and
             399A of the Rules), I am satisfied pursuant to  paragraph  398
             of the Rules  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  is
             outweighed  on  the  basis  that  there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraph  399
             and 399A, bearing in mind the balance to be struck between the
             nature and gravity of the Appellant's offending behaviour  and
             the private  life  established  in  the  UK  pursuant  to  the
             substantial and significant time lawfully spent  here  from  a
             young age, throughout which period the  Appellant  would  have
             understood that pursuant to his indefinite leave to remain  he
             could consider the UK to be his permanent home."


The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


    8. The respondent appeals on the ground  that  in  light  of  the  prior
       findings made by the Judge, the Judge's conclusion  that  the  public
       interest in deportation is outweighed on the  basis  that  there  are
       very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
       paragraph 399 and 399A of the immigration rules, is irrational.   The
       respondent contends that the Judge relies upon  the  substantial  and
       significant time that the appellant lawfully spent in the UK, but  it
       is well established that long residence alone, is not  sufficient  to
       overcome the strong public interest in the deportation of  those  who
       are persistent offenders.


    9. Permission to appeal was granted on  19th  December  2017  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Kekic.  The  matter  comes  before  us  to  determine
       whether the decision of the FtT contains a material  error  of  law,
       and if so, to re-make the decision.


   10. After hearing submissions, we announced that in  our  judgement,  the
       decision of the FtT is infected by a material error of  law  and  the
       decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.  We said that we  would  give
       the reasons for our decision in writing.


   11. Having decided that the decision of the FtT should be set aside,  Ms
       Clarke invited us to remit the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing  de
       novo.  She submitted that there is an issue as  to  the  appellant's
       contact with his son who is the subject of a full Care Order made by
       the Family Court on  16th  February  2017.   She  submits  that  the
       appellant's mother is in the process of being assessed  as  a  carer
       for the child, and that the appellant himself  intends  to  commence
       proceedings in the Family Court  to  resolve  the  question  of  his
       contact with his son.  Ms Clarke confirmed that  the  appellant  has
       not yet issued an application in the Family Court and there  was  no
       evidence of any further assessment of  his  mother  before  us.   We
       declined to remit  the  matter  to  the  FtT  for  further  hearing.
       Directions had been issued to the parties making it clear that there
       is a presumption that, in the event of the  Tribunal  deciding  that
       the decision of the FtT is to be set aside as erroneous in law,  the
       re-making of the decision will take place at the same hearing.   The
       appellant was reminded in further directions issued on 18th  January
       2018 that any Rule 15(2A) notice to be relied, was to  be  filed  no
       later than 7 days prior to the hearing.  There  was  no  application
       made by the appellant to  permit  new  or  further  evidence  to  be
       admitted.  The Care Order was made by the Family Court  in  February
       2017, and before the FtT it was asserted that the appellant's mother
       was in the process of being assessed  as  a  potential  carer.   The
       Judge of the FtT noted that the appellant's  mother  had  previously
       failed in challenging the Care Order, and that the  local  authority
       did not plan to place the  child  with  his  grandparents.   In  the
       absence of any evidence that begins to demonstrate that  there  have
       been further developments in the care proceedings since  the  making
       of the Care Order, in our  judgement  it  is  in  the  interests  of
       justice to re-make the decision on the evidence  before  us,  taking
       into account the unchallenged findings made by the Judge of the FtT,
       and after hearing submissions from the parties.


   12. We went on to hear submissions from the parties and at  the  end  of
       the hearing before us, we said that  we  reserve  our  decision  and
       would give our decision and reasons in writing.  This we now do.


 Error of Law


   13. The appellant's offending history is set  out  in  the  respondent's
       decision and is uncontroversial;


             Your deportation is conducive to the public good  and  in  the
             public interest because you have been convicted of an  offence
             which has caused serious harm and are a  persistent  offender.
             You have amassed 15 convictions covering 28 offences, and  are
             the subject of two Court Orders because of your behaviour.'


   14. At the hearing of the appeal, the Judge of the  FtT  heard  evidence
       from the appellant, his mother, his sister and one of  his  friends.
       The Judge's findings and reasons are to be found at  paragraphs  [8]
       to [41] of the decision.  The Judge states at paragraph [8]:


             "In light of the decision in ETA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  10  -
             see in particular paragraph 27, "Decisions of tribunals should
             not become formulaic and rarely benefit from copious  citation
             of authority"  et  seq.  -I  do  not  propose  to  recite  the
             applicable law and principles.  Suffice  to  say  I  have  had
             particular regard to the applicable jurisprudence  in  respect
             of deportation and the  ECHR,  and  have  had  regard  to  the
             applicable burden and civil standard of proof. "


   15. At paragraph [10] of the decision, the  Judge  states  that  he  has
       "..given very careful consideration to the evidence and arguments in
       respect of the claim that the appellant enjoys family  life  in  the
       UK.  For the following reasons, I have reached the conclusion that I
       am not satisfied in this regard.".  Having found that the  appellant
       does not enjoy a family life in the UK, the Judge went  on  to  make
       the following further findings:


             "The appellant is  not  wholly  without  ties  in  St  Lucia";
             paragraph [12]


             "... the  Appellant  will  more  likely  than  not  face  some
             difficulties in integrating into his  country  of  nationality
             given that he would be returning  essentially  as  a  stranger
             with no previous  experience  of  having  lived  there  as  an
             independent adult, I am not persuaded that he has  shown  that
             there would be very significant obstacles to integration.....I
             accept his evidence that he has  no  meaningful  contact  with
             anybody in St Lucia at present - the presence or absence of  a
             support network is not, in my judgement, determinative in  the
             context of an able  bodied  man  in  his  early  40s  able  to
             converse in the official  language  of  the  country.  In  any
             event, in circumstances where [the appellant's mother] appears
             to have been able to assist in  providing  care  for  her  own
             mother, and has continued to visit the island every few years,
             I am not persuaded that the family is wholly without  contacts
             in St Lucia that might be called upon to provide the Appellant
             with a degree of steerage or  guidance  towards  integration."
             [paragraph 13]


             ".., he has produced no supporting evidence as to  limitations
             in  employment  opportunities  either  generally,  or  in  the
             context of a person who has trained as a bricklayer,  and  has
             worked variously as a painter/decorator and in car shops as  a
             panel beater and a paint sprayer - and who might otherwise  be
             reasonably expected to be able  to  turn  his  hand  to  other
             similar unskilled and semiskilled jobs."; [paragraph 14]


   16. At paragraphs [17] to [22] of his decision, the Judge refers to  the
       appellant's offending history and the convictions that gave rise  to
       the  Deportation  Order.   The  Judge  considered  the   appellant's
       explanation that many  of  the  offences  arise  by  reason  of  the
       appellant's fractious relationship with his  son's  mother  and  the
       deterioration in their relationship. At paragraph  [25],  the  Judge
       states:


             "However, there is nothing in this that begins to  explain  or
             justify what followed. It appears that both the Appellant  and
             D drank  heavily  on  this  occasion.  The  subsequent  events
             culminated in the Appellant being charged  and  convicted  not
             only in relation to the breach of the  restraining  order  but
             also  on  three  counts  of  assault  on  a  police   officer,
             destroying  or   damaging   property,   and   restricting   or
             obstructing a constable. It was these matters  that  triggered
             the deportation process."


   17. Having had regard to the appellant's offending, the Judge states, at
       [28];


             "Whilst I am not persuaded that it  might  be  said  that  the
             Appellant has been convicted of an offence   that  has  caused
             serious  harm,   I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  a  persistent
             offender, and as such is  to  be  classified  as  a   'foreign
             criminal'  within the  meaning of  section   117D(2)   -  with
             particular reference  to  subsection  (2)(c)(iii)  -  for  the
             purpose of Part V of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act 2002."


   18. As we have set out previously, the Judge of the FtT found, at  [10],
       that the appellant does not enjoy a  family  life  in  the  UK.   At
       paragraph [29],  the  Judge  notes  that  the  appellant's  case  is
       ultimately based on his private life in the UK.  Applying the  five-
       stage approach set out in Razghar, the Judge turned to the  question
       of proportionality at paragraphs [31] to [39] of his  decision.   We
       have already referred to the Judge's overall conclusion that  is  to
       be found at paragraph [40] of  the  decision.   The  Judge  was  not
       satisfied that either Exception 1 or Exception 2 under section  117C
       of the 2002 Act or that the exclusions under paragraphs 399 and 399A
       of the Rules apply.  Nevertheless,  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
       public interest in deportation is outweighed on the basis that there
       are very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
       paragraph 399 and 399A by reference to  the  balance  to  be  struck
       between  the  nature  and  gravity  of  the  appellant's   offending
       behaviour, and the private life established in the  UK  pursuant  to
       the substantial and significant time  lawfully  spent  here  from  a
       young age.


   19. Mr Melvin submits that in reaching his decision, the Judge fails  to
       give any clear reasons as to why the  high  threshold  to  establish
       that the public interest in deportation is outweighed,  is  met.  He
       submits that the Judge erred in his conclusion that  the  length  of
       time that the appellant has spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
       offending  is  capable  of  amounting  to   the   "very   compelling
       circumstances" required.


   20. Ms Clarke submits that although the  Judge  does  not  set  out  the
       relevant statutory provisions and the immigration rules, it is to be
       inferred from  what  the  Judge  states  at  paragraph  [8]  of  his
       decision, that the Judge had in mind  the  relevant  considerations.
       She submits that the Judge identified that a balance must be  struck
       between the public interest in deportation and the Article 8  rights
       of the appellant.  In reaching his decision the  Judge  had  careful
       regard to the appellant's offending history and had proper regard to
       the context in which the offending occurred.  She  submits  that  in
       reaching his decision, the Judge appears to have  had  in  mind  the
       difficult relationship between the appellant and his former  partner
       that formed the  backdrop  to  the  offending.   When  pressed,  she
       accepted, rightly  in  our  judgement,  that  the  "very  compelling
       circumstances" over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
       399A of the immigration rules are not readily  identifiable  in  the
       decision of the FtT.


   21. After retiring to consider the submissions made by the  parties,  we
       informed the parties that we find there to be a  material  error  of
       law in the decision of the Judge capable of affecting the outcome of
       the appeal.  The error of law lies in the Judge's  failure  to  give
       any or any adequate reasons for his  finding  that  there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those   described   in
       paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules,  to  outweigh  the
       public interest in deportation of the appellant.


    22. The FtT Judge was required to have regard to the considerations  set
        out in Section 117C of the 2002 Act. The  public  interest  required
        the claimant's deportation unless sub-sections (4) of  Section  117C
        could  be  said  to  be  met.   The  Tribunal  was  faced  with  the
        requirements  of  the  immigration   rules   and   public   interest
        considerations enshrined in statute, that  the  deportation  of  the
        appellant is in the public interest and, since he had been sentenced
        to a period of five months and fifteen  days  imprisonment,  it  was
        only if the test  of  undue  harshness  was  met,  that  the  public
        interest in deportation would be outweighed.


    23. We remind ourselves that s117C  of  the  2002  Act,  insofar  as  is
        relevant, provides as follows:


                   117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in   cases
        involving foreign criminals


                  (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public
        interest.


             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.


             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


                  (4) Exception 1 applies where-


                       (a) C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
        Kingdom for most of C's life,


                       (b) C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
        United Kingdom, and


                       (c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


              ...


    24. The Judge of the FtT found that Exception 1 referred to in  s117C(4)
        of the 2002 does not apply for the reasons given at paragraphs  [12]
        to [14] of his decision.  The findings made by  the  Judge  are  not
        challenged.


    25. We also  remind  ourselves  that  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
        Immigration Rules provide as follows:


             A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation
             under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article  8  will
             only succeed where the requirements of these rules  as  at  28
             July 2014 are met, regardless of when the notice of  intention
             to deport  or  the  deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
             served.


                   ...


             390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be
             outweighed by other factors.


             ....


              Deportation and Article 8


                   A398. These rules apply where:


                  a) a foreign criminal liable to  deportation  claims  that
                     his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United
                     Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                     Rights Convention;


                  ...


             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


                  ...


                       (c) the deportation of the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                  offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
                  offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the
                  Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
                  whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
                  the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed
                  by  other  factors  where  there   are   very   compelling
                  circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs
                  399 and 399A.


              399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
applies if -


                       (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and


                      (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


                           (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously
                      for at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the
                      date of the immigration decision; and in either case


                                (a) it would be unduly harsh for  the  child
                           to live in the country to which the person is  to
                           be deported; and


                                (b) it would be unduly harsh for  the  child
                           to remain in the UK without the person who is  to
                           be deported; or


                        (b)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
                  relationship with a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a
                  British Citizen or settled in the UK, and


                           (i) the relationship was formed at a  time  when
                      the person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and
                      their immigration status was not precarious; and


                           (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner
                      to live in the country to which the person is  to  be
                      deported, because of  compelling  circumstances  over
                      and above  those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                      Appendix FM; and


                           (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that  partner
                      to remain in the UK without the person who is  to  be
                      deported.


              399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
applies if -


                       (a) the person has been lawfully resident in  the  UK
      for most of his life; and


                       (b) he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
      UK; and


                       (c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.


    26. In our judgement, it is clear from the language  of  s117C  and  the
        relevant immigration rules, that the public interest in  deportation
        here, will only be outweighed by other factors where there are  very
        compelling circumstances over and above those described in  s117C(4)
        of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399A of the immigration  rules.   Both
        s117C(4) and paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules take account of
        the length of time that a person has lived in the UK,  whether  they
        are socially and culturally integrated in the UK, and whether  there
        would be significant obstacles to the persons integration  into  the
        country to which it is proposed they be deported.


    27. The Judge reached his decision seeking to strike the balance between
        the nature and gravity of the appellant's  offending  behaviour  and
        the private life established?in the UK pursuant to  the  substantial
        and significant time lawfully   spent here from a  young  age.   The
        length of residence in the UK is already a factor  relevant  to  the
        public interest consideration under s117C(4) of  the  2002  Act  and
        paragraph 399A of the rules.  What is required  is  very  compelling
        circumstances over and above those described in s117C(4) of the 2002
        Act and paragraph 399A of the immigration rules.  The Judge does not
        identify  what  those  very  compelling  circumstances  are  in  his
        decision. Having carefully read the decision of the  FtT  Judge,  we
        are satisfied that the decision of  the  FtT  discloses  a  material
        error of law and should be set aside.


 Re-making the decision


    28. Ms Clarke reminds us  that  the  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
        Kingdom when he was aged 11, and has now lived in the United Kingdom
        for some 32 years. She accepts that the appellant has been convicted
        of a number of offences between 1993 and 2016. She submits that  the
        convictions that give rise to the deportation  order  arise  against
        the backdrop of a very difficult relationship between the  appellant
        and the mother of his son. She submits that the public  interest  in
        the circumstances does not demand the deportation of the appellant.


    29. In reply, Mr Melvin submits that the  only  matter  that  weighs  in
        favour of the appellant is the length of time that the appellant has
        spent in the UK. However, that is not a factor that  is  capable  of
        amounting to very compelling circumstances that outweigh the  public
        interest in the deportation of the appellant.


    30. In reaching our decision we have had  very  careful  regard  to  the
        unchallenged findings that were made by the Judge of the  FtT.   The
        Judge was not satisfied that either Exception 1 or Exception 2 under
        section 117C of the 2002 Act or that the exclusions under paragraphs
        399 and 399A of the Rules apply.  We have no  reason  to  go  behind
        that finding.  Despite her best efforts, Ms Clarke has  been  unable
        to point us to any evidence that is  capable  of  establishing  that
        there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
        described in paragraph 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules,  to
        outweigh the public interest in the deportation  of  the  appellant.
        We find there to be no very compelling circumstances over and  above
        those described in paragraph 399 and 399A of the Immigration  Rules,
        to outweigh the public interest in the deportation of the appellant.


    31. It follows that  we  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        respondent's  decision  dated  9th  August  2017,  to   refuse   the
        appellant's human rights claim.


 Notice of Decision


    32. The appeal by the SSHD against the decision of FtT  Judge  Lewis  is
        allowed and the decision of the FtT promulgated on 27th October 2017
        is set aside.


    33. We remake the decision and dismiss the  appeal  by  SG  against  the
        respondent's  decision  dated  9th  August  2017,  to   refuse   the
        appellant's human rights claim.


    34. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date



Lord Boyd of Duncansby                        Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Mandalia
FEE AWARD


There can be no fee award in the circumstances.

Signed                                  Date


Lord Boyd of Duncansby              Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




