
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08788/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2021                     |On 28 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 RAFIQ AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not
represented.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make any order for anonymity in this case.
    I appreciate that the  appellant  is  unwell  but  there  is  a  strong
    presumption against  anonymity  and  I  have  no  reason  to  fear  the
    publicity could cause him harm.

 2. The case was listed for a remote hearing at  12  noon.   At  that  time
    there had been no contact from the  appellant  or  his  representatives
    although the Tribunal records clearly show that notice of the  hearing,
    including a warning that the  Tribunal  had  powers  to  determine  the
    appeal in the absence of a party, was sent to both  the  appellant  and
    his known representatives, in the case of the appellant by post and  in
    the case of the representatives by email.  It  was  therefore  slightly
    surprising that there was no appearance.  The most recent communication
    I can find on the file was a  skeleton  argument  and  other  documents
    produced for a hearing on 19 February 2020.  The skeleton argument  was
    signed by Counsel.  Although there had been no input for  over  a  year
    the representatives do not appear to  have  applied  to  come  off  the
    record.

 3. I heard submissions from Ms Everett and raised with her aspects of  the
    appellant's case. This was completed at about twenty minutes past  noon
    and nothing had been heard  from  the  appellant.  I  decided  I  would
    determine the appeal in the absence of the appellant.  I  am  satisfied
    that he had notice of the hearing  served  both  on  him  at  his  home
    address and on his representatives and he offered  no  explanation  for
    not attending.

 4. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  23
    September 2020 dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision  of
    the respondent on 30 April 2019 and refusing him  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

 5. I begin by considering the First-tier Tribunal's decision and reasons.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal started by reviewing the respondent's decision.
     The appellant had claimed the benefits  of  being  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner but the Secretary of  State  did
    not accept that the partnership had been  established.   The  appellant
    shared an address with a woman but she had been recognised as a partner
    of another.  The appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  about
    fifteen years but not the twenty years necessary  under  the  rules  to
    establish a right to remain in the United Kingdom  after  living  there
    without permission.

 7. The respondent did not accept that there were "any unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" in the appellant being required to return to Pakistan.

 8. The judge noted that the appeal had been originally listed for an  oral
    hearing  on  30  September  2019  but  it  was  adjourned  because  the
    appellant's partner was too  ill  to  attend.   In  February  2020  the
    appellant's solicitors said the appellant  and  his  partner  wanted  a
    paper hearing because they were too ill to attend and give evidence and
    the papers found their way to the trial judge in September  2019.   The
    judge summarised the  documents  that  were  before  him  but  said  at
    paragraph 14:

         "The basic issue still remains outstanding,  in  that  neither  the
         appellant nor the sponsor had attended to give  evidence.   If  the
         respondent  makes  an  allegation  that  the  relationship  is  for
         convenience, and if there is sufficient evidence  to  justify  that
         conclusion then the burden shifts to the appellant  to  demonstrate
         that it is a genuine relationship.  In this  case  I  am  satisfied
         that  there  are  strong  grounds  to  suspect  a  relationship  of
         convenience and the appellant not satisfied  me  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that there is a genuine  relationship.   It  follows,
         therefore, that as this has been demonstrated to be a  relationship
         of convenience, it follows that it is not a genuine relationship".

 9. There is then a rather general reference to  considering  the  relevant
    factors under Section 117B before the judge concluding that the  appeal
    had to be dismissed.

10. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  when  the
    judge granted permission he emphasised that:

         "Permission to appeal is only granted on the issue of private life.
          No grounds have been put forward concerning the findings  made  by
         the judge with regard to family life as the Applicant has not  been
         able  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with his Sponsor.  That point  is  not  taken  in  the
         application for permission to appeal".

11. I now look at the application for permission and summarise the grounds.
     The grounds refer to the appellant having established a  private  life
    in the United Kingdom on a lawful basis since he  entered  lawfully  in
    August 2004 and his leave was extended until 2009.  Criticism  is  made
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider  "factors  such  as
    the weight to be attached to the appellant's  private  life  which  was
    established when he had lawful residence in the United  Kingdom".   The
    grounds referred to the appellant being able to speak English  and  not
    having recourse to public funds and indeed criticises the judge for not
    apparently mentioning Section 117B at all.  The grounds then go  on  to
    refer to failing to make any "adequate findings" on paragraph 276ADE(1)
    of HC 395.  Particularly, the appellant  had  denied  the  respondent's
    contention that he had spent more than half his life in  Pakistan.   He
    had spent more than half of his life outside Pakistan.  This contention
    was supported with reference  to  his  Saudi  Arabian  passport  having
    stamps showing entry to Saudi Arabia.  The judge  was  also  criticised
    for commenting adversely on the appellant not giving oral evidence  and
    his suffering from a depressive illness.  The grounds finish by saying:

         "It is submitted that the findings  of  the  Immigration  Judge  in
         relation to the Appellant's  private  life  are  unsustainable  and
         without any or inadequate reasons and therefore an error of law".

12. It is right to emphasise that the judge who gave  permission,  when  he
    referred to the grounds relating solely  to  "private  life",  was  not
    limiting the scope of his grant but pointing out that the scope of  the
    permission application was limited.

13. It is therefore slightly surprising to see that the  skeleton  argument
    prepared by Counsel for the hearing that was to have taken place on  19
    February 2020 begins by asserting that the appellant considered  it  to
    be a live issue if he is in a  "genuine  and  subsisting  relationship"
    with  his  alleged  partner  and  whether  there  are   "insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple continuing  their  relationship  in  Pakistan".
    The grounds also identify as an issue in the appeal if there  would  be
    "very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration to Pakistan"
    and whether removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    and his family's protected rights under Article 8 and  whether  removal
    would be contrary to the best interests of the children in this case.

14. I cannot agree with Counsel that those things are  in  issue.   To  the
    extent that they were ever an issue they were resolved  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  As was made abundantly plain there was no challenge  to
    those findings in the application  for  permission  and  there  was  no
    permission given beyond the scope of the  application.   As  indicated,
    the judge who gave permission drew attention to this.  If a mistake had
    been made there may have been an opportunity  to  deal  with  it  in  a
    timely way but nothing was done.  It follows that the submissions based
    on there being a genuine and subsisting relationship are irrelevant.

15. Similarly, submissions based on there  being  insurmountable  obstacles
    are of limited  relevance.   There  is  no  question  of  his  resuming
    cohabitation with his alleged partner in  Pakistan.   She  is  not  his
    partner.

16.  However,  ground  2  complains,  with  some  justification,  that  the
    appellant had complained he could not live safely in  Pakistan  because
    of bad feeling arising from the failure of his first marriage  and  his
    suffering from depression and his not having returned to Pakistan since
    December 2007.  These points were substantially repeated under ground 3
    dealing with "very significant obstacles".

17. Ground 4, or submission 4,  referred  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and ground 5 refers to his relationship with
    his partner's stepdaughter.  Again, I cannot consider these points.

18. There are several documents before me  which  I  have  considered.   Of
    particular  interest  is  a  prescription  on  20  February  2020,  and
    therefore post-decision, for Fluoxetine and Propranolol  and  there  is
    evidence that Zopiclone has been prescribed.  These are drugs  commonly
    prescribed for anxiety and mild depression.  I do not in any  way  seek
    to trivialise the illnesses that they assist but these  are  not  drugs
    normally indicative of a very serious mental illness.

19. There is an updated witness statement dated 19  September  2019.   This
    refers to the evidence of the Islamic marriage which was  not  accepted
    by the First-tier Tribunal and which finding has not been challenged.

20. It is explained that the alleged  partner  would  not  go  to  Pakistan
    because she had no experience of living there and did not wish to  live
    there.

21. Further, the appellant claimed to  feared  vengeance  from  his  former
    wife's family.  He spoke critically of his ex-wife's brother describing
    him as an "habitual criminal, drug addict and  member  of  a  terrorist
    political group".  There is also a statement from his sponsor but  that
    adds nothing especially given the findings that have been made.

22. In an undated statement at G2 in the bundle the appellant makes similar
    complaints about the risks he faces.

23. Although I am entirely satisfied, having considered  the  papers  as  a
    whole, that the First-tier Tribunal reached a lawful conclusion I  have
    to say the decision is not satisfactory because too little is explained
    and I set it aside.

24. I intend to re-make the decision on the evidence before me which I have
    considered.

25. It is for the appellant to show that the decision interferes  with  his
    (in  this  case)  private  life,  proving  facts  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities and for me to balance the consequence of that  inference,
    if any, against the public interest.

26. The appellant has not established a  life  partnership  or  a  parental
    relationship.  That much is clear.

27. It is the respondent's case the appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He
    was born in May 1969 and entered the United Kingdom in August 2004 with
    entry clearance and he extended his leave lawfully until it ran out  in
    ran out in June 2010 when all applications had  been  refused  and  his
    appeal rights were exhausted.  He remained in the United Kingdom making
    unsuccessful applications for further leave.

28. Although I am satisfied that the  appellant  does  have  a  history  of
    mental ill  health  and  may  well  have  poorly  when  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's made its decision I  am  wholly  unpersuaded  that  the  ill
    health is  any  way  near  the  kind  of  levels  that  make  a  person
    unreturnable.

29. I do not believe the appellant's claims to have a well-founded fear  of
    his former brother-in-law or other members of his former wife's family.
     The appellant is not obliged to give evidence but I am not required to
    believe evidence at all  and  certainly  not  evidence  that  might  be
    thought  controversial  and  which  has  not  been  tested  in   cross-
    examination.  I have seen nothing to show that the appellant  is  unfit
    to give evidence although I accept that one of the  reasons  given  for
    seeking a "paper" hearing was that he did not  want  to  give  evidence
    because he is unwell.

30. The Reasons for Refusal Letter made it plain that it was  not  accepted
    that the appellant enjoyed a "genuine and subsisting relationship".  He
    had not been in the United Kingdom  for  long  enough  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the  Rules  unless  he  could  show  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to integration.  The Secretary of State did  not
    accept that the appellant had lost all social and  cultural  ties  with
    his home country.  The Secretary of State also looked  for  exceptional
    circumstances and acknowledged that:

         "Although you have indicated that you will face a serious  harm  if
         refused, you[r] failure to claim Asylum or International Protection
         has cast out on the veracity of your claim.

         [...]

         Further, you have not provided evidence that you  would  personally
         be affected if your application is refused and you have  to  return
         to your home country".

31. The letter then went on to explain that the appellant would be able  to
    relocate within Pakistan in a place removed from his  former  relatives
    and, if necessary, the authorities in Pakistan could also  be  expected
    to assist.

32. It follows therefore it was plain that these points were in  issue  but
    there  is  little  evidence  to  support  the   appellant's   contested
    assertions.

33. I appreciate that in the solicitors' letter of 26 November  2018  there
    is a clear assertion of persistent problems with former relatives.

34. I find it hard to believe that a person would be at risk because of bad
    feeling in the family after so  many  years  and  I  regard  it  as  so
    unlikely that I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's  bare  assertion  as
    truthful.

35. In  any  event  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  and/or  effective
    protection of the state are not addressed.

36. Further, even if I am wrong to reject the appellant's claim to  have  a
    well-founded fear that his former relatives are keen to harm him, I  do
    not accept that he would be  unable  to  find  a  place  of  safety  in
    Pakistan especially as there is no reason  for  him  to  advertise  his
    return. There is no credible reason for him  to  establish  himself  in
    part of Pakistan where his former relatives  would  know  that  he  had
    returned.

37. It is not clear to me for how long the appellant has lived in  Pakistan
    but I do acknowledge it is his case that he has spent a great  deal  of
    time in Saudi Arabia and I have seen photocopies of a  passport  issued
    to the appellant in Karachi.  I regret that I cannot work out from that
    with confidence when the appellant might have been in Saudi Arabia.  He
    certainly had permission sometime in 1993.

38. The appellant claims that he had not spent 35  years  in  Pakistan  but
    rather he had been out  of  Pakistan  for  about  24  years.   He  left
    Pakistan at a very young age and started  professional  life  in  Saudi
    Arabia working there from 1993 to 2002.  I have decided to accept  that
    this is about right.  There is sufficient clarity in the  photocopy  of
    the passport to give some credence to the date  and  this  is  a  claim
    which is not difficult to believe.

39. It does not follow from this that the appellant could not  re-establish
    himself in Pakistan and I find that he could.

40. The appellant has not made out any case under the Rules.

41. I remind myself of the terms of Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   This
    gives statutory authority to the generally uncontroversial  claim  that
    effective immigration control is in the public interest.  I accept  the
    appellant can probably speak English to a good standard but that is not
    a reason for him to be allowed to remain, it is just that is case  does
    not suffer the aggravating deficiency of his not being  able  to  speak
    the main language used in his chosen country of  residence.  Similarly,
    he may well be able to earn a living if given the opportunity but  that
    is not a weighty point in his favour.

42. Section 117B(5) requires me to give only  "little  weight"  to  private
    life established when a  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious.
    This man's status has never been strong.  For much of the time  he  had
    permission but his status was then  precarious  and  for  much  of  his
    residence in the United Kingdom he did  not  have  permission  to  live
    there.

43. There is nothing under Section 117B that gives him any assistance.

44. The simple facts are that this is a man who entered the United  Kingdom
    lawfully, extended his leave for considerable period but remained for a
    very long period after that leave had run out.  He has no obvious right
    to be in the United Kingdom.  He has no strong family life  element  in
    his "private and family life" and although will no  doubt  be  able  to
    make his living and can speak English there  is  no  strong  reason  in
    favour of allowing him to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  Article  8
    grounds.

45. He has not persuaded me that he really does face a risk of  his  former
    relatives and he has wholly failed to persuade me that any  risk  could
    be avoided by internal relocation.  He has not adduced evidence of  the
    kind of ill health necessary to be given a right to remain.

46. Although I found the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  I  find  the
    decision is right, I have re-evaluated the evidence myself  and  formed
    my own view and for the reasons given although I  find  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law and I set  aside  its  decision  I  dismiss  this
    appeal.




    Notice of Decision

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I  remake  the
    decision and, like the First-tier Tribunal, I dismiss this appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 April 2012                  |

