
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08261/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 24th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Dinepemi [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jebb, instructed by Nelson-Singleton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 29 January 2019 in which he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  decision  to  remove  her
    from the United Kingdom subsequent to the failure of her protection and
    human rights claim.

 2. The judge noted that the appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria  and  has
    three children, two of whom are twins.  One of the children was born in
    December 2007 and was brought to the United Kingdom on 28 October  2012
    which is relevant for the purposes of this appeal.  In  this  case  the
    judge found at paragraph [19] that the appellant's children were in the
    position of having a family life with them and  the  mother,  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  intention  was  to  preserve  family  unity  by
    returning the family to Nigeria as a unit and he found that they do not
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  finding  that  the
    youngest child was not a qualifying child.  He found it  had  not  been
    established they would not be able to integrate into life  in  Nigeria.
    He then went  on  at  paragraph  20  to  consider  the  issue  of  best
    interests, finding that on balance this lay with  them  being  able  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph  [21]  he  found  that  the
    interests were not determinative and that in the circumstances of  this
    case removal would be proportionate.

 3. The grounds of challenge are narrow.  The grounds are in short that the
    judge failed properly to have regard to  the  fact  that  the  youngest
    child was approaching the seven year point at which she would have been
    a qualifying child.  The submission being that this ought to have  been
    taken into account in the proportionality assessment.

 4. Permission was granted on 16 August 2019 by Upper Tribunal Judge  Owens
    who gave permission but stated that she was particularly concerned that
    the decision arguably did not reflect the fact that the relevant  child
    was a qualifying child when the decision was promulgated.

 5. As a preliminary matter I drew the  representatives  attention  to  the
    fact that there had been an arithmetical error by  the  judge.   It  is
    accepted quite fairly by Mr Jebb that this is so.

 6. I consider that in this case the judge  quite  properly  made  findings
    regarding the children's best interests.  I consider that it cannot  be
    said that in this case he did not have regard to the  circumstances  of
    the family and of the child in particular.  He records that  the  child
    is  not  a  qualifying  child  which  indicates  that   he   did   have
    consideration  of  the  issue.   He  made  findings  about  their  best
    interests.  He noted that  they  had  been  provided  with  healthcare,
    education and so on.

 7. Whilst it is correct that the judge does not directly refer to the fact
    that the child is nearly a qualifying child, that is  not  in  my  view
    capable of amounting to a material error.  This is not a case in  which
    there was,  for  example,  any  material  tending  to  show  particular
    difficulties, or a independent report from a  social  worker.  Further,
    the relevant date for consideration of the position of the child is the
    date of promulgation, 29 January 2019. Since then,  there  has  been  a
    material change in that the child has now  been  here  for  over  seven
    years, but that is not something that can  be  taken  into  account  in
    determining whether there is an error of law.

 8. As Mr Govan submitted, this situation has to be looked at in  the  real
    world context, the parent has no right to be here and in line  with  KO
    (Nigeria) and the other factors which have to be taken into account  as
    set out in Section 117B,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  requirement  of
    immigration control is a factor which attaches significant  weight,  it
    could not be said, even were it arguable that the judge ought  to  have
    taken this factor into account, that it  would  have  been  a  material
    error given the very strong interest in maintaining immigration control
    and the fact that the child  had  not  yet  reached  the  threshold  of
    becoming a  qualifying  child  and  accordingly  for  these  reasons  I
    conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law and I uphold it.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18 December 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

