
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08434/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2017                           |On 17 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                SADIA FURQAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Gondal, Berkshire Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 28 May 1976. She is married
to a British national born on 18 May 1977. The marriage took place on 12
February 2014 in Pakistan.

On 8 June 2015 the appellant submitted an application for entry clearance
to enter the UK as the spouse of her husband, under Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules.

On 7 September 2015 the application was refused. Two reasons were given by
the respondent refusing the application under the Immigration Rules.

Firstly, it was not accepted that the marriage was valid as documentation
to show that the appellant's sponsor had lawfully divorced his previous
wife had not been provided.

Secondly, it was not accepted that the financial requirements under
appendix FM had been satisfied as required documentation had not been
submitted.

The respondent also stated that the circumstances did not warrant a grant
of entry clearance under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
heard by Judge Chudleigh. In a decision promulgated on 27 June 2017, the
judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that
decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge directed herself that it was for her to consider the claim under
Article 8 ECHR, rather than under the Immigration Rules, as pursuant to
section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 an appeal
can only be brought against the decision to refuse a human rights claim.

Before addressing Article 8, the judge considered whether the respondent
had correctly applied the Immigration Rules. She accepted the appellant's
argument that the marriage was legitimate as appropriate documentation to
establish the sponsor's divorce had been submitted with the application.

However, the judge did not accept that the financial threshold requirement
had been met. Under Appendix FM-SE, an applicant seeking to demonstrate
income from self-employment must submit, inter alia, the latest Statement
of Account (SA300 or SA302). The appellant submitted a tax calculation by
his accountant on HMRC software for the purposes of obtaining the SA302,
but not the actual SA302. The reason for this was that at the time of the
application being made the SA302 was not yet available. But for this
deficiency in the documentation, the appellant would have satisfied the
financial requirements under Appendix FM.

In evaluating the appeal under Article 8 ECHR, the judge first considered
whether the operation of Article 8 was engaged. At paragraph 26, the judge
found there to be "very little evidence about the appellant's marriage and
family life with the sponsor."

 The judge concluded at paragraph 27 that:

         "... in the absence of a witness statement from the appellant, and
         because these matters were not included in the sponsor's witness
         statement I have reservations about the quality of the evidence,
         and I consider that the appellant has not proved her case in
         relation to family life on the balance of probabilities"

Having found that Article 8 was not engaged the judge considered, in the
alternative, whether refusing entry to the appellant would be
proportionate. The judge found that there was no reason advanced as to why
the appellant and sponsor could not enjoy family life together in Pakistan.


In finding that refusing the appellant entry to the UK would be
proportionate, the judge stated at paragraph 30 that:

         "Article 8 does not confer an automatic right of entry, and does
         not oblige the state to facilitate a married couple's preference
         for living in the UK. There are no compelling circumstances to
         justify entry clearance under article 8, no obstacles the family
         life outside the UK and it would not be unduly harsh to refuse the
         appeal".

Grounds of appeal and submissions

The first submission made in the grounds of appeal is that the judge erred
by applying a "much higher standard of proof than is required" because she
only considered the claim under Article 8 ECHR outside the rules and did
not consider the "totality of the evidence".  Permission to appeal was not
granted on this ground and Mr Gondal did not seek to pursue it at the error
of law hearing. He was right to not do so. As observed by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Brunnen when granting permission to appeal, the applicable
standard of proof is the balance of probabilities and there is nothing in
the decision that indicates this standard was not applied. On the contrary,
at paragraph 27 the judge made clear that the decision was made on the
balance of probabilities.

The second argument advanced in the grounds of appeal (in respect of which
permission to appeal was granted) is that the judge erred in her assessment
of Article 8 ECHR. Within this ground a number of points are raised:

      a) It is argued that the judge improperly treated as damaging to the
         appellant's case the absence of a witness statement addressing her
         family life with the sponsor when there is no requirement in the
         Immigration Rules or elsewhere for this to be submitted.

      b) It is also argued that it was open to the judge to ask the sponsor,
         who attended the hearing, about any matter or documents she was
         unclear about.

      c) A further submission is that the judge failed to follow the five
         stage test in Razgar and had she done so she would have found that
         Article 8 was clearly engaged.

      d) The grounds also take issue with the judge's finding that the
         sponsor could relocate to Pakistan on the basis the consideration
         of the impact on him was inadequate.

Before me, Mr Gondal argued that there were only two issues in contention
before the First-tier Tribunal: the validity of the appellant's marriage,
and whether the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules had been
satisfied. He argued that the judge accepted the appellant's marriage was
valid and was wrong to find that the financial requirements were not met as
it was clear the appellant comfortably met them and the only shortcoming in
his application for entry clearance was that, rather than submit a
Statement of Account (SA302), he submitted a tax calculation by his
accountant on HMRC software showing identical information.

Mr Gondal also argued that the judge erred by basing the decision on a lack
of witness evidence when there is no requirement for such evidence to be
submitted and the absence of family life had not been previously raised.

Mr Kandola's response was that there is no case law or policy saying it is
permissible to rely on alternative evidence to that specified in the
Immigration Rules where a self-employed person is seeking to show they meet
the financial requirements under Appendix FM. He argued that it is fair to
acquire everyone to submit the same documents and that the appellant could
have waited a few months until he had the required documentation.

Mr Kandola submitted that the burden was on the appellant to establish
family life. It was clear from the respondent's decision that family life
was not accepted and therefore the onus was on the appellant to establish
that there was family life within the meaning of Article 8(1) ECHR. He
maintained that the fact that the judge had found the marriage between the
appellant and sponsor to be "valid" did not mean it was genuine and engaged
Article 8.

Consideration

As correctly noted by the  judge, the only ground upon which the appeal
could be brought to the First-tier Tribunal was that the decision to refuse
the appellant entry was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
1998, i.e. that it was contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

The issue for the judge to decide was not therefore whether the Immigration
Rules had been satisfied (although this is a matter of some weight in
determining the proportionality of denying entry clearance - see, for
example, Mostafa [2015] UKUT 112) but whether refusing entry clearance
would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR. This required a consideration,
firstly, of whether there was family life between the appellant and sponsor
the interference with which was of sufficient gravity to engage the
operation of Article 8(1) ECHR; and secondly, if (and only if) the answer
to the first question was yes, whether refusing entry clearance to the
appellant would be a disproportionate interference with the appellant's and
sponsor's rights under Article 8(2) ECHR.

The judge's reason for finding Article 8(1) was not engaged was that
although the appellant and sponsor were validly married they had not
submitted evidence to show that they were in a genuine relationship and had
a genuine desire to live together as a couple.

As the Upper Tribunal stated in Mostafa at [24], there are no particular
kinds of relationship that always attract the protection of Article 8(1)
just as there are no kind of relationship that would never come within its
scope. Accordingly, the fact that the appellant and sponsor were in a
legally valid marriage is not a sufficient basis to conclude Article 8 was
engaged. Whether Article 8 was engaged was a fact sensitive question for
the judge which needed to be determined on the evidence.

The burden of proof was on the appellant to establish there was family life
between her and the sponsor. In the absence of evidence being adduced about
the relationship between them (whether in the form of witness statements or
otherwise) it was not an error of law to find that the burden had not been
discharged by the appellant to show that there was family life engaging
Article 8(1) even though the marriage was valid.

Mr Gondal is correct that there is no legal requirement to submit a witness
statement and that the absence of such a statement from the appellant is
not of itself a reason to dismiss her appeal. But the judge did not find a
witness statement was required. Rather, she explained that her decision was
being made in the absence of evidence from the appellant. There is no error
arising from the judge highlighting the absence of a witness statement when
it is the way in which evidence from a party is ordinarily given in
proceedings before the Tribunal.

The grounds argue that the judge failed to follow the five stage test of
Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UK HL 27. In that case, Lord Bingham set out
the following five questions to be considered where Article 8 is at issue:

      1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his
         private life or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

The first two Razgar questions address whether Article 8 is engaged. If, as
the judge found, the answer to the second question was in the negative (ie
Article 8 is not engaged) then it was not necessary to proceed to the other
questions. In other words, having found that Article 8 was not engaged, it
was not necessary for the judge to proceed to assess the proportionality of
refusing entry clearance to the appellant.

Mr Gondal submitted that whether there was a genuine relationship between
the appellant and her sponsor had never been put in issue by the
respondent, who had focused only the question of the validity of the
marriage. I do not agree. In the Entry Clearance Manager Appeal Review
dated 26 July 2016 it is stated:

         "Given the concerns raised in the refusal notice regarding the
         relationship and the fact that no additional evidence has been
         provided, I am not satisfied that the appellant has a family life
         with the sponsor. As this is the case, article 8 (1) does not apply
         to the appellant."

This makes clear that the respondent did not accept Article 8(1) was
engaged because of the absence of evidence about the "relationship".
Indeed, it is apparent that not only did the Entry Clearance Manager make
clear that Article 8(1) was at issue but also that the appellant had failed
to provide adequate evidence to support the case under Article 8(1).

Although it was not necessary given her finding about Article 8 not being
engaged, the judge considered the proportionality of refusing the appellant
entry clearance, and found refusal would not be disproportionate.

At the hearing before me, the primary argument Mr Gondal advanced to
challenge the judge's conclusion on proportionality was that the appellant
satisfied the Immigration Rules and this should have been accorded
significant weight in the proportionality assessment.

I agree that if the appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules this would be
highly relevant to whether denying entry was proportionate. However, the
appellant did not meet the Rules. The Rules stipulate that a self-employed
applicant must submit their latest statement of account (SA300 or SA302). A
document prepared by an accountant in order to obtain an SA302, which is
what the appellant submitted, is not the same as, or the equivalent of, an
SA302. As the appellant did not meet the requirements of Immigration Rules
the judge did not err in law by failing to weigh in her favour that the
Rules were satisfied.

The judge also did not make an error by finding the sponsor could relocate
to Pakistan. The burden of proof lay with the appellant. Given the lack of
evidence before her to establish reasons why the sponsor could not
relocate, the judge was entitled to find that the burden had not been
discharged.

I therefore find that:

      e) The judge did not make an error of law in finding that Article 8(1)
         was not engaged. Therefore, there was no need for the judge to
         consider the proportionality of denying entry clearance or indeed
         whether or not the Immigration Rules were satisfied.

      f) If I am wrong, and the judge erred in respect of Article 8(1), I am
         satisfied, in the alternative, that the judge did not err in
         finding it would not be disproportionate to deny entry clearance to
         the appellant.

Notice of Decision


      1. The appeal is dismissed.



      2. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal stands

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  14 January 2018      |

