
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08939/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 January 2018                        |On 6 March 2018                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  IVAN [B]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willock-Briscoe (Home Office Specialist Appeals
Team)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal of 29 August 2017 to allow the appeal of Ivan
       [B], a citizen of  Ukraine  born  20  October  1976,  itself  brought
       against the decision of the Secretary of State of 22  March  2016  to
       refuse his human rights claim.

    2. Mr [B] first entered the UK some years ago. He was served with papers
       as an illegal entrant on 20 September 2008, and removed from  the  UK
       to Ukraine on 16 January 2009.

    3. On 7 December 2015 he applied for leave to remain as the partner of a
       British citizen; their child was British too. He and  his  wife  Olha
       [B] originally married in  2000  in  Ukraine  where  they  then  both
       resided, and became separated in  2005,  and  subsequently  divorced.
       They resumed their relationship in  Summer  2012  when  Olha  visited
       Ukraine. They remarried on 15 August 2013. He subsequently stated  he
       had entered the country on 1 October 2013. Their daughter Yuliya  was
       born on [ ] 2000, where she had lived until the age of  11;  she  was
       now in full-time education in  the  UK,  presently  at  the  Kingsley
       Academy.

    4. The application was refused. Summarising his immigration  history  as
       above, the decision maker noted that there was  no  evidence  of  the
       date of his return to the UK, his word aside.  Mr [B] was  considered
       unsuitable for the partner route under Appendix FM  as  he  had  been
       convicted of possessing false documentation and sentenced  to  twelve
       months' imprisonment, and thus failed to meet S-LTR-1.4  of  Appendix
       FM. Furthermore, there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration back in  Ukraine.  There  were  no  relevant  exceptional
       circumstances present: he  had  entered  the  country  illegally  and
       commenced a relationship knowing he lacked  immigration  status,  and
       thus with no expectation of long-term residence here.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  from  the  family,  which  it
       accepted as credible. The daughter arrived in  this  country  without
       knowing English, and had struggled, and also missed her  father.  She
       had achieved a lot here, doing well in school, and spending  time  at
       the library with her friends; indeed  she  was  herself  involved  in
       teaching children in Feltham Maths and English. She  hoped  to  study
       law, and was presently undertaking voluntary work for a law firm. She
       spent time at the park with her friends at the cinema.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal noted that Mr [B]'s conviction prevented  him
       from meeting the suitability requirements of Appendix  FM.  Given  he
       did not face  deportation,  the  public  policy  position  struck  by
       section 117B(6)  of  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       applied to him; thus his removal would be appropriate only if it  was
       reasonable, bearing in mind the  public  interest  issues.  Here  the
       child was a British citizen, unlike the child in MA Pakistan. She was
       at a very crucial stage of her education and was owed the benefits of
       British citizenship, suggesting her departure was  unreasonable.  The
       consequences of her father's conviction should not be visited on her.
       Mr [B] spoke some English, was supported by his wife, and lived  with
       his daughter in a stable family unit  that  had  cohabited  for  some
       time: overall his removal would be disproportionate.

    7. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal.

    8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the  basis
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  failing  to  take
       account of the circumstances of Mr  [B]'s  removal  from  the  United
       Kingdom, and in failing to explain adequately explain  its  reasoning
       as to why the public interest was overcome given his past conviction.
       Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that these grounds were
       arguable.

    9. Before  me  Ms  Willock-Briscoe  developed  the  grounds  of  appeal,
       emphasising the fact that the  Respondent  had  returned  to  the  UK
       illegally notwithstanding that he had previously  been  removed.  She
       drew my attention to the Home Office Guidance  on  the  circumstances
       where removal of a parent of a British citizen child was appropriate,
       which took account of the possibility that "the conduct of the parent
       or primary carer gives rise to considerations of such  weight  as  to
       justify separation, if the child could otherwise  stay  with  another
       parent or alternative primary carer in the UK  or  in  the  EU."  The
       Secretary of State had not proposed that the  daughter  should  leave
       the UK. She emphasised that the section 117B  factors  had  not  been
       considered, and that the Home Office guidance needed to be considered
       when the policy on British citizen children fell to be considered.

   10. Furthermore, Ms Willock-Briscoe provided a Rule 15A notice seeking to
       adduce further material: firstly, an exclusion order of  18  February
       2009.  She  did  not  suggest  the  order  had  been  served  on  the
       Respondent, but pointed out that it was nevertheless relevant to  the
       assessment  of  proportionality.  Secondly,  GCID  notes   from   the
       Secretary of State's electronic records of  20  May  2011  indicating
       that the Respondent  had  been  encountered  in  the  UK  on  another
       occasion  and  though  he  gave  the  name  of  Ivan  [B]  then,  his
       fingerprints matched those of one Ivan  [G],  previously  removed  to
       Ukraine on 16 January 2009.

   11. Mr Collins submitted that the judge was well aware of the fact of the
       Appellant's departure as an illegal entrant, and accordingly  had  in
       mind the elevated public interest in upholding  immigration  control.
       Home Office policy lacked the force of law. There was nothing in  the
       decision that was inconsistent with the Home Office Guidance found in
       Appendix FM.

Findings and reasons

   12. The essential finding of the First-tier Tribunal in this  appeal  was
       that the Respondent enjoyed a close family tie with his daughter  who
       was heavily assimilated into her life in the UK and was  at  a  vital
       stage in her education. That conclusion might well  be  a  legitimate
       one, though it needs to be reached  via  a  structured  consideration
       that has regard to the legal framework.

   13. Both parties referred me to this Guidance on  the  Appendix  FM  "ten
       year route" to settlement as a partner:

           "11.2.3: Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  British  Citizen
           Child to leave the UK?

           Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
           take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of  a
           British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be
           to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless  of  the
           age of that child. This reflects the European Court  of  Justice
           Judgment in Zambrano.

           ...

           Where a decision to  refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.

           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

           It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
           child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
           primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

           The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
           398 of the Immigration Rules;

           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
           repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

           In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision
           maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation.
           If the decision maker is  minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances
           where separation would  be  the  result,  this  decision  should
           normally be  discussed  with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
           appropriate, advice  may  be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
           Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare  of  the
           child, in order to inform the decision."

   14. Mr Collins emphasised the fact that forcing a British child to  leave
       the EU would be unreasonable per se; Ms Willock-Briscoe took from  it
       the proposition that a parent's conduct may  have  been  such  as  to
       exclude them from that otherwise routine outcome. This Guidance must,
       of course, be interpreted in line with the case law that explains the
       ambit of the Zambrano principle.  Elias LJ in  Harrison  [2012]  EWCA
       Civ 1736  (similar reasoning appears in Sanneh [2016] QB 445 stated:

           "... there is really no basis for asserting that it is  arguable
           in the light of the  authorities  that  the  Zambrano  principle
           extends to cover anything short of  a  situation  where  the  EU
           citizen is forced to leave the territory of the European  Union.
           If the EU citizen, be it child or wife, would not in practice be
           compelled to leave the country if the non-EU family member  were
           to be refused the right  of  residence,  there  is  in  my  view
           nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU law is  engaged.
           Article 8 Convention rights may then come into  the  picture  to
           protect family life as the Court recognised in Dereci  [2012]  1
           CMLR 45, but that is an entirely distinct area of protection."

   15. Ms Willock-Briscoe relied heavily on SF Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC)
       where the Upper Tribunal states at [13]:

           "10.  ... it appears to us that the terms of the guidance are an
           important source of the Secretary of State's view of what is  to
           be regarded as  reasonable  in  the  circumstances,  and  it  is
           important in our judgement for the Tribunal at  both  levels  to
           make decisions which are, as far as  possible,  consistent  with
           decisions made in other areas  of  the  process  of  immigration
           control.

           11.   If the Secretary of State makes a decision in  a  person's
           favour on the basis of guidance  of  this  sort,  there  can  of
           course be no appeal, and the result will be  that  the  decision
           falls below the radar of consideration by a Tribunal. It is only
           possible for Tribunals to make  decisions  on  matters  such  as
           reasonableness consistently with those that are  being  made  in
           favour of individuals by the Secretary of State if the  Tribunal
           applies similar or identical processes to those employed by  the
           Secretary of State.

           12.   On occasion, perhaps where it has  more  information  than
           the Secretary of State had or might have had, or  perhaps  if  a
           case  is  exceptional,  the  Tribunal  may  find  a  reason  for
           departing from such guidance. But where there is clear  guidance
           which covers a case where an assessment  has  to  be  made,  and
           where the guidance clearly demonstrates what the outcome of  the
           assessment would have been made by the Secretary  of  State,  it
           would, we think, be the normal practice for the Tribunal to take
           such guidance into account and to apply it in assessing the same
           consideration in a case that came before it."

   16. It was her submission that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
       in failing to cite this Guidance. That  failure  meant  that  it  was
       deprived of the possibility of taking a decision that was  consistent
       with that which the Secretary of State might have made.

   17. Having reviewed the relevant materials and the  reasoning  below,  it
       seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal was perfectly well aware  of
       the fact that the Respondent's conduct was relevant to the  balancing
       exercise: it expressly cited his conviction  but  considered  it  was
       outweighed by the interests of his daughter. The Home Office Guidance
       does not  suggest  another  process  of  reasoning  would  have  been
       appropriate. I note that, not for the first time,  the  Secretary  of
       State's Guidance in relation to Zambrano seems to  have  been  relied
       upon in a vacuum, rather  than  in  the  context  of  its  subsequent
       interpretation by the domestic  courts.  As  shown  by  Harrison  and
       Sanneh, the Zambrano principle applies only where a child is required
       to leave the European Union due to a primary carer's departure: given
       the daughter's mother is not threatened by expulsion,  this  was  not
       the case here. The true barrier to removal was the strength of family
       life established in this country having particular regard to the best
       interests of the daughter, as to which the governing authority was MA
       (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (interpreting the proper  approach  to
       interpreting section 117B of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002). The First-tier Tribunal was plainly alive to the relevance
       of the best interests of the child.

   18. As I indicated at the hearing, although the First-tier  Tribunal  was
       clearly aware of the Respondent's prior conviction and factored  that
       into the proportionality assessment, it did not take account  of  his
       return to the UK notwithstanding an earlier removal. Whether  or  not
       this was in breach of an Exclusion Order is  besides  the  point:  it
       still represented an egregious breach  of  immigration  control  that
       transcended  the  circumstances  of  a  bare  overstayer  or  illegal
       entrant; and is also the kind of conduct which potentially falls  for
       consideration as "a very poor immigration history, such as where  the
       person has  repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
       Rules."

   19. This egregious breach of immigration control required  assessment  in
       the proportionality balance, being relevant to the assessment of  the
       precariousness of his residence within section  117B.  That  kind  of
       factor is of course relevant to the assessment of whether a  parent's
       departure from the UK is  relevant  notwithstanding  a  child's  best
       interests, see generally MA (Pakistan) which  identified  that  wider
       public interest  considerations  must  be  taken  into  account  when
       applying the reasonableness criteria.

   20. In Campbell [2013] UKUT 147 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that  there
       is no requirement for personal service of an exclusion  decision  for
       it to be legally effective.  Nevertheless,  the  other  side  of  the
       consideration was that actual knowledge of  such  a  decision  was  a
       relevant consideration when assessing  proportionality,  noting  that
       "the true circumstances of the appellant's departure from the UK  and
       the subsequent decision to exclude him have  a  bearing  on  ...  the
       proportionality [of] the decision." These considerations will require
       assessment when the appeal is finally determined.

   21. I accordingly find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       cannot stand. The matter must be re-heard.  Formally this will  be  a
       hearing afresh, albeit it is difficult to imagine that much would  be
       gained by revisiting the findings as to the strength of the  father's
       relationship with his daughter, which were not  the  subject  of  any
       criticism by  the  Secretary  of  State  before  me.  It  is  clearly
       appropriate for the further evidence sought to  be  admitted  by  the
       Home Office in  relation  to  Mr  [B]'s  immigration  history  to  be
       admitted at any future hearing. He will  of  course  be  entitled  to
       provide rebuttal evidence if he so chooses.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand. The  appeal  must
    accordingly be re-heard afresh.

    It is not appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to direct  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to case manage this hearing in  any  particular  way:  however
    attention is drawn to the fact that the Appellant's daughter  is  at  a
    vital stage of her education and achieving certainty as to her father's
    future must be viewed as a priority. Accordingly the appeal  should  be
    treated with appropriate despatch in re-listing.


Signed:     Date: 5 February 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

