
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08766/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2017                           |On 14 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mr Felipe Alberto Justiniano Camacho
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Moffatt, Counsel instructed by ITN Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego which allowed the Article 8 appeal of the respondent.

 2. For the purposes of  this  decision  I  refer  to  the  respondent,  Mr
    Camacho, as the appellant and to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department as the respondent, reflecting  their  positions  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Further, although the  appeal  also  concerns  Mr
    Camacho's wife, her material circumstances are the same as  his  and  I
    need only refer to him.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant arrived in  the  UK
    on 8 October 2002 with a visit visa.  He obtained leave  as  a  student
    until 31 March 2005 but became an overstayer thereafter.  His wife came
    to the UK in 2006, again on a visit visa and overstayed at the  end  of
    that leave.

 4. The couple remained in the UK with their adult son and his family.   As
    they were overstayers they could  not  work  and  were,  in  the  main,
    supported  by  their  relatives  in  the  UK.   When  this  became  too
    burdensome, on 12 September 2015 the couple attempted to leave  the  UK
    having purchased their own  one-way  ticket  for  Bolivia.   They  were
    stopped at immigration control and refused access to the flight.   They
    were advised to make an application to regularise  their  status.   The
    couple did so on 17 December 2015, applying for further leave to remain
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  That application was refused  on  16  March
    2016.  The appellant appealed and had a hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 7 September 2017.

 5. The arguments put to the First-tier Tribunal were that there were  very
    significant obstacles to the couple  establishing  a  private  life  on
    return to Bolivia.  Further, it was argued that if  the  provisions  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  were   not   met,   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances that made the decision disproportionate in an  assessment
    of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego made cogent findings that the  couple
    could not meet the provisions of the Immigration Rules.   He  found  at
    [48]-[50] that where the couple were attempting to go back  to  Bolivia
    voluntarily in 2015, just two years earlier,  and  their  evidence  was
    clear as to having relatives in Bolivia, including  three  other  adult
    children, it was not  possible  to  find  that  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to them returning as of the date of the hearing.



 7. The judge went on to  conduct  an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal identified at [54] that the
    couple had a family life with their son, a British  national,  and  his
    children.  There  were  adverse  findings  made,  however,  as  to  the
    evidence of the couple attempting to "airbrush out"  the  fact  of  the
    other three adult children in Bolivia; see [52].   Judge  Housego  also
    identified at [53] that the "immigration history of the  appellants  is
    poor". That is unarguable. Further, in the same paragraph he identified
    correctly that the fact of  their  not  speaking  English  "even  to  a
    rudimentary  level"  weighed  against  them  in   the   proportionality
    assessment.  He also identified correctly in the  same  paragraph  that
    any family or private life had to be given "little weight"  as  it  had
    been established whilst they were in the UK illegally.

 8. At [57], however, the judge identified what he found to be "exceptional
    circumstances".  This was the simple fact of the attempt to  return  to
    Bolivia voluntarily in 2015.  The judge found that the decision of  the
    respondent's officers not to let them leave and  in  advising  them  to
    return home in order to regularise their status, the  appellants  doing
    as they were told, "reduces the weight of the public interest in  their
    removal - the Secretary of State would not let them go".

 9. The judge went on to find at [58]:

         "With the weight of public interest so reduced on the Secretary  of
         State's side of the scales,  while  what  would  otherwise  be  not
         enough weight to tip the scales in favour of the appellants now  is
         enough, and the decision is unduly harsh."

10. The Secretary of State challenges that decision in the following terms:

         "It is submitted the FtT at [57] have given  undue  weight  to  the
         appellants' claimed failed departure.  The FtT has failed  to  give
         adequate consideration to the fact  that  this  incident  does  not
         impact on the appellants' ability to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
         and/or Article 8.

         In addition it is respectfully submitted that the appellants  could
         have left at any time since the noted incident, the appellants have
         family and property in Bolivia therefore it is unclear  as  to  why
         the Judge would find return to be unduly harsh.  In addition family
         life between two countries has clearly also always existed and  the
         Judge has not accepted the no  contact  aspect  with  the  Bolivian
         families is not accepted [49-50].

         In making the findings of undue harshness it is submitted that  the
         FtT has erred in law as he has  failed  to  identify  what  in  the
         appellants' circumstances over the past two years has changed."

11. Although not well drafted, the respondent's point is clear.   The  fact
    of the failed attempted return was not something  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find amounted  to  an  exceptional  circumstance  that  was
    capable of either reducing the weight attracting to the public interest
    or added to the weight on the appellants' side of the balance such that
    the decision could be found to be disproportionate.

12. The challenge is a simple one and I have no hesitation in accepting it.
     In my judgment, the fact of the appellant and his wife being prevented
    from leaving in 2015 is not a factor that can amount to an  exceptional
    circumstance capable of outweighing the other factors weighing  against
    the  appellant.  The  conclusion  that  it  is  was   irrational.   The
    Immigration Rules were not met. They had breached  immigration  control
    knowingly for nine years or more.  As the judge  correctly  identified,
    their family and private life could attract little where that  was  so.
    The couple  had  three  other  adult  children  in  Bolivia  and  other
    relatives there with  whom  they  were  in  contact.  The  respondent's
    officers preventing the couple from getting on their flight in 2015  is
    simply not a factor that any reasonable decision maker could reasonably
    take as being of sufficient weight to justify Article 8  leave  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

13. I must therefore find that the proportionality assessment under Article
    8 was in error and set it aside to be remade.

14. The same reasoning means that I must refuse the appeal because there is
    nothing here which amounts to exceptional circumstances such  that  the
    decision can be regarded as disproportionate.   On  the  contrary,  the
    weight of the evidence is significantly  against  the  appellants.  The
    Rules are not met. Their immigration history is  poor.   They  remained
    here knowingly in breach of immigration control for  a  very  extensive
    period of time.  Their private lives and family life with their son and
    his children attract only little weight, formed whilst they  were  here
    illegally. They retain relationships with their  other  adult  children
    and relatives in Bolivia. They have not learned to speak English to any
    significant level in the time that they have been here.  They have  not
    supported themselves financially while they have been here. The fact of
    their being unable to get onto their flight that they paid for in  2015
    is not a factor that can assist them to any significant degree  in  the
    proportionality assessment in light of those various and  significantly
    adverse factors.  The fact of their son having separated from his  wife
    since 2015 is also not a factor that can, in the context set out above,
    make out an exceptional  or  compelling  case.  It  is  reasonable  and
    proportionate to expect  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  return  to
    Bolivia.

15. I therefore remake the appeal under Article 8 as refused.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade to the extent identified above.

17. I remake the appeal under Article 8 ECHR as refused.



Signed   [pic]                               Date 13 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


