









Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08818/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 February 2019                      |On 20 February 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

     Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           MOHAMMED SHAHINUZ ZAMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                       DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF
             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    family and private life grounds pursuant to the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) and Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 19 December 2018 on the basis  that
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing was arguably unfair by  reason  of  the
    amount  of  questioning  by  the  First-tier  Judge,  that  the   Judge
    misapplied the relevant law,  failed  to  consider  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended),  and  failed
    properly to apply both part VA  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration  Act  2009  (the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    children).

 3. By an out of time Rule 24  Reply,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    grounds of appeal reveal material  errors  of  law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the Judge's consideration of Appendix  FM,  Article  8  and
    section 55.  The respondent invited the Upper Tribunal  to  remit  this
    human rights appeal afresh to the First-tier Tribunal, without the need
    for an oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

 4. It  is  therefore  common  ground  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    materially err in law and both parties agree that this is a case  where
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set  aside.   I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal can properly  be
    set aside without a reasoned decision notice.

 5. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with  no
    findings of fact or credibility preserved. The decision in this  appeal
    will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008, no reasons (or further reasons) will be provided unless, within 7
    days of the sending out of this decision,  either  party  indicates  in
    writing that they do not consent to the appeal being disposed of in the
    manner set out at (5) above.  If in  consequence  an  oral  hearing  is
    required, but the outcome is the same, the Upper Tribunal will consider
    making an order for wasted costs.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:          14  February
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



