
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08997/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4 July 2017                         |On 11 July 2017                         |
|                                       |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Miss Ashvina Luximon
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Perry Clements
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is what purports to be an appeal from the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cameron promulgated on 22  December  2016.   I  use  the
    expression "purports to be" because in this instance the  Secretary  of
    State's application for permission to appeal is dated 9  January  2017.
    It does not acknowledge that it was lodged  outside  the  fourteen  day
    period prescribed and there was  no  material  within  the  application
    giving an explanation for the lateness.

2.   The purported grant of permission to appeal is dated 18 May  2017,  and
    is made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.  I will read it in full.

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, four  days  out  of
             time,  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Cameron  promulgated  on  22  December  2016  to   allow   the
             appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  against   the
             decision of the respondent on 8 October  2015  to  refuse  her
             leave to remain.  There is no explanation  for  the  delay  in
             making the application and I do not extend time.


         2.   Grounds 4 to 7 is a disagreement with the judge's finding  and
             shows no arguable error.


         3.   It is arguable that the judge erred  in  taking  into  account
             that the appellant is said to rely on support from her  family
             in the UK when it appears they are without leave to be in  the
             UK."

3.   This document has been the subject of discussion this  morning  between
    Mr Avery, who acts for the Secretary of State, and Mr  Gajjar  for  the
    responding party.  On the face of it, the application is out  of  time.
    Mr Avery concedes this. The judge refused to extend time. The purported
    grant of appeal is therefore a nullity because the judge only has power
    to grant permission to appeal if he or she has first extended the  time
    within which to bring the application.

4.   This is not a case of a judge  omitting  to  mention  the  time  point,
    where it can be inferred that the period was extended. Here  the  judge
    was alive to the application being out of time and expressly refused to
    extend time.

5.   Mr Avery did not argue against my provisional view that this grant  was
    a nullity. He drew my attention to the fact that (as would  be  obvious
    from the dates) the period during which the lodging of  an  application
    for permission to appeal was under consideration covered the  Christmas
    and  New  Year  break.  This  may,  he  conjectured,  have   been   the
    justification, or the explanation at least, for the  application  being
    served late.

6.   The difficulty is twofold: first  that  that  Christmas  and  New  Year
    break was not a matter relied on on the face  of  the  application  and
    secondly there is no evidence before me today of that justification.  I
    am doubtful, even had there been some appropriate letter of explanation
    today, that this would have cured the grant  of  permission  to  appeal
    being null on its face.

7.   In those circumstances  I  formally  declare  the  purported  grant  of
    permission to appeal to be a nullity.  In the absence of permission  to
    appeal, I need say nothing about the underlying merit or  otherwise  of
    the grounds.

8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Notice of Decision

The purported grant of permission to appeal being declared  a  nullity,  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal remains valid.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     10 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


