
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08760/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2018                         |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   dev raj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison of Counsel instructed by HSBS Law
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Aziz  made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 3rd September 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 3rd April 1979.  He arrived
    in the UK in July 2010 with a six month visit visa and after his  leave
    expired he overstayed.  He made an unsuccessful application  for  leave
    to remain on 23rd April 2013 on the basis of  his  private  and  family
    life and a further application on 28th October 2016. That  resulted  in
    the refusal by the respondent dated 28th July 2017 which is the subject
    of the decision before the Immigration Judge.

 3. The appellant's case is based upon  his  relationship  with  a  British
    national, Ms [S], who has been diagnosed  with  paranoid  schizophrenia
    and has learning difficulties.  It was accepted by the  respondent  and
    by the judge  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her, but that nevertheless it  was  proportionate  to
    expect him to return to India either to live there with his wife or  to
    apply for entry clearance.

 4. The judge recorded the evidence from the appellant and  from  his  wife
    and from members of her family.  She is British born and last  went  to
    India in 1993.  She said that she would go with him temporarily to make
    an application to come to the UK but could not live there  permanently.



 5. The judge said that the oral evidence was  confusing.  He accepted that
    Ms [S] had schizophrenia and a learning disability, but said  that  the
    medical evidence did not shed any light on her daily care needs or  her
    ability to live an independent life.  He recorded that she worked on  a
    voluntary basis in a charity shop for a few hours, three days  a  week.
    He considered that the appellant's evidence was contradictory  in  that
    at one point he said that he wanted to take employment and  at  another
    said that he could not work because he had to look after his wife.  The
    fact that Miss [S] was currently working and hoping to secure full-time
    employment undermined the assertions made by members of her  family  as
    to her inability to live independently and her having daily care  needs
    which could only be met by her husband.

 6. The judge concluded that the appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  he
    could meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  said  there
    were no compelling or exceptional  circumstances  which  might  warrant
    consideration of the application outside the Rules.  However, if he was
    wrong about that then the balance of the argument lay in favour of  the
    respondent.  He dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not adequately considered the position of the appellant's wife when
    making his assessment of the Article 8 issues.  The judge had not asked
    the witnesses what the level of  care  was  which  she  required.   The
    impact of his leaving the country had not been considered.  It had been
    accepted that the couple were in a genuine relationship and, given  her
    medical conditions, it was not reasonable to expect her to  follow  the
    appellant to India.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gibb on 29th October 2018  in
    the following terms:-

         "The grounds are arguable.  The judge arguably  uses  an  incorrect
         legal framework, post  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  where  a
         threshold approach is used.  It is also arguable  that  the  judge,
         when conducting a proportionality assessment  in  the  alternative,
         omitted relevant factors, including the entry clearance point.   It
         is arguable that the judge restricted himself  to  considering  the
         appellant's  wife's  care  needs,  omitting  to  address  the  full
         question  of  very  serious   hardship   within   the   Rules,   or
         unjustifiably harsh consequences  outside  them.   It  is  arguable
         that, regardless of the findings as  to  care  needs,  the  medical
         evidence that  was  accepted  placed  the  appellant's  wife  in  a
         category far from what would be expected of a  person  without  her
         mental and physical health problems, and that there was a  need  to
         address this in the required assessments  inside  and  outside  the
         Rules."

 9. Mr Davison relied on his grounds and pointed out  that  the  judge  had
    reached a number of  positive  findings  accepting  that  there  was  a
    genuine relationship between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  and  that
    relocating to India  would  cause  a  degree  of  difficulty  for  her.
    However, he had not properly assessed the impact of his removal on her,
    given that she has substantial mental health problems  which  ought  to
    have been weighed in the balance.  It was crucial for  him  to  make  a
    finding on her ability to settle in India and to decide whether it  was
    reasonable to expect her to accompany her husband when he  applies  for
    entry clearance.

10. Mr Tarlow said that initially he had considered that the grounds were a
    mere disagreement with the decision, but having heard  the  submissions
    from Mr Davison accepted that there had been no  proper  assessment  of
    the effect of the decision on Ms [S], and that the decision  needed  to
    be remade.

Submissions

11. Mr Tarlow submitted that the balance of the argument still lay with the
    Secretary of State.  The appellant had been here  unlawfully  for  many
    years.  There was a functioning system of healthcare in  India  and  it
    was perfectly reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  wife  to  return
    there, either permanently or to obtain entry clearance on return.

12. Mr Davison submitted that it would be  wholly  unreasonable  to  expect
    Miss [S] to go to India permanently.  The evidence in the documentation
    showed that in all likelihood they would meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and given her health conditions it was not reasonable
    to expect her to accompany him there in order to  make  an  application
    which would be likely to succeed.

Findings and Conclusions

13. The Immigration Judge erred in law in that he did not take into account
    relevant matters, namely the effect of the appellant's removal upon his
    vulnerable wife.  The reasoning in respect of Article 8 mainly consists
    of a series of statements of the law  but  does  not  engage  with  the
    evidence in relation to her.

14. Accordingly, the decision is set aside.

15. However, the overall decision will remain the same  for  the  following
    reasons.

16. It was accepted by Mr  Davison  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, and he did  not  seek  to  argue
    that  the  relevant  tests  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  and   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) had been met.

17. In deciding whether the appellant  ought  to  succeed  in  relation  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules it is necessary to take  into  account  the
    factors set out in paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.

18. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  The appellant has a poor immigration history having  arrived
    as a visitor and overstayed.  Little weight should be  given  therefore
    to either his private life or to  his  relationship  with  his  partner
    because it was established at a time when he was in the UK  unlawfully.



19. Paragraph 117B(6) is not relevant because  although  evidence  has  now
    been produced that the appellant's wife  is  in  the  early  stages  of
    pregnancy there is no genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a qualifying child in this case.

20. The evidence in relation to the appellant's wife  is  set  out  in  the
    extremely  large  bundle  of  documents  produced  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  There is a letter dated 27th March 2018  which  states  that
    she suffers from paranoid schizophrenia and has a  learning  disability
    and is on repeat medication.  The letters from both the GP and the  NHS
    Foundation Trust at Sandwell state that she suffers from mild  learning
    difficulties and was admitted in 2013 to Hallam Street Hospital with  a
    psychotic illness.  Her conditions cause poor motivation  and  lack  of
    initiative to do things.  She requires anti-psychotic medication  which
    she has always adhered to.  The GP said that  she  does  not  presently
    suffer from any behavioural problems, taking her  medication  regularly
    and attending outpatient clinics.

21. According to the evidence given  to  the  judge  she  manages  to  work
    voluntarily on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays for two-and-a-half hours
    on each day, keeping the  tables  and  shop  area  clean,  hanging  the
    clothes and keeping the shop tidy and sometimes  operating  the  tills.
    She apparently hopes to secure full-time employment.

22.  Like the First-tier Judge, I accept that Ms [S] requires some level of
    help,  and  in  particular  needs  medication  in  order  to  keep  her
    underlying condition under control.  However, there  is  a  functioning
    system of healthcare in India and if she were  to  go  there  with  the
    appellant for a short period  of  time  whilst  he  applied  for  entry
    clearance there is no reason to think  that  she  would  be  unable  to
    obtain that medication.

23. I agree with Mr Davison that it would not be reasonable to  expect  her
    to live in India permanently, given that she clearly comes from a large
    and close family who give her a great deal of support, and without that
    support it is very likely that she would struggle.

24. Ms [S] receives a number of benefits because of her  underlying  health
    condition and they are evidenced in the bank statements which have been
    produced.  She would therefore not be required to meet the income level
    normally needed in entry clearance cases for  spouses  because  she  is
    exempt from those financial provisions.  It can be seen from  the  bank
    statements that on the whole the couple managed to  live  within  their
    means and they live independently in accommodation of  their  own.   On
    the face of it therefore there ought to be no delay and no obstacle  to
    the appellant obtaining entry clearance to join her here.

25. I conclude that it is proportionate to expect him to do that.  His wife
    can either remain in the UK with her family or accompany him there  for
    the period it takes for him to make the application.   His  immigration
    history is poor.  There is a strong public interest in his removal  and
    in my judgement that public interest outweighs the interest of his wife
    in this case.

Notice of Decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows:-

    The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 4 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
