
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/08367/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2017                    |On 12 July 2017                      |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               SHAGUFTA JABEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G Brown for Arshed & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant , a national of Pakistan, was born on  26  September  1979.
   The Appellant appealed against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
   dated 2 October  2015  to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  following  an
   application for leave to  remain  based  on  long  residence.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Frankish  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  Appellant  now
   appeals with permission to this Tribunal.
3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom on  5 July 2005 as a student. This  was  extended  after  various
   rejections to 4 September  2014.  On  8  December  2010  she  obtained  a
   certificate of approval for marriage. On 29 April  2014  her  application
   for a residence card was refused. On 14  May  2015  her  application  for
   leave based on family and private life was withdrawn. On 17 June 2015 she
   made an application based on long residence which is the subject of  this
   appeal .
4. The Respondent refused  the  application  because  in  relation  to  long
   residence the continuity of residence for the required period  could  not
   be  established.  In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE  it  could  not  be
   established that there were very significant obstacles to the  Appellants
   reintegration back into life in Pakistan. No basis for a grant  of  leave
   outside the Rules was found. .
5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  Appellant  could  not  meet
   the requirements of long  residence.  In  considering  the  private  life
   requirements it was common ground before me that the Judge  at  paragraph
   12 set out a previous version of the Rule  in  issue  which  referred  at
   subsection (vi) to the  applicant  having  'no  ties  (including  social,
   cultural or family) with the country to which he  would  have  to  go  if
   required' summarising that he the Appellant relied upon 'a complete  loss
   of ties in Pakistan' (paragraph 13)
6. Mr Brown argued that while the Judge was required to approach  the  human
   rights appeal through the prism of the Rules  the  Judge  had  failed  to
   apply the correct version of the private life requirements  and  in  this
   case it could have made a difference.  The  Judge  failed  to  adequately
   consider that her case was that she would, given her former marriage,  be
   ostracised by her family and the Judge  failed  to  consider  that  these
   cultural and family issues would amount  to  very  significant  obstacles
   both for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE and when considering the  appeal
   by reference to Article 8 generally. He noted that  there  was  no  wider
   consideration of Article 8 in the decision at all and  the  private  life
   findings were inadequate.
7. Mr Bates conceded that there was a material error  of  law  in  that  the
   Judges consideration of the private life was based on the  wrong  version
   of the Rules.
Error of Law

8. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

9. While this was not an appeal against a refusal of leave under  the  Rules
   the Judge nevertheless was required to approach  the  assessment  of  the
   human rights appeal in his proportionality assessment through  the  prism
   of the Rules. In this case it was accepted  that  he  applied  the  wrong
   version of the Rules and that had he considered the social  and  cultural
   issues that it was claimed had  arisen  out  of  the  Appellant  marrying
   outside of the cultural norms  this  may  have  been  found  to  be  very
   significant obstacles to her reintegration even if it was not a basis for
   arguing that she had no ties. I also note that there was no consideration
   of any of the  factors  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the Judge was required to take  into
   account in his assessment of the issue of proportionality.  The  findings
   made in respect of the Appellants  private  life  appeal  were  therefore
   inadequate.

10. I am satisfied therefore that Mr Bates was correct to concede  that  the
   Judges approach to this human rights appeal was in error.  This  error  I
   consider to be material since had the Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise
   the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct
   test to apply.

11. I therefore set aside the Judges decision.

12. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
       (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
       First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
       party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal;
       or

       (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
       necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
       such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
       is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the Judges  findings  in
   relation to the Appellants private life and what she  faced  in  Pakistan
   were wholly inadequate. In this case none of the findings of fact are  to
   stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

14. I set aside the decision and remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal sitting at Manchester to be heard on a date to be  fixed  before
   me.

Signed                                                              Date
12.7.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

