
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08572/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MRS JUSTICE LANG
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    P B E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant or his family members. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  This  direction  has  been
    made in order to protect the Appellant's children  from  serious  harm,
    having regard  to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the  principle  of
    proportionality.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G. Mellon, Counsel, instructed by David Benson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant ("the SSHD") appeals against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FTT"), promulgated  on  24  September  2018,  in  which
    Designated FTT Judge Shaerf allowed the appeal by the Respondent (Mr E)
    under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    ("NIAA 2002") against the SSHD's decision to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim.

 2. UT Judge Kekic granted the SSHD permission to appeal on 2 January 2019.



 3. Mr E is a national of Nigeria, with indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    UK.  He was convicted of  acquiring  criminal  property  under  section
    329(1) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, and sentenced to a total of 6
    years imprisonment.  By virtue of section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007 ("UKBA 2007"), the SSHD was obliged to make  a  deportation  order
    against him. Following this, the Respondent raised a human rights claim
    by way of submissions dated 8 February 2017.  This  claim  led  to  the
    appealable decision. The FTT allowed his  subsequent  appeal  on  human
    rights  grounds,  concluding   that   there   were   "very   compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2",
    why the public interest did not require  his  deportation,  within  the
    meaning of section 117C(6) of the NIAA 2002.

 4. The SSHD appealed on the grounds that his family circumstances did  not
    reach the high threshold of "very compelling circumstances" in  section
    117C(6) of the NIAA 2002, and the FTT had  not  correctly  applied  the
    statutory test to the facts of the case.  It was also argued  that  the
    FFT had placed too much weight on the rehabilitation of Mr E.

    Facts

 5. Mr E was born in Nigeria on 26 June 1958 and is now aged  60.   He  has
    been resident in the UK for 28 years.

 6. Mr E entered the UK on a business visa on 12 September 1990.  Following
    his marriage to a British citizen, Y E, in early 1991, he  was  granted
    an extension of stay until 4 June 1992. On  27  October  1992,  he  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain.

 7. His first marriage did not last, and he  subsequently  entered  into  a
    long-term relationship with A A.  They had a child, P, in  1994.   That
    relationship ended in about 1998, and Mr E has little contact with  his
    son P, who is now an adult.

 8. In 2001 Mr E met T O-E, and they married in 2003.  Mrs E  (as  she  was
    known after the marriage) was born in Nigeria  on  27  September  1968.
    She became a British citizen in 2010.

 9. Mrs E has a daughter from a previous relationship called C B,  who  was
    born in May 1996. She is a British citizen.

10. Mr and Mrs E have three children. Their older daughter, E, was born  in
    October 2002, and is now aged 16.  Their son, U, was born  in  November
    2003, and is now aged 15.  Their younger daughter, O, was born in  July
    2006, and is now aged 12.  All three children are British citizens, and
    are at school in the UK.

11. On 20 November 1996, Mr E was convicted  of  two  offences  of  driving
    whilst disqualified and three offences of driving without insurance. He
    was sentenced to 28 days imprisonment,  fined,  and  disqualified  from
    driving for 9 months.  His licence was endorsed.

12. On 20 June 2003, Mr E was convicted of driving whilst disqualified  and
    driving without insurance. He was sentenced to  14  days  imprisonment,
    fined, and his licence was endorsed with penalty points.

13. On 18 June 2004, Mr  E  was  convicted  of  going  equipped  to  cheat,
    contrary to section 25  of  the  Theft  Act  1968.   He  was  found  in
    possession of two metal boxes with fake 100 US dollar  bills.   He  was
    sentenced to 15 months imprisonment.  On  the  same  occasion,  he  was
    convicted  of  possession  of  cocaine,  and  sentenced  to   1   day's
    imprisonment.

14. On 8 January 2013, Mr E was convicted after a trial at Southwark  Crown
    Court on 19 counts of acquiring criminal property, contrary to  section
    329(1) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002.  He was sentenced to 6  years
    imprisonment on each count, to run concurrently.  The offences involved
    money-laundering about �778,000 which were the proceeds of  an  advance
    fee fraud, committed by others.

15. On 4 October 2016, Mr E completed the custodial element of his sentence
    and he was detained under immigration powers.  Bail was granted  on  28
    October 2016. Following a judicial review challenge, he was granted  an
    in-country right of appeal.

    The decision to deport

16. On 20 February 2013, the  SSHD  notified  Mr  E  of  his  liability  to
    deportation under section 32 UKBA 2007.  Mr E made representations that
    deportation would be in  breach  of  article  8  ECHR  because  of  the
    interference with his family and private life, and that of his wife and
    children.

17. On 10 March 2015, the SSHD made a decision to deport,  concluding  that
    the public interest in deporting him outweighed his family and  private
    life rights.

    Legal framework

    (1) Automatic deportation under the UKBA 2007

18. Under section 32(5) UKBA 2007, the SSHD must automatically deport, as a
    "foreign criminal", a person who is not a  British  citizen,  following
    conviction for a criminal offence for which he has been sentenced to 12
    months imprisonment or more, unless he falls within the  exceptions  in
    section 33.

19. By section 33(2)(a), automatic deportation does not apply where removal
    under a deportation order would breach a person's Convention rights.

20. Section 32(4) UKBA 2007 provides  that,  for  the  purpose  of  section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971,  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
    criminal is conducive to the public good.  By  section  33(7),  section
    32(4) continues  to  apply,  despite  the  application  of  section  33
    exceptions.

    (2) Article 8 ECHR

21. By virtue of section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998, it is  unlawful
    for a public authority to act in a way which  is  incompatible  with  a
    Convention right.

22. Mr E claimed that his removal would be  in  breach  of  the  "right  to
    respect for private and family life" under article 8(1)  ECHR.  Article
    8(2) provides:

         "There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
         exercise of this right except such as in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
         country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

    (3) Best interests of children

23. By virtue of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009, in making decisions on deportation, the SSHD must have regard to
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in
    the UK.

24. The House of Lords, in ZH (Tanzania) v Home Secretary [2011] 2 AC 166,
    held that, in the application of article 8(2), the children's best
    interests should be treated as "a primary consideration", to give
    effect to article 3.1 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
    Nationality and the rights of citizenship are of particular importance
    in assessing the best interests of any child.  Thus, the decision-maker
    must ask whether it is reasonable to expect the child to live in
    another country, and to be deprived of the opportunity to exercise the
    rights of a British citizen.  However, even if it is found to be in the
    best interests of the child to remain in the UK, that factor can be
    outweighed by the strength of "countervailing considerations" in favour
    of removal (per Lady Hale at [29] - [33]).

25. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74,
    Lord Hodge, delivering the judgment of the Court, summarised the
    principles to be applied, at [10]:

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

    (4) Sections 117A - D NIAA 2002

26. Sections 117A-D NIAA 2002 have set out public interest considerations
    which a court or tribunal must take into account in an appeal based
    upon article 8:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

             "Article 8" means Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights;

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of seven years or more;

             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                  meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see  section  33(2A)
                  of that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender.

         (3)  ...

         (4)  ...

         (5)  ..."

    (5) Immigration Rules

27. The considerations set out in section 117C NIAA 2002 are reflected in
    the Immigration Rules ("IR") which provide, so far as is material:

         "Deportation and Article 8


         A398.    These rules apply where:

              (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
              deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United   Kingdom's
              obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

              (b) ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they  have
              been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they  have
              been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years
              but at least 12 months; or

              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest  because,  in  the
              view of the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused
              serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who  shows  a
              particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

              (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
              relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
              the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                     (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                     in the country to which the person is to be  deported;
                     and

                     (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                     in the UK without the person who is to be deported; or



              (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
              a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen  or
              settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
              of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
              integration into the country to which it is  proposed  he  is
              deported."

    (6) Application of the legislation and the Immigration Rules

28. The approach which tribunals should adopt was  helpfully  described  by
    Hickinbottom LJ giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v KE (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA  Civ  1382,
    at [30] to [36]:

         "30. The statutory provisions in sections 117A-117D are law (cf the
         Immigration Rules: see Ali at [17]). However, both section 117C and
         the relevant Immigration Rules set out policy, in  the  sense  that
         they provide a general assessment of the  proportionality  exercise
         that has to be performed under article 8(2) where there is a public
         interest in deporting a foreign criminal but countervailing article
         8 factors. The force of the  assessment  in  section  117C  is,  of
         course, the greater  because  it  directly  reflects  the  will  of
         Parliament. The statutory provisions thus provide  a  "particularly
         strong statement of public policy" (NA (Pakistan)  at  [22]),  such
         that "great weight" should generally be given to it  and  cases  in
         which that public interest will be  outweighed,  other  than  those
         specified in the statutory provisions and  Rules  themselves,  "are
         likely to be a  very  small  minority  (particular  in  non-settled
         cases)" (Ali at [38]), i.e. will be rare (NA (Pakistan) at [33]).

         31.   But  the  required,  heavily  structured  analysis  does  not
         eradicate all judgment on the part of the  decision-maker  and,  in
         its turn, the court or tribunal on any challenge to that  decision-
         maker's decision. It is well-established, and indeed  self-evident,
         that relative human rights (such as the right to respect for family
         and private life under article 8) can only ultimately be considered
         on the facts  of  the  particular  case.  The  structured  approach
         towards  the  article  8(2)  proportionality   balancing   exercise
         required by the  2002  Act  and  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not
         determine the outcome of the assessment in an individual case.

         32.  Whether an exception in  paragraph  399  or  399A  applies  is
         dependent upon questions  that  require  case-specific  evaluation,
         such as whether in  all  of  the  circumstances  it  would  not  be
         reasonable for a child to leave the United Kingdom  or  whether  in
         all of the circumstances  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
         family life outside the United Kingdom.

         33.  More importantly for the purposes of  this  appeal,  where  an
         offender has been sentenced to at least four  years'  imprisonment,
         or otherwise falls outside the paragraph 399 and  399A  exceptions,
         the decision-maker, court or tribunal entrusted with the task  must
         still consider  and  assess  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
         circumstances" that justify a departure from the general rule  that
         such offenders should be deported  in  the  public  interest.  That
         requires the decision-maker to take into  account,  not  only  that
         general assessment (and give it the weight appropriate to  such  an
         assessment  made  by  Parliament),   but   also   the   facts   and
         circumstances of the particular case which are not - indeed, cannot
         - be taken into account in any general assessment.  As  Lord  Reed,
         giving the majority judgment, said in Ali:

             "49. ... It is necessary to feed into the analysis  the  facts
             of the particular case and the criteria which are  appropriate
             to the context, and, where a court is reviewing  the  decision
             of another authority, to give such weight to the  judgment  of
             that authority as may be appropriate. In  that  way,  relevant
             differences between, for example, cases where lawfully settled
             migrants are facing deportation or expulsion, and cases  where
             an alien is seeking admission to a host country, can be  taken
             into account.

             50.  In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its  task
             on the basis of the facts as  it  finds  them  to  be  on  the
             evidence before it, and the law as established by statute  and
             case law. Ultimately, it has to decide whether deportation  is
             proportionate in the particular case before it, balancing  the
             strength of the public interest  in  the  deportation  of  the
             offender against the impact on private  and  family  life.  In
             doing so, it should give appropriate  weight  to  Parliament's
             and the Secretary of State's assessments of  the  strength  of
             the general public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
             offenders..., and also consider all factors  relevant  to  the
             specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal
             will generally be whether, giving due weight to  the  strength
             of the public interest on deportation of the offender  in  the
             case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to
             outweigh it. In general, only a claim  which  is  very  strong
             indeed - very compelling, as it was put in  [MF  (Nigeria)]  -
             will succeed."

         See also [53] to similar effect.

         34.  Therefore, as Lord Reed emphasises, whatever  the  seriousness
         of the offences or length of sentence, the ultimate question is the
         same - would deportation be in  breach  of  article  8  -  but  the
         sentence imposed affects the approach to the exercise of  assessing
         proportionality for article 8(2) purposes. If it is at  least  four
         years'  imprisonment,   any   decision-maker   must   attach   very
         considerable  weight  to  the  general  assessment  of  the  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals, now  directly  adopted  by
         Parliament in statute, under which such  a  sentence  represents  a
         level of offending in respect of which the public  interest  almost
         always outweighs countervailing considerations of private or family
         life, only being outweighed by  countervailing  factors  which  are
         very compelling (see Ali at [46]). Where there is a challenge to  a
         decision  involving  the  article  8(2)  balancing  exercise  by  a
         decision-maker on behalf of the Secretary of State in an individual
         case, as I have already described, the court or tribunal must  give
         that general assessment substantial weight, because it is  endorsed
         by Parliament; and it must also take into account  -  but  no  more
         than take into account - the application of that general assessment
         to the facts of the specific case by  the  original  decision-maker
         (OH (Serbia)  at  [15(d)]).  As  independent  judicial  bodies,  on
         hearing a challenge to an executive decision in an individual case,
         it is the duty of the court or tribunal to make its own findings of
         the relevant  facts  and  then  make  its  own  assessment  of  the
         proportionality of the proposed deportation (Ali at [46]).

         35.  Since Ali, the 2014  Act  has  intervened,  encapsulating  the
         relevant  Government  policy  in   statute   rather   than   merely
         Immigration Rules. However, in my view, the principles and approach
         expounded by Lord Reed still apply; although,  in  considering  the
         appropriate weight to be given the assessment of  the  strength  of
         the  general  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   foreign
         offenders, any decision-maker, court  or  tribunal  conducting  the
         article 8(2) exercise  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  that  is  now
         incorporated into statute, and so, even more starkly, reflects  the
         will of Parliament."

29. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662, the Court of Appeal gave guidance on the  application  of
    section 117A(6), "where the public interest requires deportation unless
    there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2".   Jackson LJ, giving the judgment of the  Court
    said:

         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase  used  in  section
         117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have  held  is
         to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean  that  a  foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from  seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope  of  the  circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As  we  have  indicated  above,  a  foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he  would  need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the  2014  rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances  described  in  those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which  made  his  claim  based  on
         Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
         circumstances in his own case which could be said to correspond  to
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and  2,  but  where  he
         could only just succeed in  such  an  argument,  it  would  not  be
         possible to describe his situation  as  involving  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2. One might describe that as a bare case of the kind described  in
         Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could point to  factors
         identified in  the  descriptions  of  Exceptions  1  and  2  of  an
         especially compelling kind in support of an Article 8 claim,  going
         well beyond what would be necessary to make out a bare case of  the
         kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
         constitute "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by themselves or in
         conjunction with other factors relevant to application  of  Article
         8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
         possibility would lead to violation of Article  8  in  some  cases,
         which plainly was not Parliament's intention. ...

         ...

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
         inexorably follows from the statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in
         which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the
         high public interest in deportation will be rare.  The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient.

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
         as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian
         Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it
         is  a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that  offenders  may  be
         separated from their children for many years, contrary to the  best
         interests of those children. The  desirability  of  children  being
         with both parents is a commonplace of  family  life.  That  is  not
         usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high
         public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals.  As  Rafferty  LJ
         observed in Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  CT
         (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

             "Neither the British nationality of the respondent's  children
             nor their likely separation from their father for a long  time
             are  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh  the   public
             interest in his deportation."

         ..."

30. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath (giving  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court)
    analysed the exception, based on the  deportee's  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, in section 117C(5) NIAA 2022 and Paragraph 399(a) IR.
     At [15], he explained that he started from the  presumption  that  the
    provisions were intended to be consistent with the  general  principles
    relating to the "best interests" of children, including  the  principle
    that "a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not
    responsible, such as the conduct of a parent" (see Zoumbas v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74  per  Lord  Hodge  at
    [10]).  He concluded that the exception was self-contained and  so,  in
    deciding whether or not it  applied,  the  decision-maker  should  only
    consider the factors specified, and disregard the degree of seriousness
    of the parental offending and other public interest considerations  (at
    [20]- [23]).

31. Lord Carnwath gave guidance on the meaning of "unduly harsh".  The word
    "unduly" assumed that there was a "due" level of harshness, that was  a
    level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  context.  "Undue"
    implied something going beyond that level; "a degree of harshness going
    beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with  the
    deportation of a parent" (at [23]).

32. Lord Carnwath cited with approval  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MK (Sierra  Leone)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "....'unduly   harsh'   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable, or merely difficult. Rather, it poses  a
         considerably more elevated  threshold.  'Harsh'  in  this  context,
         denotes something  severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of
         pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore, the addition  of  the  adverb
         'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher."

    Conclusions

33. In our judgment, the  FTT  Judge  correctly  directed  himself  on  the
    relevant legal tests at paragraphs 41 and 42 of his Decision:

         "41. There was no challenge for the Respondent to  the  claim  that
         the Appellant meets the criteria of s.117C Exception  2  and  I  am
         satisfied on the  evidence  that  he  does  meet  the  Exception  2
         requirements of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         qualifying partner, his wife and their three qualifying children.

         42.  I have to consider the best interests of the Appellant's minor
         children and I do so in the knowledge that they  and  their  mother
         are British citizens and there is no intention  to  remove  any  of
         them.  I have to consider their interests in relation to the impact
         on them of the deportation of the Appellant, noting that  the  best
         interests of the children are a priority but not paramount.  I have
         kept in mind that the Appellant was  sentence  to  a  term  of  six
         years'  imprisonment  so  that  he  falls  outside  the  scope   of
         paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  to
         succeed he must show that there are very  compelling  circumstances
         and that the  consideration  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
         circumstances"  matters  relevant  to  an  assessment  whether  the
         Appellant's case falls within Exception 2 may also be relevant: see
         para.58 of NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ.  662.   Further  I
         remind myself that because the Appellant has been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2: s.117C(6)."

34. Mr Wilding rightly conceded that paragraph 41 and 42 did  not  disclose
    any error of law, but contended that the Judge failed  to  apply  these
    principles when reaching his conclusions. He relied  in  particular  on
    the Judge's  failure  to  include  the  words  "over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2" in his final paragraph which reads:

         "53. I remind myself  that  the  deportation  of  foreign  national
         offenders is in the public interest and the high threshold of  very
         compelling  circumstances  required  to  resist  it.   I  find  the
         circumstances of the Appellant's family, the strength of the family
         unit including with his wife's  eldest  child  and  especially  the
         relationship of the Appellant with his middle child who is commonly
         considered by the experts the school and the parents to be at  risk
         amount  to  very  compelling  circumstances  for  the  purposes  of
         s.117C."

35. In our judgment, the FTT Judge was not required to repeat the words  of
    section 117A(6) in full at paragraph 53, having already set them out at
    paragraph 42.  We consider  that  his  reference  to  "very  compelling
    circumstances for the purposes of s.117C" (emphasis added) demonstrated
    that he had well in mind the terms of section 117C, when  applying  the
    test of "very compelling circumstances", including the requirement that
    the compelling circumstances should be "over and above those  described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2".

36. Mr Wilding criticised the  FTT  Judge  for  failing  to  state  whether
    Exception 2 was met in this case. He acknowledged that the Judge stated
    at paragraph 41 that Mr E met the Exception 2 requirements of a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  his  wife  and
    their three qualifying children.  However, he did not  expressly  state
    that the effect of the deportation would be "unduly harsh" on them, nor
    the reasons why.

37. There were two aspects to Mr  Wilding's  submission.   First,  the  FTT
    Judge was required to set out his reasons for finding that  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh", by reference to the criteria and the evidence,
    in addition to setting out his reasons  for  finding  that  there  were
    "very  compelling  circumstances".   Second,  in  the  absence  of  any
    findings on whether the deportation would be "unduly harsh",  it  could
    be inferred that the FTT Judge failed to apply his mind to this part of
    the test, before he went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances".

38. We have carefully considered the guidance given in Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v Chege (section 117D - Article 8  -  approach)
    [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC).  At [33], UT Judge Coker said:

         "It follows that the correct approach, where  an  appeal  on  human
         rights grounds has been brought in seeking to  resist  deportation,
         is to consider:

          a. is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined ...

          b. if so, does he fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

          c. if not are there very compelling circumstances over and  above
             those falling within 399 and 399A relied upon ..."

39. In our view, UT Judge Coker was giving guidance on the order  in  which
    the relevant provisions should be considered by the FTT Judge.  She was
    not deciding that an FTT Judge had to set out full written reasons  for
    his conclusions at each stage. Moreover, her guidance was based on  the
    assumption that "the purpose of 398 is to recognise circumstances  that
    are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
    deportation but do not  fall  within  399  and  399"  (at  [25]).   So,
    applying the stages at [33], the factors under (b) would  not  also  be
    considered under (c).

40. That aspect of the reasoning in Chege was not followed by the Court  of
    Appeal in NA where Jackson LJ  held  that  factors  which  fell  within
    Exceptions  1  and  2  of  section  117C(6)  (which  are  reflected  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A IR) could, in principle, also amount  to  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2" (at [30], cited above at paragraph 29 of our judgment).

41. Jackson LJ went on to say, at [37]:

         "In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible first
         to  see  whether  his  case  involves  circumstances  of  the  kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because the circumstances  so
         described set out particularly  significant  factors  bearing  upon
         respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect for family  life
         (Exception 2) and because that may provide a helpful basis on which
         an assessment can  be  made  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2" as is required under section 117C(6). It will then be  necessary
         to look to see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions
         1 and 2 are of such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
         conjunction with any other relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the
         circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy  the
         test in section 117C(6)."

42. On our reading of this passage in NA, Jackson LJ was giving guidance on
    the approach which would often be  "sensible"  and  "helpful"  for  FTT
    Judges to adopt when deciding appeals under these provisions.   He  was
    not deciding that an FTT Judge had to set out full written reasons  for
    his conclusions on Exceptions 1 and 2, in addition  to  giving  reasons
    for his conclusion that there were "very compelling circumstances".

43. In this appeal, in light of the findings which the FTT Judge  made,  we
    have no doubt that he considered the deportation to be "unduly  harsh",
    because of the impact on Mr E's family, which he set out fully. On  our
    reading of the decision, the FTT Judge  considered  that  the  evidence
    relied upon by Mr E was very strong. Indeed, the evidence of the impact
    on Mr E's family persuaded the Judge that the higher threshold of "very
    compelling circumstances" in section  117A(6),  displacing  the  public
    interest in deportation, was also met in this case.  We do not consider
    it at all likely that this experienced Judge, who correctly set out the
    legal test earlier in his decision, later forgot to apply it and failed
    to consider whether the "very compelling circumstances" were "over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2".

44. Although we accept that it would have been best practice for the  Judge
    to record expressly that the impact on  the  family  would  be  "unduly
    harsh", to demonstrate that the requirements  of  section  117(6)  NIIA
    2002 had been met, we do  not  consider  that  a  departure  from  good
    practice in the drafting of a decision amounts to an error of law which
    would justify the quashing of an otherwise lawful decision.

45. The SSHD submitted, in its grounds of appeal, that the circumstances of
    this case did not  meet  the  threshold  of  "unduly  harsh"  or  "very
    compelling circumstances", so as to outweigh the strong public interest
    in deportation.  The SSHD relied upon the judgment of Jackson LJ in  NA
    at [33] and [34], set out in our judgment above.

46. At the FTT hearing and at the hearing  before  us,  the  SSHD  did  not
    submit that Mrs E  and  the  children  could  or  should  re-locate  to
    Nigeria.  Although Mrs E was born in Nigeria, she is a British citizen.
     The children have lived in the UK all their lives, and have never even
    visited Nigeria.

47. The FTT Judge accepted the evidence of the experts, which he summarised
    at paragraphs 29, 31, 32 and 34 of his Decision:

         "29. Mr Halim referred to the expert  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
         Dhumad. The Appellant's wife had told him she had  been  trafficked
         into the United Kingdom in 1995 and  had  been  granted  asylum  in
         1999: see para.7.2 of his original  report.  He  had  concluded  at
         para.14.1  she  suffered  from  severe  depression  which  if   the
         Appellant was deported would likely deteriorate with "a devastating
         impact on  the  whole  family".  Dr  Dhumad  also  interviewed  the
         Appellant's three minor  children.  He  considered  they  were  all
         suffering  from  emotional  and  behavioural  difficulties  due  to
         separation from their father and was particularly  concerned  about
         one of them who appeared very depressed and  feeling  suicidal  and
         had effectively been grieving the loss  of  his  father  since  the
         Appellant had been detained and was  unable  to  face  any  further
         separation. He considered the risk of  suicide  by  this  child  as
         "extremely high, very likely to be critical in  the  case  of  (the
         Appellant's) removal": see para.14.1. In  the  addendum  report  Dr
         Dhumad confirms his diagnosis, risk assessment and opinion  in  the
         original  report  to  be  applicable  whether  the  Appellant   was
         temporarily or permanently removed: see para.2 of the addendum.

         ...

         31.  I turn to the social worker's report  of  Ms  Smart.  She  has
         dealt with the Appellant's middle child considered by Dr Dhumad  to
         be a suicide  risk  at  para.2.1  confirming  the  articulation  of
         suicidal ideation and that uncertainty whether the  Appellant  will
         be deported has affected the child's performance,  self-esteem  and
         confidence and the child's concern for his sibling who suffers from
         asthma in the event that the child might have a fatal panic attack.
         The eldest child was  found  to  be  genuinely  worried  about  the
         Appellant and the risk of his deportation and had struggled to cope
         with the Appellant's absence during his imprisonment. The  youngest
         child experienced similar concerns and fears.  Ms  Smart  describes
         the shock of the Appellant's imprisonment on his wife and that  she
         had been left to raise their three children as a single parent. The
         wife considered she had been  unable  to  meet  the  needs  of  the
         children and to give them adequate stability with  the  consequence
         that she recognised that each of  them  had  developed  behavioural
         problems.

         32.  She was particularly concerned about the middle child who  had
         expressed  suicidal  thoughts  as  well  as  the  difficulties  the
         Appellant would meet on return to Nigeria.  Ms  Smart  at  para.3.3
         noted  that  each  of  the  three  children   demonstrated   "their
         admiration for their father and hold him in high regard ...   (and)
         ... they are aware of the current pressures placed on their  mother
         being the sole provider". She went  on  at  para.3.4  to  note  the
         Appellant "represents a significant relationship in their lives and
         any permanent separation will cause  not  only  a  great  loss  but
         highly likely to significantly impact upon their development".  She
         also noticed that when all the family  had  been  together  in  her
         presence the Appellant had shown his authority "and encouraged them
         to be open and honest during interview.... there was a strong sense
         of respect demonstrated between the family  members".  At  para.3.5
         she noted "the family interactive style was balanced in that it was
         sensitive and facilitative. The children were  respectful  of  'the
         Appellant' ... and it was evident that (he) has influence over  the
         way his children behave".  Ms  Smart  concluded  at  para.3.6  "the
         parents share the power in the family and  support  each  other  in
         their decision-making and share in the  appropriate  discipline  of
         the children". She also concluded they were  "an  extremely  strong
         family unit".

         ...

         34.  The witnesses had spoken with one voice about  the  impact  of
         the separation which had been and would continue to  be  caused  in
         the removal of the Appellant. the evidence was that the three minor
         children were all anxious for each other. Ms Smart had concluded in
         para.9.1 that the impact of permanent separation was likely  to  be
         severe and that his  wife  would  be  unlikely  to  be  emotionally
         available to her vulnerable children which would further impact  on
         their emotional well-being and development as well as on his  wife.
         At para.11.2 she had re-iterated her finding of the strong bond the
         children share with their father."

48. Letters from the school confirmed that Mr E's son, U, aged 15, was in a
    downward trajectory of aggressive and disruptive behaviour,  which  had
    resulted in a series of temporary exclusions  and  he  was  now  facing
    permanent exclusion after repeated assaults on staff.

49. A letter from the son's GP, dated 6 July 2018, described  his  symptoms
    of mental illness and suicidal ideation which  led  to  a  referral  to
    specialist mental health care:

         "I have been seeing this child since November last  year.  When  he
         came to see us on  21st  November  2017  the  child  complained  of
         insomnia, difficulty with  sleeping  and  also  worries  about  his
         father being deported to Nigeria...Due  to  the  stress  the  child
         complained that he has been having migraine headaches and this  has
         been getting worse with stress and worry. I saw the  child  against
         on the 30th May 2018 and then the child complained of his emotional
         difficulties. He complained that he feels "heavy  hearted"  and  he
         feels that if his father is deported it will affect his studies. He
         also further complained that he is unable to  concentrate  and  his
         performance in school has dropped. He  also  says  he  has  a  poor
         appetite and his hands have been shaking. He said he only manages 3
         hours of sleep now and very  often  thinks  of  self-harm  and  has
         suicidal thoughts. He says it is not worth living if his father  is
         deported to Nigeria.

         Due to the seriousness of his symptoms and presentation I  referred
         him to the Child & Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) ..."

50. The FTT Judge heard evidence from  Mr  and  Mrs  E  on  the  impact  of
    separation on the family and found them to  be  credible  and  reliable
    witnesses.

51. We consider that the FTT  Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    unusually severe  impact  of  deportation  on  Mr  E's  son  -  further
    deterioration in his poor mental condition with a real  risk  of  self-
    harm and suicide - did amount to very compelling  circumstances  within
    the meaning of section 117C(6) NIAA 2002, which outweighed  the  public
    interest in deportation. This was a factor of such gravity that it went
    far beyond the usual consequences of a deportation and  the  consequent
    separation of parent and child.  This conclusion  necessarily  involved
    an exercise of judgment on the part of this experienced Judge, who  had
    the benefit of hearing the witnesses  and  assessing  the  evidence  in
    detail.   In  reality,  the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  expressed   a
    disagreement with the FTT Judge's exercise of judgment. We bear in mind
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225, per McFarlane LJ at [28]  and
    [30]:

         "28. ... an appellate court must afford due deference  and  respect
         to the evaluation of an expert tribunal charged with  administering
         a complex area of law in challenging  circumstances  (per  Baroness
         Hale in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2008] 1 AC 678 at paragraph 30) ..."

         "30. Whilst  another  specialist  tribunal  might  have  reached  a
         contrary conclusion, it is, in my view, not possible to  hold  that
         the FTT in the present case  arrived  at  a  conclusion  which  was
         insupportable on the evidence or otherwise perverse ..."

    We do not consider that the Judge's conclusion on the  very  compelling
    circumstances in this case was either unsupportable on the evidence  or
    otherwise perverse.

52. Finally, Mr Wilding submitted that the FTT Judge erred in giving  undue
    weight to Mr E's rehabilitation when carrying  out  the  balance  sheet
    approach recommended in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 16.  He referred to passages in the judgment  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA  Civ
    557, indicating that rehabilitation would rarely establish a compelling
    reason to outweigh the public interest in deportation and that the risk
    of re-offending was a facet of the public interest, but  not  the  most
    important aspect (per Newey LJ at [17], [18]).

53. In our judgment, the FTT Judge was entitled to take  into  account  the
    rehabilitation of Mr E, as it was relevant to the risk of re-offending,
    and thus the public interest.  It was a notable feature of  this  case.
    We do not accept that, in consequence, he  failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to other facets of  the  public  interest,  in  particular,  the
    public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  who  have
    committed serious offences. The FTT Judge referred to that principle in
    paragraphs 25, 27 and 42.  He applied that principle to  the  facts  of
    this case at paragraphs 47, 48, 53 and 54.   He was well aware  of  the
    weighty public interest in deportation, and he took it into account.

54. We consider that the FTT  Judge  fairly  and  thoroughly  assessed  the
    evidence, and considered the  public  interest  factors  in  favour  of
    deportation, as well as those factors relied upon by Mr E,  in  support
    of his human rights claim in respect of his family life, and the family
    lives of his wife and children.

55. In conclusion, this decision does not disclose any error of law.

Notice of Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors  of
         law and it shall therefore stand.

      2. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      3. We  make  an  anonymity  direction  under  rule  14  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal's Procedure Rules 2008.


MRS JUSTICE LANG
     Date: 8 March 2019

