
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08475/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 29 January 2019           |


                                   Before:

               Lord Beckett sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Rohan Roger Scott                                 |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy, of Counsel, instructed by Powell
                    Spencer & Partners Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Iqbal  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated 29 March  2018  following  a  hearing  on  12
    February 2018, allowed the appeal of Mr Rohan  Roger  Scott  (hereafter
    the "claimant"), a national of Jamaica born on  22  November  1996,  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8) against an automatic deportation order
    made on 1 December 2016 under the provisions section 32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 2. Deportation proceedings were commenced against the  claimant  following
    his conviction on 16 September 2016 at Harrow Crown Court of an offence
    of possession with intent to supply a class A controlled drug,  namely,
    cocaine, for which he received on 23 September 2016 a  sentence  of  21
    months' imprisonment.

 3. The claimant first arrived in the United Kingdom on  1  December  2002,
    aged 6 years. He was granted leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor  for  six
    months, until 1 June 2003. He applied, in-time, for indefinite leave to
    remain. On 31 October 2003, he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. It was not in dispute before the judge that the claimant was a "foreign
    criminal" who fell within para 398 (b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    reason of the fact that he had received a sentence of  imprisonment  of
    21 months, this being a sentence of at least 12 months  and  less  then
    four years.

 5. The judge considered para 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Para  399A
    provides:

        399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
        if -


             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
                  of his life; and


             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.


 6. It was accepted before the judge on the  Secretary  of  State's  behalf
    that the claimant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
    most of his life. However, the Secretary of  State  disputed  that  the
    claimant satisfied the requirements of para 399A(b) and (c).

 7. The judge found that the claimant satisfied para 399A(b)  and  (c)  and
    therefore allowed the appeal.

 8. In relation to para 399A(b), the judge considered the evidence at paras
    27-31 of her decision and concluded, at para 32, as follows:

         "I find on balance that the conviction and the offence for which he
         was convicted, does not in all the circumstances, before me detract
         from the fact  that  given  he  has  been  here  since  2003,  with
         indefinite leave  to  remain,  through  the  schooling  system  and
         developed young adult through his formative years, such that he has
         demonstrated complete integration both socially and  culturally  in
         his life in the United Kingdom from the time he has been here."


 9. The grounds do not challenge the judge's finding that the claimant  was
    socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom.  They  only
    challenge her finding  that  there  would  there  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Jamaica.

The judge's decision

10. The judge gave her reasons for her finding that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the claimant's  integration  into  Jamaica  at
    paras 34 to 42 of her decision. At para 34 of her decision, she  quoted
    paras 36-37 of decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon and  Others
    (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT  00013
    (IAC). At para 37 of Treebhawon, the Upper  Tribunal  quoted  from  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 as
    follows:

         "It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a Court  or  Tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day to day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual' s private or family life."


11. The judge also reminded herself of the guidance in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)
    [2015] UKUT 223, at para 46, concerning the other  limb  of  the  test,
    i.e. "very significant obstacles", as follows:

         "The other limb of the test, "very significant obstacles", erects a
         self-evidently elevated threshold, such that  mere  hardship,  mere
         difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or  inconvenience,  even
         where multiplied, will generally be insufficient in  this  context.
         The philosophy and reasoning, with appropriate adjustments, of this
         Tribunal in its exposition of the sister test "unduly harsh" in  MK
         (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 at [46] apply."


12. At para 35, she said that she  had  also  considered  the  Home  Office
    "Criminality guidance" at page 31 which she then quoted.  At  para  36,
    she said that she heard evidence from the claimant and his mother as to
    what his circumstances might be on return to Jamaica.   The judge  then
    set out what  she  considered  to  be  the  relevant  aspects  of  such
    evidence, at paras 36-39, as follows:

         "36.     [The  claimant]  made  clear  that  he  had  no  immediate
             relatives in Jamaica to turn to and although he had a 72-year-
             old grandmother who had a two bedroom house,  she  was  living
             with her daughter who had recently separated from her  husband
             and another cousin and therefore there was no room for him  to
             live there. Further that he was not really in touch  with  any
             family members as it was very difficult  to  keep  in  regular
             communication however, he did know  that  his  mother  was  in
             communication with his grandmother.


         37.      [The claimant] confirmed he had travelled back to Jamaica,
             once in 2007 when he visited with his father's relatives,  but
             since the permanent separation between his mother and  father,
             when he was aged around 15 years old, he had no  real  contact
             with them. When he went for the Easter break with  his  mother
             and siblings in 2015, they stayed with an aunt and because  of
             lack of space  at  night,  his  cousins  would  sleep  at  the
             neighbour's house and [the  claimant]  and  his  siblings  and
             mother would sleep in their room.  His  mother  also  had  one
             sister in the US and one other who lived in Canada.


         38.      [The claimant] had no strong ties to  Jamaica  having  not
             lived there since he was a preschool child.  [The  claimant's]
             distant family in Jamaica would not be in a position  for  him
             to help him make a life for himself in Jamaica  and  certainly
             given the stage at which [the claimant]  had  reached  in  his
             life, he had not developed any skills or  financial  resources
             that could assist his life in Jamaica.


         39.       [The  claimant]  in  evidence  before  me  gave  detailed
             evidence that he intended to pursue a  career  as  a  personal
             trainer and in fact had already developed a  number  of  links
             and training his friends unofficially, until he  was  able  to
             complete such training. It was put to him whether he could  do
             such training and then be employed in this  field  in  Jamaica
             however, [the claimant's] evidence was that it  would  not  be
             easy as such a career was more of a luxury."


13. The judge then set out her assessment  and  findings  on  the  evidence
    before her, at paras 40-42, as follows:

         "40.     I find in the context of [the claimant's] background  when
             looking at the relevant considerations  and  guidance,  he  is
             familiar with the language and the  culture  in  the  Jamaica,
             having visited on two  occasions  for  a  very  short  holiday
             period. However, he first arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
             2002, aged 5 years old and whilst, there  is  some  family  in
             Jamaica, the evidence before me is that he has  no  real  bond
             with either his maternal aunt, who is  going  through  marital
             difficulties or his grandmother who is 72 years old. In  these
             circumstances, I am satisfied on balance  that  he  would  not
             have the requisite support required to integrate  in  life  in
             the Jamaica.


         41.      Although, [the claimant] has now  turned  21,  I  find  on
             balance he has always lived in the remit  of  his  own  family
             unit with his mother and two siblings, save for  his  time  in
             prison. He has not lived an independent life  and  whilst  one
             could expect someone at the age of [the claimant] to fend  for
             themselves, I find that this [claimant] is indeed a vulnerable
             individual having been the victim and certainly a  witness  to
             domestic violence at the  hands  of  his  father  against  his
             mother and himself as confirmed  by  the  report  from  Ealing
             Social Services. I have already noted the probation report and
             the Judge's sentencing remarks are certainly  weighty  factors
             with  reference   to   consideration   of   [the   claimant's]
             circumstances and ability to rehabilitate.


         42.      I have also  kept  in  mind  the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminal is  in  the  public  interest  and  that  the  public
             interest in an individual's removal is not the  same  in  each
             case and  will  vary  depending  on  the  seriousness  of  the
             offence: s.117C (1) and (2). However, on the cumulative  facts
             of [the claimant's] case, as I have  accepted  above,  I  find
             that on balance that he would face very significant  obstacles
             on return back to  Jamaica  and  given  that  the  test  under
             Exception 1, of the  Immigration  Act  2014  Part  5A  Section
             117C(4) is mirrored in  the  immigration  rules,  I  find  the
             public interest does  not  require  the  deportation  of  [the
             claimant]."


14. It is therefore plain that the judge found the evidence of the claimant
    and his mother credible.

The Secretary of State's case

15. Mr Clarke did not pursue paras 5-8 of the grounds. These relate to  the
    judge's finding that the claimant presented a low risk on return;  that
    the judge had failed to take into account the  various  facets  of  the
    public interest pursuant to the Court of Appeal's judgments at para  15
    of OH (Seria) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694 and para 20 of  Danso  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 596.

16. In our view, Mr Clarke rightly did not pursue paras 5-8 of the grounds,
    in view of the Supreme Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria)  and  others  v
    SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

17. The remainder of the written grounds may be summarised and follows:

    (i)    The reasons  provided  by  the  judge  were  not  sufficient  to
         outweigh the very compelling public interest in his removal.






    (ii)   The judge failed to consider the threshold explained in  Bossade
         (ss.117A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IACC)
         and the guidance  at  para  (III)  of  the  judicial  head-note  of
         Treebhawon as to the meaning of "very significant hurdles".


    (iii)  The judge noted, at para 32 of her decision, that  the  claimant
         had been schooled in the United Kingdom. According to para 31,  the
         claimant had benefitted from his time in the cadets where the judge
         said that the claimant had learnt how to uphold the law (para  31).
         The claimant is familiar with the  life  and  culture  in  Jamaica,
         having visited Jamaica. He has various family  members  in  Jamaica
         (para 37 of the judge's decision) and there was no suggestion  that
         he was dependent on his family in the United Kingdom.  The  grounds
         therefore  contend  that  there  is  nothing  which  elevates   the
         claimant's situation out of the ordinary such  as  to  satisfy  the
         "very significant hurdles" test.


18. At the hearing, Mr Clarke accepted that the judge had reminded  herself
    of the guidance in Kamara and Treebhawon. However, he  submitted  that,
    given the evidence before the judge at paras 36-39 of her decision, her
    findings at paras 40-42 were  wholly  inconsistent  with  Kamara.  Mere
    inability to obtain a job  is  insufficient  to  satisfy  the  relevant
    threshold. He submitted that the judge overlooked the capacity  of  the
    claimant to become an insider  given  that  he  is  familiar  with  the
    language and culture in  Jamaica  and  that  he  does  have  family  in
    Jamaica. He submitted that, given the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge, her finding that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    the claimant's integration into Jamaica is perverse.

19. Without meaning any disrespect,  we  do  not  summarise  Ms  McCarthy's
    submissions, as we shall incorporate them into our assessment.

Assessment

20. We shall deal first with the written grounds, summarised at our para 17
    above.

21. Point (i), that the reasons provided by the judge were  not  sufficient
    to outweigh the very compelling public interest in his removal,  cannot
    survive the judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  which
    determined, at para 21, that Exception 1 is a self-contained assessment
    which does not involve a further balancing against the public interest.



22. Point (ii) ignores the fact that  the  judge  specifically  quoted  the
    guidance as to the meaning of "very significant obstacles", at para  34
    of her decision (see our para 11 above).  This  is  the  same  guidance
    relied upon in the written grounds.

23. In relation to point (iii), the contention that there was no suggestion
    that the claimant was dependent  on  his  family  ignores  the  judge's
    finding that the claimant has always lived within the remit of his  own
    family unit, save for the time that he was in prison, and that  he  has
    not lived an independent life. The judge considered  the  remainder  of
    the evidence relied upon in the grounds.

24. This is the reason why Mr Clarke put the Secretary of State's case  the
    way he did at the hearing, i.e. that, although  the  judge  did  direct
    herself to the applicable guidance as to meaning of  "very  significant
    obstacles" and "integration", her finding  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the claimant's  integration  into  Jamaica  is
    inconsistent with the guidance or her conclusion was perverse.

25. Before we deal with Mr Clarke's submission  that  the  judge's  finding
    that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  claimant's
    integration into Jamaica was inconsistent with the guidance in the case-
    law or that her conclusion was perverse, we should say that we  are  of
    the view that his submission, that the Court  of  Appeal  had  said  in
    Kamara that mere inability to obtain a job is insufficient, is based on
    a misreading of what the Court  of  Appeal  said  in  Kamara.  In  this
    regard, the Court of  Appeal  said  that  the  term  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration" is not confined to the mere ability to find a
    job or to sustain life while living (see the first sentence  quoted  at
    our para 10 above). This runs contrary to Mr Clarke's submission,  that
    mere inability to obtain a job is insufficient.

26. We do not accept Mr Clarke's submissions that the judge overlooked  the
    capacity of the claimant to become an insider to be able  to  integrate
    in Jamaica. It is plain from the judge's decision  that  that  was  the
    precise issue she considered, the capacity of the  claimant  to  become
    enough of an insider to be able to integrate into Jamaica.

27. It may be that the claimant is the beneficiary of a generous finding by
    the judge. However, given that she specifically reminded herself of the
    meaning of "very  significant  obstacles"  and  "integration",  we  are
    simply unable to conclude that her conclusion is inconsistent with such
    guidance and/or that her conclusion  is  perverse.  In  particular,  we
    should say that she took into account the  fact  that  he  had  visited
    Jamaica twice and found that he was  familiar  with  the  language  and
    culture in Jamaica. However, she also noted the evidence that  the  two
    visits were short holidays. She noted that he had distant relatives  in
    Jamaica but also found that they were in no position to  give  him  the
    requisite support to integrate into life in Jamaica. She also took into
    account that, although the claimant is 21  years  old,  he  has  always
    lived within the remit of his own family save for his  time  in  prison
    and that he had not lived an independent life. She  said  that,  whilst
    one could expect someone of the claimant's age to fend for  themselves,
    she found that that he was a vulnerable individual having been a victim
    of domestic violence and also a witness to domestic violence.

28. In all of the circumstances, we concluded that the Secretary of State's
    case amounts to no more than a disagreement with the judge's  reasoning
    and findings. We are satisfied that the judge did not err in  law.  Her
    decision therefore stands.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Iqbal did not  involve
    the making of any error of law.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill         Date: 24 January 2019
