
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08602/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th May 2021                             |On the 17th June 2021         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                    elizabeth oluwayemisi salami ogunlade
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by remote means.   There
    were technical difficulties at the outset with a strong echo, which was
    resolved by the Appellant  using  a  different  device  to  access  the
    hearing, following  which  everyone  could  see  and  hear  each  other
    clearly.  The file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. In an error of law decision promulgated on 18 January 2021 and  annexed
    to this decision, I found an error of law in the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Beg promulgated on 20 November 2019 in which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights  claim  was
    allowed.  That decision was set aside with preserved findings of fact.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 13 November  1949,  who
    entered the United Kingdom on 23 July 2003 as a visitor with  leave  to
    enter as such for a period of  6  months  to  17  December  2003.   The
    Appellant has remained in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  ever  since,
    only seeking to regularise her status by making an application on human
    rights grounds on 6 June  2018  (which  was  rejected  due  to  payment
    issues)  and  again  on  11  August  2018.   The  application  was  for
    indefinite leave to remain outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of the Appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom, her
    private life here, including with her children and  grandchildren;  and
    compassionate circumstances.

 4. The Respondent refused the application in a  decision  dated  26  April
    2019 on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  any  of  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain
    and in particular that having spent the majority of her life in Nigeria
    there would not be any very significant obstacles to her  reintegration
    there.   Further,  there   were   no   exceptional   or   compassionate
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules;  the  Appellant's  family  and  other  relationships
    established in the United Kingdom were not considered  as  sufficiently
    strong evidence for a grant of leave to remain and there  would  be  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  Appellant  in  refusing  the
    application.

 5. The Appellant's appeal is to be remade on Article 8  grounds  with  the
    following preserved findings of fact:

       - The Appellant lived the majority of her life in Nigeria and  worked
         there.

       - The Appellant is  familiar  with  the  customs  and  traditions  of
         society in Nigeria.

       - There would not be very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
         reintegration in Nigeria, where she would be able to operate  on  a
         day-to-day basis in that society, form and build up  relationships.
         The Appellant does not therefore meet the requirements of paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

       - The Appellant is a widow, her  husband,  brother  and  niece  being
         deceased.

       - The Appellant is in contact with her nephew in the United States of
         America.

       - The Appellant has extended family in Nigeria, but they would not be
         able to accommodate or support her.  The Appellant does not have  a
         family home to return to in Nigeria.

       - The Appellant has established family life  in  the  United  Kingdom
         with her daughter for the purposes of Article  8  of  the  European
         Convention  on  Human  Rights,  but  not  with  her  son   or   any
         grandchildren.  The Appellant has a close-knit family in the United
         Kingdom.

       - The Appellant has looked after  her  grandchildren  in  the  United
         Kingdom, including taking them to school.  The Appellant's children
         would be able to arrange alternative childcare in  the  Appellant's
         absence.

       - The Appellant is financially  supported  and  accommodated  by  her
         daughter in the United Kingdom and would be  financially  supported
         by her family on return to Nigeria.

 6. There was  no  further  evidence  submitted  by  the  Respondent.   The
    Appellant  submitted  a  supplementary  bundle,  including  an  updated
    written statement from her and her daughter, both  of  whom  gave  oral
    evidence at the hearing before me.

 7. In her written statement  signed  and  dated  22  January  2021  (which
    updated her statement before First-tier Tribunal), the Appellant states
    that she has lived in the United Kingdom continuously for over 14 years
    and without recourse to public funds.  The Appellant's son and daughter
    reside permanently in the United Kingdom  with  their  families;  which
    include six grandchildren for whom the Appellant has provided care  and
    support and continues to look after two of them, including taking J  to
    school and specialist support groups.  The  Appellant  lives  with  her
    daughter and her family.  She  states  that  her  contribution  to  her
    family has enabled her children and their partners  to  be  financially
    self-sufficient and not rely on public funds.

 8. The Appellant states that separation from her grandchildren will have a
    detrimental impact on her and their mental, physical,  emotional  state
    and well-being.  The Appellant does not have any family in Nigeria  and
    has lost contact with friends and family there since 2003, such that it
    would be difficult, if not impossible to reintegrate,  endangering  her
    health and life.

 9. The Appellant attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  her  details  and
    adopted her written statement.  In oral evidence she  stated  that  her
    children would not be able to pay for childcare or financially  support
    her on return  to  Nigeria  without  recourse  to  public  funds.   The
    Appellant's son was out of work for part of 2020 but has now started  a
    new job, otherwise the family financial circumstances were no different
    to that before the First-tier Tribunal and there was no  evidence  that
    they were worse off now.

10. The Appellant stated that there was no proper healthcare in Nigeria for
    people who had Covid-19 and there would be no one in Nigeria to support
    her.  The Appellant has no family in Nigeria, her husband  and  brother
    both died in 2016.  The Appellant was notified of her  husband's  death
    through church members in the United Kingdom who travelled  to  Nigeria
    and informed her on their return.

11.  The  Appellant  has  not  yet  had  a  Covid-19  vaccine,  a  previous
    appointment being cancelled due to swelling in her legs  but  this  has
    been rebooked.  The Appellant has high blood  pressure  and  arthritis,
    which restricts her mobility and  for  which  she  is  prescribed  pain
    relief through her GP.

12. The Appellant takes her grandson J to and from school, helped with home
    schooling  during  lockdown  and  helps   him   with   extra-curricular
    activities on zoom.  The Appellant also used to take him to the  clinic
    and for appointments when he had them.

13. In her written statement signed and dated 22 January 2021, Ms  Ifeoluwa
    Akinyemi (the  Appellant's  daughter)  gives  details  of  her  family,
    including four children, all of whom are British citizens.  Ms Akinyemi
    is employed in the NHS and her husband is  employed  as  a  rail  track
    maintenance operative.  The family are  described  as  self-sufficient,
    using earnings to meet their basic needs and place  themselves  in  the
    lower middle class of the population.

14. Ms Akinyemi describes the support given to her and her  family  by  the
    Appellant and in particular, her care for J, who has Autism and who the
    Appellant assists in accessing and  attending  specialist  support  and
    facilities as  well  as  home  schooling  during  lockdown.   J  has  a
    comfortable and trusting relationship with the Appellant, struggling to
    settle with anyone outside of his  immediate  family  and  he  displays
    significant withdrawal from unfamiliar people and environments.  J  has
    significant dietary limitations, eating restricted food prepared  by  a
    family member only.  The Appellant has a close  relationship  with  her
    other grandchildren who she has cared for over the years and they would
    be traumatised if she had to return to Nigeria.

15. Ms Akinyemi has only returned to Nigeria once in 2016 for her  father's
    burial and has no ties there or reason to return.   Her  children  have
    never been to Nigeria.  The family are all concerned about the state of
    affairs in Nigeria and consider  that  returning  the  Appellant  there
    would be sending her to an early  death,  without  access  to  adequate
    medical care and being unable to integrate given covid restrictions and
    lack of family support.  Ms Akinyemi states that  the  Appellant  would
    face extreme difficulty meeting her everyday needs in Nigeria due to  a
    lack of home delivery services and that Ms Akinyemi would be placed  in
    undue hardship and financial strain as she  has  no  reserve  funds  or
    investment to ensure a standard livelihood for the Appellant's care and
    well-being in Nigeria.

16. Ms Akinyemi attended  the  oral  hearing,  confirmed  her  details  and
    adopted her written  statement.   In  oral  evidence  she  stated  that
    although her brother had been out of  work  for  a  period  during  the
    pandemic, the family were currently in the same financial circumstances
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal;  being  financially  self-
    sufficient but without excess funds.  When asked about why  the  family
    would be under financial strain if the Appellant returned  to  Nigeria,
    Ms Akinyemi stated that at present, the Appellant does not need to  pay
    rent as she lives and eats with her family and is supported for  things
    like clothing.  In Nigeria they would need  to  provide  an  additional
    home which would be a  strain  and  additional  burden  on  the  family
    finances.  Bank statements and financial information could be  provided
    if needed but had not been submitted so far.

17. In relation to J, Ms Akinyemi thought the only issue that needed to  be
    addressed was evidence of his ASD diagnosis which was provided and that
    document outlined the additional  services  and  support  he  required.
    Since diagnosis he has entered mainstream school  and  most  additional
    support is provided through school, with  some  groups  on  zoom  after
    school as no one can  currently  attend  in  person  due  to  Covid-19.
    During lockdown, the Appellant cared  for  J  and  supported  his  home
    schooling for him to complete work set by school.  Once school reopened
    fully after February half-term, J returned to  full-time  education  at
    school.  The Appellant is J's main source of  care,  is  known  to  his
    school (as she is from the older children)  and  was  the  main  person
    attending specialist appointments such as speech and  language  therapy
    with J.  There is no documentary evidence of current specialist support
    provided outside of school but  a  community  team  report  is  awaited
    following a visit on 6 May 2021.

18. The Appellant attended church in the United Kingdom (pre Covid-19)  and
    the church is connected to the one she used to attend in Nigeria;  with
    some families from  there  having  children  attending  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   Ms  Akinyemi  and  the  Appellant  were  informed   of   her
    father's/husband's death in 2016 through the  church  and  the  funeral
    itself was supported by members of the church in Nigeria.  Ms  Akinyemi
    stated that relatives of her father attended his funeral but she has no
    connection with them or contact details and did not have  any  even  in
    Nigeria before she left.  The Appellant has no  family  or  connections
    left in Nigeria and although she could try to involve  herself  in  the
    church community on return, this is  not  the  same  as  having  family
    there; may not include anyone she knew from  before  and  it  would  be
    difficult to integrate due to her age.

19. Ms Akinyemi stated the Appellant has high blood pressure and arthritis,
    managed by medication  and  checked  at  home.   She  stated  that  the
    healthcare system in Nigeria is not easily accessible and is  not  good
    even  for  a  third  world  country  measured  against  other   African
    countries, being in a poor state.  Ms Akinyemi knows  about  this  from
    Nigerian news and through networks working in the  NHS;  she  is  aware
    that there are problems and gaps in healthcare in Nigeria.

20. The Appellant did not originally have a Covid-19 vaccine after research
    on risk factors as she had a history of serious DVT as a teenager;  but
    she is now booked in for her first injection on Sunday with the  second
    to follow.   It  was  not  known  if  the  second  injection  could  be
    administered in Nigeria but Ms Akinyemi stated that it would  be  risky
    with standard advice in the United Kingdom to have the same vaccine  at
    the same location for the second dose.  There would be a high  risk  to
    the Appellant from  Covid-19  in  Nigeria  and  even  when  vaccinated,
    protection is still needed.  There are no home  delivery  services  for
    food in Nigeria  for  the  Appellant  to  use.   Ms  Akinyemi  had  not
    investigated any possible housing options for the Appellant in Nigeria.
     It would be hard, particularly financially, for Ms Akinyemi  to  visit
    the Appellant in Nigeria and there are security concerns.

21. In addition, there was written evidence  from  the  Appellant's  family
    members in the United Kingdom (including her grandchildren) which spoke
    of her care and positive support to family; and from  friends  and  her
    church.  In addition, there is a letter  from  J's  school,  some  bank
    statements, family photographs, death certificate for  the  Appellant's
    husband and NHS report dated 3 May 2018 regarding J's diagnosis of ASD.

22. In closing submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Clarke  referred
    to the preserved findings of fact and raised no objection  to  the  new
    evidence relied upon, nor to the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules being revisited  as  at  date  of  this  hearing.
    However, it was submitted that the new evidence was  inadequate  to  go
    behind or alter any  of  the  findings  previously  made;  even  though
    certain parts were now in dispute.

23. In relation to whether the Appellant has extended  family  in  Nigeria,
    the First-tier Tribunal found that she did but this is  now  denied  by
    her and her daughter; although there was no challenge to  that  finding
    of fact previously.  Nor was there any challenge to  the  finding  that
    the Appellant had family life for the purposes  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights with her daughter, but not with her
    son or other family members in the United Kingdom.

24. In relation to finances, the Appellant's  daughter  says  that  if  the
    Appellant returned to Nigeria,  she  would  become  reliant  on  public
    funds, but there is no evidence to support that assertion.  There is no
    updated evidence from the Appellant's son, no evidence of  earnings  or
    outgoings or any financial documents.  The  preserved  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant's  children  are  in  well  paid
    employment and would be able to arrange and pay for childcare  as  well
    as financially support  the  Appellant  on  return  to  Nigeria  should
    therefore stand.

25. The test for reintegration for private life  purposes  is  set  out  in
    Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813.  In accordance with that, the Appellant has spent the majority  of
    her life in Nigeria where she has continuing links through  the  church
    she attends in the  United  Kingdom  and  receives  news  from  Nigeria
    (including of the death of her husband) and notwithstanding the  impact
    of Covid-19, the Appellant could re-establish private life  in  Nigeria
    through the church and her knowledge of culture  there.   Even  if  she
    does not know individuals there, she can  form  new  friendships.   The
    Appellant has simply not identified any very significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration in Nigeria and the circumstances  and  restrictions  from
    Covid-19 are not enough.

26. The Appellant is about to receive her first vaccine  and  there  is  no
    evidence beyond speculation that she could not receive her second  dose
    on return to Nigeria and a lack of medical evidence generally about the
    Appellant's health,  current  treatment  received  or  needed  and  its
    availability and accessibility in Nigeria.

27. There is also a lack of any up to date medical evidence in relation  to
    J and lack of any detail or supporting evidence of the Appellant's role
    in his care.  The information in the witness statements is now to  some
    extent out of date as it refers to  the  situation  of  home  schooling
    during  a  period  of  lockdown  which  has  since  eased.   In   these
    circumstances, there is also no reason to go behind  the  finding  that
    the Appellant does not have family life with  J  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

28. Overall Mr Clarke submitted  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  would  be  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences or disproportionate interference  with
    her right to respect for private and family life for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8.  The factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 must be considered.  The  Respondent  accepts  that
    the Appellant speaks English and  is  financially  independent  to  the
    extent that she is supported wholly by family members.  The  importance
    of immigration control is particularly strong  in  circumstances  where
    the  Appellant  has  remained  unlawfully  in   the   United   Kingdom,
    persistently in breach of immigration control  and  in  full  knowledge
    that she had no right to remain, such that only little  weight  can  be
    attached to her private life.

29. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Karim submitted that the  Appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on
    the basis that there were very significant obstacles  to  reintegration
    and that in any event there would be a  breach  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

30.  Mr  Karim  highlighted  in  particular  that  there  were  no  adverse
    credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the
    Appellant  or  her  daughter  and  no  challenge  was  made  to   their
    credibility before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  witnesses  have  given
    consistent and credible evidence, including  as  to  the  lack  of  any
    family  remaining  in  Nigeria  and  as  to  J's  care  needs  and  the
    Appellant's involvement with those.  In these circumstances,  there  is
    no need for corroborative or documentary evidence, the credible witness
    evidence is sufficient on the balance of probabilities and the lack  of
    specific evidence should not be held against the Appellant.

31. The Appellant is in her seventies, she is from an ethnic  minority  and
    has health conditions, such that she  is  particularly  susceptible  to
    Covid-19 and has not yet been vaccinated.  During the course of closing
    submissions Mr Karim forwarded links to two websites about Covid-19  in
    Nigeria stating that this poses a high risk there and travel to Nigeria
    is not advised.  The Appellant would be  required  to  self-isolate  on
    return for 7 days and would have no one to support her in  that  period
    and no other support, such as a food delivery service available.   This
    would be a very significant obstacle to her reintegration.

32. In relation to Article 8, there must also be an assessment of the  best
    interests of J pursuant to section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 which goes beyond a  binary  assessment  of  being
    with his parents.  Mr Karim submitted it is in his best  interests  for
    the Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom given his needs, that his
    parents are both employed and the care given by the Appellant.

33. Mr Karim submitted that the earlier finding that  family  life  existed
    for the purposes of Article  8  only  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter but not between the Appellant and J or  other  family  members
    who are all part of the same household is  bizarre  and  in  any  event
    there is evidence to show more than normal emotional ties  between  the
    Appellant and J.  It must also be noted  that  section  117B  does  not
    penalise the Appellant in relation to this type of family  relationship
    developed whilst here unlawfully.

34.  Overall,  the  Appellant's  removal  to  Nigeria   would   result   in
    unjustifiably harsh  consequences  to  the  Appellant  and  her  family
    members and grandchildren  in  particular.   The  Appellant  lacks  any
    family or meaningful connections in Nigeria, has resided in the  United
    Kingdom for  a  long  time  and  is  at  risk  due  to  Covid-19.   The
    Appellant's removal would result in the severance of meaningful  family
    ties in the United Kingdom, without any  family  or  other  support  in
    Nigeria.   The  Appellant's  removal  would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with her right to respect for private and family life.

Findings and reasons

 1. This appeal is under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights, for which the five stage approach set out in Razgar v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 is followed.   Although
    there is a preserved finding from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant does not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    for a grant of leave to remain on private life grounds,  the  Appellant
    submits that she does and the  Respondent  has  no  objection  to  this
    matter being revisited as at the date of hearing.  In  any  event,  the
    date  of  hearing  is  the  relevant  date  for   assessment   of   all
    circumstances in a human rights appeal.

 2. For  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  the  only  potentially  relevant
    requirement of the Immigration Rules is  that  contained  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) which requires a  person  not  to  fall  for  refusal  on
    suitability grounds; to have made a  valid  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the United Kingdom, is aged 18
    years or above, has lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  less
    than 20 years and there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the United Kingdom.

 3. In Kamara, Sales LJ commented on the "very significant obstacles"  test
    (in the context of section 117C(4)(c) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 but which is the  same  as  set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules) as follows:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c)  ...  is  a  broad  one.  It  is  not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

 4. The  Appellant's  claim  to  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  is  a  convenient   starting   point   as   it   is
    uncontroversial that if she does, that is likely to be determinative of
    her appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The Appellant has lived the majority of her life in  Nigeria,  she  has
    worked there and is familiar with the customs and traditions of society
    in Nigeria.  There is  a  preserved  finding  that  the  Appellant  has
    extended family in Nigeria which was  challenged  before  me,  with  no
    specific family members being identified in that country by either  the
    Appellant or her daughter and their evidence was that all close  family
    members were either deceased or outside of Nigeria; albeit  there  were
    at least some family members of  the  Appellant's  husband  present  in
    Nigeria in 2016 who attended his funeral.  I  find  that  even  if  the
    Appellant has extended family members in Nigeria, there is  nothing  to
    suggest any current or close contact and the First-tier Tribunal  found
    that such family members would not be able to  accommodate  or  support
    the Appellant on return.  However, I do find  that  the  Appellant  has
    continuing ties and links to Nigeria through her  church.   The  church
    that she has attended (pre-Covid-19) is linked to the  church  she  and
    family members attended in Nigeria and some other families have members
    in the church in both countries.  Whether or not  the  congregation  in
    Nigeria is the same as it was when the Appellant left  in  2003,  there
    are clear established links and this  would  be  an  obvious  route  to
    assist with reintegration on return.

 6. On behalf of the Appellant, a number of obstacles to reintegration have
    been identified and relied upon; including the Appellant's age, lack of
    support or services on return (including  medical  treatment)  and  the
    risks from Covid-19.

 7. The Appellant would not have direct (as in face to face) support within
    Nigeria from a family member, although  beyond  financial  support  and
    accommodation in the United Kingdom there is  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant is in need of  nor  receives  any  personal  care  or  direct
    physical support from her family in the United  Kingdom.   There  is  a
    preserved finding of fact  that  the  Appellant  would  be  financially
    supported by her family on return to Nigeria and there is a lack of any
    evidence before me to depart from that finding.  The Appellant has  two
    adult children in the United Kingdom who are in work, as are  at  least
    her son-in-law and all are financially self-sufficient.   There  is  an
    assertion that if the Appellant returned  to  Nigeria,  her  daughter's
    family would have to have recourse to public  funds,  which  is  wholly
    unsupported by any evidence.  Whilst the  financial  support  currently
    given to the Appellant may be different to what is needed on return  to
    Nigeria (for example because she currently shares accommodation  likely
    with no additional cost to the family) there is simply no  evidence  of
    likely living costs on return for the Appellant or  as  to  the  family
    income and outgoings in the United Kingdom (for  her  daughter  or  her
    son) to show that the latter would not be sufficient  for  the  former.
    This is not just a lack of  documentary  evidence  but  extends  to  an
    almost complete lack of any detail in  the  witness  evidence  on  this
    issue.  I find that  the  Appellant  would  be  adequately  financially
    supported by her family on return to Nigeria.

 8. It is reasonable to expect that the Appellant would not take up any  or
    any significant employment on return to Nigeria due to her age, but she
    would be financially supported on return in any event.  The Appellant's
    daughter's evidence was that there had not yet been  any  consideration
    of accommodation for the Appellant on return to Nigeria, but  there  is
    nothing to suggest that suitable accommodation could not be obtained.

 9. The Appellant relies on health concerns,  both  in  terms  of  her  own
    conditions and more generally in relation to Covid-19  (and  associated
    practicalities related to daily living because of this) as an  obstacle
    to reintegration on return.  In relation to her own health  conditions,
    the Appellant has not provided any medical  evidence  of  diagnosis  or
    treatment and at its highest,  the  witness  evidence  refers  to  home
    monitoring and pain  relief  only  as  current  and  needed  treatment.
    Although the Appellant's daughter asserted in her evidence  that  there
    is no effective healthcare system in Nigeria; there  is  no  background
    country evidence available as to this and nothing to suggest  that  the
    Appellant would not have access to healthcare and medication as needed,
    particularly at the  relatively  basic  level  of  what  she  currently
    receives.

10. In relation to Covid-19, the Appellant relies on various websites which
    advise that there is a high risk of exposure to Covid-19 in Nigeria and
    there are some  restrictions  on  return.   The  information  on  those
    websites show that Nigeria is on the UK amber travel list, that  return
    is possible with certain safeguards and procedures for travel and  that
    within Nigeria, there  are  public  health  measures  in  place  and  a
    vaccination programme is underway there.  There is no direct comparison
    of the situation in Nigeria compared to the United Kingdom and this  is
    a global pandemic with  risks  and  restrictions  also  in  the  United
    Kingdom and nothing to suggest that the situation is any worse for  the
    Appellant in Nigeria than it is or has  been  for  her  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was stated in  submissions  that  there  is  a  period  of
    quarantine or self-isolation required on  return  to  Nigeria  and  the
    Appellant would not be able manage because of the lack of food delivery
    services in Nigeria, but again there was no background country evidence
    in relation to this nor anything to suggest that the Appellant had even
    considered what preparations could  be  made  on  return  for  this  as
    required, or whether, for example,  this  could  be  in  a  hotel  with
    catering such as the way that compulsory quarantine  is  available  for
    arrivals in the United Kingdom.  In any event, a short period of  self-
    isolation  or  quarantine  is  not  a  very  significant  obstacle   to
    reintegration, the measure is reintegration within a reasonable period,
    not within the first week or two of return.

11. The Appellant had not yet received any Covid-19 vaccine at the time  of
    hearing, but was booked in to have had her first dose by  the  time  of
    writing and under current  guidelines  would  expect  her  second  dose
    within 8 weeks and in any event, a vaccination programme  is  currently
    underway in Nigeria.   There  is  no  background  country  evidence  in
    relation to the specifics of this or what vaccines are  available,  nor
    any medical evidence specifically  about  the  need  for  a  particular
    vaccine or dose; such  that  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant, if needed, could not obtain an appropriate  second  dose  on
    return to Nigeria if she had not already received this  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although the Appellant has a number of risk factors for Covid-
    19,  including  age  and  ethnicity;  this  is  not  in  all   of   the
    circumstances  set  out  above,  a   very   significant   obstacle   to
    reintegration in Nigeria, alone or cumulatively with all other factors.

12. Taking all of the above into account individually and  cumulatively,  I
    find that the Appellant will not face very significant obstacles to her
    reintegration in Nigeria.  Although she has been away from the  country
    for approximately 18 years, she remains familiar with life and  customs
    there,  has  some  continuing  links  through  her  church,  would   be
    financially supported on return and would be able to operate on a  day-
    to-day basis in Nigeria  and  within  a  reasonable  period,  build  up
    private life there.  The Appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

13. I turn next to the Appellant's private and family life  established  in
    the United Kingdom.  There is a preserved  finding  of  fact  that  the
    Appellant has established family life with her daughter in  the  United
    Kingdom for the purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights, but not with her wider family (her son, grandchildren and
    in-laws) although in submissions the finding of  no  family  life  with
    other members of the same  household  and  J  in  particular  has  been
    challenged.

14. The Appellant lives with her daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren and
    is financially supported by her daughter.  There is evidence of a close
    family  relationship  between  all  members,  with  letters  from   the
    grandchildren showing involvement and support from the Appellant whilst
    they have been growing up, including in school drop-offs and  pick-ups.
    With the possible exception of J, this evidence demonstrates what would
    often be expected in a relationship between grandparent and grandchild;
    with no additional emotional ties or dependence such as to bring  these
    relationships within the ambit of  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(1).

15. The evidence before the Tribunal focused  mostly  on  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and J and his particular circumstances and needs.
     J has been diagnosed with autism (of which there  is  evidence  dating
    from 2018 of this and possible support needs  at  that  time)  and  the
    witness evidence is that the Appellant has had a  significant  role  in
    his care, taking him to appointments and activities, taking him to  and
    from school and assisting from home during periods  of  home  schooling
    and online activities/groups  when  covid  restrictions  have  been  in
    place.  There is however no up to date medical or other evidence  about
    J's current needs and the witness evidence  was  that  the  support  he
    currently requires was now provided  through  mainstream  schooling  as
    opposed to any specific regular support outside of  school  (needed  or
    currently in place) nor that the Appellant any longer provides specific
    support beyond school pick-up and drop-offs.  There is some evidence of
    J having a very restricted diet and eating only certain foods  prepared
    by a family member, but the evidence is not specific to  the  Appellant
    as opposed to any other family member.  Whilst in  the  past  it  seems
    that the Appellant may have played a greater role in the practicalities
    of looking after J, including attending appointments with him; there is
    little to suggest that continues to date beyond the role the  Appellant
    has played  for  her  other  grandchildren  in  terms  of  school  drop
    offs/pick ups and general support as a grandparent.  There is a lack of
    evidence as to what, if any impact there would be on J of the Appellant
    returning to Nigeria, either specifically in relation to his autism  or
    otherwise; albeit it can be inferred that there is likely  to  be  some
    negative impact and disruption to the relationship caused  by  removal.
    There is a preserved finding of fact that alternative  childcare  could
    be arranged for the Appellant's grandchildren in her absence and  there
    was no further evidence before me to suggest otherwise,  including  for
    J.

16. In light of the above and the  lack  of  specific  evidence  available,
    including from the Appellant and her  daughter  as  well  as  from  any
    external sources; I do not find  that  the  Appellant  has  established
    family life with any of her grandchildren for the purposes  of  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The best interests of
    the grandchildren, including J, are as a primary matter  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom with their parents and each other.  I also find that
    given the close family relationship, it is also in the  best  interests
    of the grandchildren, including J for the Appellant to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  However, relatively, this is of lower importance  than
    their primary best interests to remain here with their parents and I do
    not find that the relationships would be severed if the Appellant  were
    to return to Nigeria; just that contact would be more indirect and less
    frequent than it is currently with most living  together  in  the  same
    household.

17. In relation to private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  this  comprises
    primarily of  the  Appellant's  relationships  with  her  wider  family
    members not included as family life for the purposes  of  Article  8(1)
    (with her son and grandchildren) and her involvement with  her  church.
    There is little, if any evidence of any other significant private  life
    established in the United Kingdom.

18. There would be an interference with the Appellant's private and  family
    life if returned to Nigeria; such interference being in accordance with
    the law and the legitimate aim of immigration control, given  that  she
    does not meet any of the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for  a
    grant  of  leave  to  remain.   The  final  question  is  whether   the
    interference is a proportionate for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

19. In assessing proportionality, I am required to take  into  account  the
    factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as follows.  First, the maintenance of immigration control  is  in
    the public interest and in this case, there is  a  very  strong  public
    interest in removing the Appellant who entered the United Kingdom as  a
    visitor in 2003, has remained here unlawfully ever since and only  made
    an attempt to regularise her status in the United  Kingdom  in  2018  -
    fifteen years after her arrival.  Secondly, I  am  required  to  attach
    little weight to the Appellant's private life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because she has not been lawfully present here for almost  all  of  the
    time since her arrival.

20. Thirdly, the Respondent accepts that the Appellant  can  speak  English
    and is financially independent to the extent that she is supported here
    by family members and not by public funds; these factors being  neutral
    in the assessment.

21. Using the balance sheet approach to the  assessment,  in  summary,  the
    following factors are weighed in  the  Appellant's  side.   First,  the
    close relationship with her family in the United Kingdom, including her
    children and grandchildren, for whom their best interests  include  the
    Appellant remaining in the United Kingdom.  Secondly,  the  Appellant's
    length of presence in the United Kingdom and absence from Nigeria since
    2003.  Thirdly, that the Appellant's ties in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    currently greater than her ties in Nigeria.

22. In summary, the factors weighed on the other  side  are  primarily  the
    maintenance of immigration control and the Appellant's lengthy unlawful
    presence in the United Kingdom without  any  attempt  until  relatively
    recently to regularise  her  status  here  (meaning  little  weight  is
    attached to private life established in the  United  Kingdom)  together
    with the Appellant's ability to reintegrate on return  to  Nigeria  and
    maintain family relationships from there (albeit  in  a  more  indirect
    manner than currently).

23. Taking into account all of the matters set out above, I find  that  the
    Appellant's removal would not be a disproportionate  interference  with
    her right to respect for private and family life for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   The  Appellant
    retains knowledge of life and culture in Nigeria where  she  has  spent
    the majority of her life, where she would within a reasonable period of
    time be able to reintegrate and re-establish herself and  private  life
    there, would be financially supported on  return  and  from  where  she
    could  maintain  contact  with  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant's family in the United Kingdom are able to  provide  for  and
    care for  themselves  without  the  Appellant's  contribution  (however
    valuable and useful this has been over  the  years)  and  although  the
    closeness of their relationship currently would be adversely  affected;
    neither  they  nor  the  Appellant  could  have  had   any   reasonable
    expectation of lawful leave to  remain  and  those  relationships  were
    strengthened and established during a time when the Appellant was  here
    unlawfully.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the decision annexed, the making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  a  material  error  of
law and as such it was set aside.

The appeal is remade as follows.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson     Date 7th June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08602/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|means)                                     |                                |
|On 23rd December 2020                      |                                |
|                                           |................................|
|                                           |.......                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                    Elizabeth oluwayemisi salami ogunlade
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed on a direct access
basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated on 20 November 2019, in which
    Ms Ogunlade's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  human  rights
    claim dated 29 April 2019 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to
    the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  Ms
    Ogunlade as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 13 November  1949,  who
    entered the United Kingdom with valid entry clearance as a  visitor  on
    23 June 2003 and states that she has remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since the expiry of that entry clearance  on  17  December  2003.   The
    Respondent's records however show that the Appellant applied for  entry
    clearance as a visitor from Nigeria in 2004, following  which  she  was
    granted a multi-visit visa from 22 October 2004  to  22  October  2006;
    although there are no further records of entry to the United Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules on 6 June 2018, which was  rejected  due  to  payment
    issues and then submitted a further application on the same basis on 11
    August 2018, the refusal of which is the subject of this  appeal.   The
    Appellant's application was based on her length  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2003, her private and family life established here
    (with  her  two  children  and  grandchildren)  and  for  compassionate
    reasons.

 5. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  there  was  no
    provision for or  exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant  a  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules as  sought,
    refusing  the  application  under  paragraph  322(1)  and  (3)  of  the
    Immigration Rules as the application was for a purpose not  covered  by
    the Immigration Rules and as the Appellant had failed  to  comply  with
    the conditions attached to her previous entry clearance.  In any event,
    the Respondent also  considered  the  Appellant's  circumstances  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  (albeit  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate any partner, parent or dependent child in the United  Kingdom)
    and under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  With  respect  to
    private life, the Respondent noted that the  Appellant  had  lived  the
    majority of her life in Nigeria, up to the age of 53 and  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for less than 20 years.  The  Respondent  considered
    that the Appellant would  be  able  to  re-integrate  into  society  in
    Nigeria and that there would not be any significant obstacles to  doing
    so.  Friendships and relationships  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  be
    maintained and there were no exceptional or  compassionate  factors  to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 6. Judge Beg allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  20  November
    2019 on Article 8 human rights grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant had lived the majority of her life in  Nigeria,  had
    worked there, had her children and raised them there  and  is  familiar
    with the customs and  traditions  of  society  in  Nigeria.   As  such,
    although she had been outside of Nigeria for a  significant  number  of
    years, there would not be very significant obstacles to her integration
    and she would be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in society, form
    and build-up relationships.  The Appellant did not therefore  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules,  although
    this provision was not expressly referred to in the decision as part of
    the findings.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal went on to consider Article 8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules in accordance with the five stage approach in Razgar.
     In relation to family members, the First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that
    the Appellant's husband, brother and niece were deceased but found that
    it was implausible that she was not in contact with her nephew  in  the
    United States of America and that the Appellant has other relatives  in
    Nigeria.  Those relatives are more distant and  it  was  accepted  that
    they would  not  be  in  a  position  to  provide  the  Appellant  with
    accommodation or support.

 8. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant  was  found  to  have  established
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 with her daughter  (whom  she
    lives with and who provides financial support for  her)  and  that  she
    also had a role caring for her grandchildren (although childcare  could
    be arranged in the Appellant's absence) and a relationship with her son
    and his children  but  that  those  additional  relationships  did  not
    constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal acknowledge that the Appellant established private life in the
    United Kingdom at a time when she was  here  unlawfully  and  any  such
    private life must therefore be given little weight.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's conclusions are in the final  two  paragraphs
    of the decision, which state as follows:

         "21. In conclusion, for the reasons I have already  given,  I  find
         that the appellant is a widow who has no home or means of financial
         support in Nigeria.  She has not worked since before  2003  and  is
         now aged 70.  Whilst her children gave evidence that they would  be
         willing to financially support their mother in Nigeria, I find that
         sending  the  Appellant  to  live  alone  in  Nigeria  would  be  a
         disproportionate interference in her family and private life.

         22.  I find that she is settled in the United Kingdom where she has
         lived since 2003.  She clearly has the love and support of a close-
         knit family.  I accept the  evidence  of  her  granddaughter  Faith
         Akinyemi that her grandmother has provided considerable support  to
         her and other family members.  I take into account the  letters  of
         support from the  appellant's  other  grandchildren  and  from  her
         church community.  In conclusion I find that  any  interference  in
         the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  while  legitimate,  would  be
         disproportionate  in  all  the  circumstances.   I  find  that  the
         interference will result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
         the appellant."

The appeal

10. The Respondent appeals on the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law  in  (i)  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    mandatory  public  interest  considerations  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  affected  the
    proportionality balancing exercise undertaken; (ii)  failing  to  place
    little weight on the Appellant's private and  family  life  established
    when she was living illegally in the United Kingdom as  an  overstayer;
    failing  to  consider  the  Appellant's  financial   independence   (or
    otherwise) and English language  ability;  and  failing  to  take  into
    account in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  the  Appellant's
    inability to satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules;  and
    (iii) as a result, failing to correctly consider  the  public  interest
    when allowing the appeal.

11. At the oral hearing, Mr Clarke clarified the grounds of appeal  pursued
    on behalf of the Respondent.  He accepted at the outset that the First-
    tier Tribunal expressly referred to  attaching  little  weight  to  the
    Appellant's private life  established  while  she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and that is was difficult to pursue  the  points  in
    relation to financial independence when there were  findings  that  the
    Appellant was financially supported by her family and where  there  was
    no suggestion that she could not speak English (having  given  evidence
    without an interpreter at the First-tier Tribunal).  Further, Mr Clarke
    accepted that section 117B(4)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 referred only to family life with a qualifying  partner
    and  therefore  did  not  expressly  cover   the   Appellant's   family
    relationship with her daughter; but submitted that  the  issue  of  the
    weight to be attached to such a relationship was wider than the express
    terms of section 117B which was not an exhaustive list.  The First-tier
    Tribunal was  required  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest,
    including the Appellant's failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and failing to do so is a material error of law.

12. Mr Clarke highlighted  the  adverse  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and early reference in the decision  to  the  failure  to
    meet  the  Immigration  Rules  but  the  lack  of  any  reference  when
    considering proportionality to the public interest.  With reference  to
    the European cases referred to in Nagre v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), including Rodriguez  da  Silva
    and Hoogkamer v Netherlands [2007] 44 EHRR 34, Mr Clarke submitted that
    it was only in exceptional  circumstances  that  removal  would  breach
    Article 8 when family life had been created when a person  was  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  It was accepted that  this  point  was  not
    expressly in the grounds of appeal, but was  a  further  example  of  a
    relevant factor that  should  have  been  taken  into  account  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise but was not.

13. The First-tier Tribunal failed to give any consideration to the  weight
    to be attached to the Appellant's family life or the  circumstances  of
    it.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    financially supported by her family, that she would be able to build up
    relationships and integrate on return to Nigeria but in the  conclusion
    found to the contrary that the  Appellant  would  be  returned  without
    accommodation to live alone and  without  any  balance  of  the  public
    interest.

14. Although the adequacy of reasons was raised  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  Mr  Clarke  was  not
    confident that he was permitted to pursue  this  point  which  was  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal and submitted that in any  event  there
    were already sufficient grounds to find a material error of law and set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

15. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Karim relied on his rule 24 response and
    made supplementary oral submissions.  It was submitted that  when  read
    as a whole, the First-tier Tribunal's decision was a thorough, balanced
    and careful one, with factors  for  and  against  the  Appellant  being
    weighed up.  The weight to be attached  to  the  competing  factors  is
    primarily a matter for the First-tier Tribunal and it can not  be  said
    that the conclusions were perverse or not open to the Tribunal  on  the
    evidence available.  The rule 24 response  also  relies  on  points  in
    relation to the factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as now accepted by Mr Clarke at the hearing.

16. Mr Karim emphasised that to set aside the  decision  there  must  be  a
    material error of law and not simply a disagreement with  the  findings
    even if the First-tier Tribunal decision was an unusually generous one;
    relying on the Court of Appeal's decision in KB (Jamaica)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1385 in which  caution
    is advised against simply finding a different conclusion on the facts.

17. The First-tier Tribunal's decision expressly sets out  the  Appellant's
    overstaying since 2003, that she does not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain  and  in  substance
    considers all of the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; including the public interest.

18. In relation to family life, the weight to be attached to it is a matter
    for the First-Tier Tribunal and there is nothing to mandate that little
    weight should  be  attached  to  it  in  a  case  such  as  this.   The
    Appellant's family life with her children was established at birth  and
    only re-established in the United Kingdom, not  created  here  for  the
    first time; making this case distinct from those who have entered  into
    a  new  relationship  with  a  partner  when  in  the  United   Kingdom
    unlawfully.

19. Mr Karim sought to support the findings and conclusions of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal by reference to evidence before it  in  relation  to  the
    broader public interest, albeit not expressly referred to at all in the
    decision.  This included that the Appellant worked for the NHS and  had
    been able to complete her training to do so with  the  support  of  the
    Appellant; and that the Appellant's grandchild possibly had autism.

20. Overall, it was  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  given
    adequate reasons for its decision,  with  multiple  references  to  the
    public interest and matters adverse to the Appellant  and  no  need  to
    refer to the same again in the final conclusion at the end.   Mr  Karim
    submitted that this was not a one sided decision, it was  balanced  and
    much of the Appellant's claim was rejected.  Short of perversity, there
    were simply no grounds  which  identified  any  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

21. In reply, Mr Clarke referred to this as a case  being  presented  as  a
    fait accompli, with family life having been  created  and  strengthened
    during a period of significant overstaying  whilst  the  Appellant  was
    here unlawfully and which  must  therefore  reduce  the  weight  to  be
    attached to private and family  life  and  which  requires  exceptional
    circumstances to achieve a fair balance.

22. Further, although there are a number of references to  adverse  matters
    and the public interest in the decision, there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that these have been taken into account in substance or applied to  the
    facts  of  the  case  in  the  final  balancing  exercise.    This   is
    particularly so given the inconsistent findings in the decision  as  to
    the failure to satisfy the Immigration Rules because of the ability  to
    form relationships and  reintegrate  but  an  overall  conclusion  that
    returning the Appellant to live alone  would  be  disproportionate  and
    unjustifiably harsh.

Findings and reasons

23. Although it has been put in a number of different ways in  the  context
    of this appeal, the sole issue in essence  is  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  materially   erred   in   law   in   conducting   the   final
    proportionality  balancing  exercise  for  the  purposes  of  assessing
    whether there is a disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's
    right to respect for private  and  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

24. Mr Karim appears  to  accept  that  this  is  a  case  which  could  be
    categorised as an overly generous result in favour of the Appellant but
    not one in which there was any error of law  in  the  findings  or  the
    outcome and not one which reached the high threshold of perversity (nor
    was this relied upon by the Respondent) and as such the Upper  Tribunal
    has no basis to interfere with the decision.

25. However, I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    simply a very generous one to the Appellant but one in  which,  despite
    early adverse findings  in  the  decision,  simply  fails  to  properly
    conduct a balancing  exercise  between  the  public  interest  and  the
    Appellant's right to respect for private and family life.  It is  trite
    that decisions must be read as a whole and that there  is  no  need  to
    refer to each and every matter, nor repeat matters in a conclusion; but
    in the present case, the conclusion makes no reference at  all  to  the
    public interest, nor how weak or strong it is on the facts of the  case
    and objectively, the public interest in immigration control  is  strong
    in circumstances where a person has overstayed in  the  United  Kingdom
    for over 15 years before making any application at  all  to  regularise
    her stay.  The First-tier Tribunal also gives no reasons as to how this
    has  been  balanced  against  the  Appellant's  circumstances  and   is
    outweighed by those given the express earlier findings relied  upon  in
    which the First-tier Tribunal has found that the Appellant  has  family
    life only with her daughter, where her private life (which includes the
    relationships she has with her son  and  grandchildren  which  did  not
    constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8) can not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because she has continues to have
    ties to Nigeria with extended relatives, cultural ties and the  ability
    to form and build relationships, as well as a finding that she would be
    financially supported on  return.   Whist  this  appeal  has  not  been
    pursued on the basis of lack of adequate reasons, the failure  to  give
    any at all in addition to the failure  to  even  refer  to  the  public
    interest  or  the  need  to  balance  this  against   the   Appellant's
    circumstances supports the finding that there simply  has  not  been  a
    proper balancing exercise conducted.

26. The conclusions reached in paragraph 21 that the Appellant has no means
    of financial support in Nigeria is expressly contrary  to  the  finding
    which immediately follows that her children would  financially  support
    her and is inconsistent with the earlier finding  that  she  would  not
    face very significant obstacles to reintegration for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   The  further  reason  that
    sending  the  Appellant   to   live   alone   in   Nigeria   would   be
    disproportionate, is also inconsistent with  the  earlier  findings  of
    extended  family  in  Nigeria  (albeit  they  would  not  be  able   to
    accommodate the Appellant) and that  she  would  not  face  significant
    obstacles to reintegration, including inter  alia,  that  she  had  the
    ability  to  form  and  build  relationships.    There   is   also   no
    consideration at all as to  whether  the  Appellant  could  maintain  a
    relationship with her children and  grandchildren  in  some  form  from
    Nigeria and there was no suggestion that family  and  private  life  in
    this regard would be permanently  severed  and  that  appears  unlikely
    given the findings of a close-knit family.  In these circumstances, the
    First-tier Tribunal has failed to identify what the unjustifiably harsh
    consequences would be for  the  Appellant.   These  matters  show  that
    reading the decision as a whole does not assist in the way submitted by
    Mr Karim but only further undermines the inadequacy of  the  conclusion
    which fails to show a lawfully conducted balancing exercise.

27. This is not a case where I simply  disagree  with  an  overly  generous
    result in the First-tier Tribunal but one in which I  find  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has materially erred in law  in  its  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the  decision  by  failing  to  balance  the  public
    interest against the Appellant's private and family life,  particularly
    where it is accepted that little weight can be attached to her  private
    life and  the  conclusions  which  state  that  they  rely  on  earlier
    findings, are at least in part, contrary to those earlier findings.  In
    this case, although the decision does include references to the  public
    interest and matters adverse to the Appellant, there is simply  nothing
    in the final paragraphs in conclusion or in  the  decision  read  as  a
    whole to show that these have been balanced against the matters in  the
    Appellant's favour.  Although not compulsory, this is  clearly  a  case
    where the First-tier Tribunal's decision  would  have  benefitted  from
    using the balance sheet approach advocated by the higher courts.

28. For these reasons, I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred
    in law and as such it is necessary to set aside the decision.   At  the
    oral hearing, I invited the parties' submissions as to case  management
    of this appeal if an error of law was found.  Mr Karim  submitted  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    hearing as new, up to date evidence may be required  (although  he  was
    unable  to  specify  what  evidence  was  required  or  any  change  of
    circumstances since the previous hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal).
    Mr Clarke submitted that the appeal could be re-made on the findings of
    fact available, particularly as no Rule  15(2A)  application  had  been
    made prior to the error of law hearing as would be required.

29. In this case, no application to adduce any further  evidence  has  been
    made and Mr Karim was unable to identify any  likely  further  evidence
    required for the re-making of this appeal.  There has been no challenge
    to the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal and nothing  to
    suggest that any further findings of fact are needed at all, or if they
    are,  that  they  would  be  significant  or   extensive.    In   these
    circumstances, a de novo hearing is not  required  and  the  appeal  is
    retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  re-making  with  the  following
    findings of fact preserved:

       - The Appellant lived the majority of her life in Nigeria and  worked
         there.

       - The Appellant is  familiar  with  the  customs  and  traditions  of
         society in Nigeria.

       - There would not be very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
         reintegration in Nigeria, where she would be able to operate  on  a
         day-to-day basis in that society, form and build up  relationships.
         The Appellant does not therefore meet the requirements of paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

       - The Appellant is a widow, her  husband,  brother  and  niece  being
         deceased.

       - The Appellant is in contact with her nephew in the United States of
         America.

       - The Appellant has extended family in Nigeria, but they would not be
         able to accommodate or support her.  The Appellant does not have  a
         family home to return to in Nigeria.

       - The Appellant has established family life  in  the  United  Kingdom
         with her daughter for the purposes of Article  8  of  the  European
         Convention  on  Human  Rights,  but  not  with  her  son   or   any
         grandchildren.  The Appellant has a close-knit family in the United
         Kingdom.

       - The Appellant has looked after  her  grandchildren  in  the  United
         Kingdom, including taking them to school.  The Appellant's children
         would be able to arrange alternative childcare in  the  Appellant's
         absence.

       - The Appellant is financially  supported  and  accommodated  by  her
         daughter in the United Kingdom and would be  financially  supported
         by her family on return to Nigeria.

30. Unless an application to  adduce  further  oral  evidence  is  made  in
    accordance with the directions below, this appeal is suitable  for  re-
    making on  the  basis  of  submissions  only  in  accordance  with  the
    preserved findings of  fact.   Having  regard  to  the  Pilot  Practice
    Direction and the  UTIAC  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2020,  and  having
    considered all the  material  on  file,  I  have  determined  that  the
    forthcoming hearing can and should be held remotely, by  Skype  (or  by
    other remote video means).

Listing Directions

      i) No later than 7 days after these directions are sent by  the  Upper
         Tribunal:

         (a)  the parties may file and serve by email any objection  to  the
             hearing being a remote hearing, giving reasons; and

         (b)  without prejudice to the Tribunal's consideration of any  such
             objections, each party shall also notify the Tribunal and  the
             other party of the  email  address  to  which  the  electronic
             invitation to join the hearing should be sent.

     ii) If no email address is furnished under paragraph  i(b)  above,  the
         invitation to the party concerned will be sent to the email address
         to which these Directions are sent by way of service.

    iii)  Any  application  to  submit  further  written  evidence  must  be
         accompanied by the proposed evidence and must be filed  and  served
         no later than 21 days after these directions are sent  out  by  the
         Upper Tribunal.

     iv) Any application to call further oral evidence must  be  accompanied
         by a witness statement capable of standing as the evidence in chief
         and must be filed and served no later  than  21  days  after  these
         directions are sent out by the Upper  Tribunal  and  must  indicate
         whether an interpreter would be needed for that evidence and if  so
         in what language or dialect.

      v) If an application is granted for the Appellant to call further oral
         evidence, the parties will have a further 7 days thereafter to file
         and serve any objection to the  hearing  being  a  remote  hearing,
         giving reasons.

     vi) A notice of hearing will follow in due course.

Documents and submissions filed in response to these directions may be  sent
by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's  reference
number (found  at  the  top  of  these  directions)  as  the  subject  line.
Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  This address is not generally  available
for the filing of documents.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         17th January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

