
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/09981/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 July 2019                          |On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Tunisia who claims to have  been  born
    on 10 December 1983, appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 24 April 2018  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim following the making of a  deportation  order  on  2
    October 2017. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated  on  20
    December 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 30 July 2019  at  Manchester,  the  appellant
    failed to attend nor was he represented. A previous hearing on  4  June
    2019 had been adjourned because there had  been  some  doubt  that  the
    notice of hearing had reached the appellant. There is  nothing  on  the
    file to indicate that the notice of hearing sent by first class post to
    the appellant's last known address in Blackpool on  25  June  2019  has
    failed to reach that address. In the circumstances,  I  have  proceeded
    with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.

    Persistent Offender

 3. The appellant had been convicted on  9  occasions  in  relation  to  15
    separate offences in the period 9 December 2016 -  27  September  2017.
    The offences including eight offences of  theft  and  six  relating  to
    police/courts/prisons and one drugs offence. The Secretary of State was
    of the opinion that the appellant is a persistent offender and that his
    deportation to Tunisia would be conducive to the public  good  (section
    3(5) Immigration Act 1971).

 4. The grounds of appeal acknowledge that during a nine-month  period  the
    appellant was a 'relatively prolific  offender'.  However,  in  the  15
    months prior to the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the appellant had  not
    been convicted of any offence. The appellant asserts that  he  has  not
    been properly characterised as a persistent offender.

 5. The ground has no merit. The Upper Tribunal in Chege ("is a  persistent
    offender") [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC) found that:

    A persistent offender" is someone who keeps on breaking the  law.  That
    does not mean, however, that he has to keep on offending until the date
    of the relevant decision or that the continuity of the offending cannot
    be broken. A "persistent offender" is not a permanent status  that  can
    never be lost once it is acquired, but an individual can be regarded as
    a "persistent offender" for the purpose of the Rules and the  2002  Act
    even though he may not  have  offended  for  some  time.  The  question
    whether he fits that description will depend on the overall picture and
    pattern of his offending over his entire offending history up  to  that
    date. Each case will turn on its own facts

 6. The appellant has not explained why his  circumstances  should  not  be
    considered by the guidelines provided by the Upper Tribunal  in  Chege.
    That the appellant has not offended for some period of  time  prior  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  does  not  prevent  him  from  being
    properly described as a 'persistent offender.'

    Unduly harsh

 7. The appellant claims to have been in a relationship  with  his  partner
    for 10 years and has two children who we claims  are  British  citizens
    (their respective dates of birth are 2011 and 2013).  In  his  analysis
    and application of Section 117C of the 2002  Act,  the  judge  at  [49]
    found that the evidence, including that contained  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement, failed  to  'disclose  anything  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved in a deportation because disruption  to  family
    life by deportation will inevitably generate harshness.' The grounds of
    appeal acknowledge the  distinction  between  'harshness'  and  'undue'
    harshness but assert that the 'failure the judge to recognise that  the
    length of relationship is  material  to  the  extent  of  harshness  in
    deportation was to leave out of account the relevant matter.'  However,
    the judge was fully aware of the ages of the children and the length of
    the  appellant's  claimed  relationship  with  his  partner.   It   was
    unnecessary  for  the  judge  to  single  out  the  duration  of  these
    relationships for specific comment. The analysis contained at  [49]  et
    seq is both adequate and legally sound.

    Is the appellant a vulnerable witness?

 8. The grounds claim that the judge has failed to treat the appellant as a
    vulnerable witness. Even if the judge has had regard to the appellant's
    vulnerability, the grounds assert that he failed to record 'any  impact
    that it had on his decision-making.' I note that it was on  this  basis
    that Judge Robertson granted permission to appeal. However, the  ground
    has no merit. The appellant was represented at the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There is nothing in the record of  proceedings  or
    in the decision itself which indicates that any submission was made  to
    the effect that  the  appellant  should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness. There is in the papers a medical report from  a  psychiatrist,
    Dr Sterling, which the judge addresses at [37]. The  judge  notes  that
    the report  of  the  psychiatrist  concludes  by  recommending  further
    assessment. Indeed, any reading of the report reveals that Dr  Sterling
    was unable to offer any diagnosis of the appellant's  condition  noting
    more than once that the appellant had 'presented to  healthcare  staff'
    in a manner which did 'not support' the  diagnosis  of  any  particular
    mental or organic physical illness. Given that the medical evidence was
    so inconclusive and that  no  submission  was  made  to  the  judge  by
    professional  representatives  that  the  Tribunal  should  treat   the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness, I do not consider that the ground of
    appeal has been made out.

 9. I find that the judge has  provided  a  detailed  and  cogent  analysis
    taking account of all relevant evidence. He has made cogent findings of
    fact and has applied relevant statute and case law to  those  facts.  I
    find that the judge was not erred in law for the  reasons  asserted  in
    the grounds of appeal or at all. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 30 July 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
