
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09296/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 September 2017                  |On 29 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Nana Amoah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Siaw, R Spio & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a Decision and  Reasons
    by First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robinson) (FTT) promulgated on 11 January
    2011 in which he allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8.  I shall refer to the parties as the Secretary of State  and
    the Claimant.

2.   The Secretary of State raised two grounds of appeal.  The  FTT  applied
    the wrong and a less rigorous test under Ex 1, namely "very significant
    obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Ghana".  The test under Ex  1
    is insurmountable obstacles defined in Ex 2 as  "...  very  significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the appellant or  her  partner  in
    continuing family life together outside the UK and which could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the appellant or her
    partner". Further the FTT  failed  to  carry  out  any  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 as the FTT regarded consideration of Ex 1 as
    determinative.

3.     Permission to appeal was granted on the first ground and  was  silent
    on the second ground, on 21st July by FTJ Brunnen. He  stated  that  it
    was arguable that a less demanding test was imposed.  Had  the  correct
    test been imposed the decision might have been different.

4.   As I indicated at the outset, I am satisfied that there  was  an  error
    of law, by way of a misdirection  as in the decision the  FTT  referred
    to the incorrect wording for the test in EX.1(b) although the test   is
    correctly set out in the determination at [18].  The real  question  is
    whether this amounts to a material error of law.  Having regard to  all
    of the evidence I am satisfied that the evidence as a whole was capable
    of meeting  EX.1(b) as defined in Ex 2, which states "or  would  entail
    very serious hardship for the appellant or his or her partner".

5.   I am satisfied that the findings of fact (which are preserved  and  not
    disputed) made by the FTT on the evidence before it establish that  the
    Claimant's partner  would  experience  very  serious  hardship  if  her
    husband were to leave the UK [32].  These hardships  are  emotional  in
    the light of the  close  and  caring  relationship  as  they  would  be
    separated.  In terms of daily care  there  would  be  hardship  as  the
    Claimant provides most of the help for daily living activities. The  GP
    stated that the Claimant provided the bulk of the  care  although  some
    care is provided by an agency [26].  In Ghana there  is  not  the  high
    level of medical treatment available to which the Claimant's partner is
    entitled  as  a  British  citizen  and  there  would  be  no   suitable
    accommodation. The FTT  found  that  the  home  had  been  adapted  for
    wheelchair use [26]. The evidence was of very limited  ties  in  Ghana.
    In light of the partner's medical conditions (a stroke,  breast  cancer
    and HIV) for which she requires on going treatment  and  medication  as
    stated in the GP report [22] to be "chronic", in addition to which  she
    has mobility problems.   The  GP  stated  that  her  conditions  "which
    require very advanced medical treatment for the highly complex  medical
    conditions in the UK".  Having regard to the totality of the evidence I
    conclude that there would be serious hardship for the  partner  because
    the Claimant's removal would result in a  significant  decline  in  her
    level of function [25] as would the partner's move to Ghana in order to
    maintain family life. The FTT placed significant weight on the detailed
    report from the GP.  I therefore conclude that on that basis  that  the
    first ground of appeal is not made out as the error is not material and
    to that extent the decision remains.

6.   However, there is still the issue of whether or not Article 8 has  been
    made out and proportionality.  Based on the facts and reasoning above I
    am satisfied that there  are  compelling  circumstances  which  justify
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules.  I rely on the same in
    reaching my decision that there is family life, and there would  be  an
    interference to that family life and the partner's private life if  the
    appellant were removed to Ghana.  The decision is  not  lawful  as  the
    Claimant  can  meet  the   Rules   under   Ex1.    My   assessment   of
    proportionality leads to the balance lying in favour of the Claimant by
    reason of the serious hardship that his partner would  suffer.   Whilst
    accepting that the public interest (as provided in section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum  Act 2002)  is  of  significance  and
    carries weight  in the light of the Claimant's unlawful and  precarious
    immigration status; he entered as a visitor in 2013 and in 2015 applied
    for leave as a partner, as does the economic argument  given  that  the
    Claimant is presently unable to support himself  independently.   There
    is no additional recourse to public funds as the partner as  a  British
    citizen is entitled to receive care and NHS treatment.

Notice of Decision

    7.  The Secretary of State's appeal is  dismissed.   The  FTT  decision
    shall stand.  The Claimant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.




Signed                                  Date 28.9.2017
G A Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 28.9.2017

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

