
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/09035/2019 (V)

                                                           HU/09039/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                    [S Z]

                                    [F Z]

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Ms L Afful of Lawrencia & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in  a  remote  hearing.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I
announced my decision and a brief statement of my reasons  but  reserved  my
full reasons to be provided in writing, which I now give. The order made  is
described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellants are sisters and both citizens of  Ghana  with  dates  of
    birth given respectively as 19.2.05 and 22.2.07. They have appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal with permission against the decisions of the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated  11.5.20,  dismissing  their  linked  appeals
    against the decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 17.4.19, to
    refuse their applications for entry clearance  as  the  children  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK, pursuant to Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The applications were refused because the respondent was not  satisfied
    that the eligibility requirements of sole responsibility were met.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that the  appellants  had  a  relationship
    with their sponsoring mother. In addition, the sponsor's claimed income
    as a direction of a limited company was not evidenced as required under
    Appendix FM-SE. In particular, the payslips and bank statements did not
    cover the required period and other documentation required under FM-SE,
    as set out in the refusal decisions, was  not  provided.  Neither  were
    there any exceptional circumstances found  to  justify  granting  entry
    clearance under GEN 3.1, 3.2, or outside the Rules pursuant to  article
    8 ECHR.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal could only consider the appeal on human  rights
    grounds outside the Rules. However, the extent to which the Rules  were
    met was a highly relevant consideration.  The  challenged  relationship
    with the sponsoring mother had been satisfactorily evidenced by the DNA
    reports, as the judge accepted. The judge  applied  the  R  (Razgar)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHKL  27  stepped
    approach but found that the appellants had not demonstrated that  their
    mother had had sole responsibility for them. The sponsor's evidence was
    found to be confusing, evasive, and inconsistent. The judge also  noted
    a paucity of documentary  evidence  supporting  the  sponsor's  claimed
    income. The judge concluded that the decisions of the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  were  not  disproportionate  and,  therefore,  dismissed   the
    appeals.

 4. The grounds argue that:

      a. The judge failed to consider all issues on  appeal,  in  particular
         the best interests of the appellants pursuant to Section 55 of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;

      b. The judge failed to give  effect  to  the  binding  decision  of  a
         superior court, namely T (Section 55 BCIA 2009 -  entry  clearance)
         Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC)  requiring  consideration  of  best
         interests of children, even if those children are outside the UK;

      c. The judge's decision was influenced by her own opinion that it  may
         better serve the grandmother for the girls to remain with  her.  It
         is argued that  because  her  focus  was  on  the  welfare  of  the
         grandmother, the judge failed to consider  the  objective  evidence
         showing that the grandmother was unwell and unable  to  look  after
         the children;

      d. The decision discloses procedural irregularity in that the decision
         was dated  13.1.20  but  not  promulgated  until  11.5.20  and  not
         received by the appellants for a further three months. It  is  also
         argued that at [1] of the decision the judge erred in stating  that
         the appellants applied as children of a person present and  settled
         in the UK when in fact the applications were made as  the  children
         of a parent with limited leave to enter.

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The grant of permission turned on an issue identified by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge granting permission and not raised as a ground of appeal
    or relied on by Ms Afful in her submissions.

 7. On 27.7.20, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf,  considering  it  arguable
    that at [12] of the decision the judge erred in identifying  the  ratio
    of TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049. A person may retain sole responsibility without having  the  day
    to day  control  which  can  be  delighted  to  another,  such  as  the
    appellants'  grandmother.  However,  it  has  to  be  noted  that   the
    appellants have not in any way appealed the finding  that  the  sponsor
    did not have sole responsibility for the appellants. Even I raised this
    point with Ms Afful, she not apply to  amend  her  grounds,  explaining
    that it had been decided to pursue the grounds as drafted  because,  in
    her submission, they disclosed grave errors  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In the circumstances, I  am  unable  to  make  any
    finding as to an error of law in respect  of  the  sole  responsibility
    issue.

 8. Ms Afful made the further point that sole responsibility  was  not  the
    only point raised in the appeal and complained that the judge neglected
    to address the  best  interests  of  the  children.  Whilst  in  normal
    circumstances the judge  should  address  the  best  interests  of  the
    children in any article 8 proportionality assessment, even  if  outside
    of the UK, on the facts of this case the appeal was  dismissed  because
    the judge found that the appellants failed to  demonstrate  that  their
    mother had sole responsibility for them. If  that  is  the  case,  then
    considerations of best interests have little relevance and  an  absence
    of a specific finding on best interests is not material to the  outcome
    of the appeal. Put another way, it would be difficult  to  see  how  an
    appeal  that  failed  on  sole  responsibility  could  have  found   it
    nevertheless in the best interests of children to come  to  the  UK  to
    join a mother with whom they do not have a close relationship. Even if,
    for the sake of argument, their circumstances were such that their best
    interests were to come to the UK, on a finding that the sponsor did not
    have sole responsibility for them, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    respondent's decision refusing entry clearance can be disproportionate.
    There was a route for entry of children to join a mother but the  Rules
    require her to demonstrate that she has sole  responsibility,  or  that
    one of the other qualifications apply, but they could  not  meet  those
    requirements. It was for that reason at [20] of the decision the  judge
    found the failure to meet the Rules carried substantial weight  on  the
    respondent's side of the proportionality balancing exercise. It  should
    also be noted  that  at  [21]  of  the  decision  the  judge  found  no
    compelling or  exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  granting  leave
    outside the Rules. It follows that no error  of  law  is  disclosed  by
    either of the first two grounds which essentially argue the same point.

 9. In relation to the third ground and the complaint  as  to  the  judge's
    statement at [13] of the  decision  that  it  may  better  serve  their
    grandmother for the appellants to be there to assist her,  the  comment
    was not material to the outcome of the  decision.  The  judge  followed
    that statement of view or opinion with this: "However, that is a matter
    for the sponsor, who states I note, that she is  very  concerned  about
    her mother's health." It is clear that the judge did not rely  on  this
    observation but considered it a matter for the sponsor. It follows that
    no error is disclosed by this ground of appeal.

10. I also find that there is no merit at all in the last ground of appeal,
    as any error of description of the precise nature of the application is
    immaterial. Nor has any prejudice been identified by the alleged  late-
    receipt of the decision, which occurred for reasons currently unknown.

11. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

    The appellants' linked appeals to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeals  remain
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    8 September 2020

