
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09490/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2020                    |On 26 June 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ALS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hussain, Khan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State is appealing against the decision of Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Smith ("the judge") promulgated on 15 January
      2020 allowing the appeal of the respondent (hereafter "the claimant")
      on the basis that deporting him from the UK would breach articles 3
      and 8 ECHR.

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq born on 27 September 1977 who has
      been in the UK since 2002. In 2017 he was convicted of conspiracy to
      handle stolen goods and sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. In May
      2019 a deportation order was made against him.

   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. The judge allowed the appeal under both articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

   4. With respect to the claimant's article 3 claim, the judge stated that
      the unchallenged evidence of the claimant, inter alia, was that he is
      from Kirkuk, does not have a passport or CSID, has not been in contact
      with his family in Iraq since coming to the UK in 2002, does not have
      any family or anyone he knows how to contact in Baghdad, and does not
      know the volume and page reference of the entry for his CSID in the
      "Family Book".

   5. On the basis of this unchallenged evidence, the judge, applying SMO,
      KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400
      (IAC), found that the claimant faced a real risk of ill-treatment in
      Iraq breaching article 3 because he does not have a CSID and could not
      obtain one within a reasonable period of time.

   6. In respect of article 8, the judge found that the unchallenged
      evidence established that the development of the claimant's children
      would be significantly impacted by separation from him and that the
      effect on the children would be unduly harsh.

   Grounds of Appeal

   7. The Secretary of State has advanced two grounds of appeal. The first
      ground, which concerns the claimant's case under article 3, submits
      that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that the
      claimant would be unable to obtain a CSID. The grounds cite AAH (Iraqi
      Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) and state that
      the claimant has failed to demonstrate he has made attempts to contact
      his family or have his identity verified by the Iraqi embassy in
      London.

   8. The second ground of appeal concerns the assessment of article 8. It
      is argued that the judge failed to apply the correct threshold for
      "undue harshness" and did not have adequate regard to the public
      interest in deportation of the claimant.

   Written Submissions in Response to Directions

   9. In the light of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, I issued directions expressing my provisional view
      that it would in this case be appropriate to determine without a
      hearing whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision
      involved the making of an error of law. The parties were invited to
      submit further submissions on the error of law issue. They were also
      given the opportunity to express a view, supported by reasons, on
      whether, notwithstanding my provisional view, a hearing would be
      necessary.

  10. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the Secretary of State, submitted written
      submissions dated 4 May 2020. In respect of the first ground of appeal
      (concerning article 3), Mr Melvin submitted that the judge failed to
      even consider the plausibility of the claimant's claim to have never
      attempted to contact his family and had failed to address the evidence
      relating to a couple that had seen his family in 2004 in Kirkuk.

  11. Mr Melvin did not express any view on whether a hearing would be
      necessary.

  12. The claimant has not responded to the Secretary of State's grounds of
      appeal or submissions. The claimant's solicitor did, however, submit
      objections to the remaking of the decision being undertaken without a
      hearing. The reasons given as to why a hearing is necessary are that
      the matter is of utmost importance to the claimant, he needs to be
      able to proactively respond to the Secretary of State's submissions,
      and the outcome would affect his partner and children. None of these
      reasons engage, in any way, with the grounds of appeal or the specific
      issues in this appeal. They are entirely generic, in the sense that
      they have nothing to do with this particular case and could be written
      for almost any appeal that comes before the Upper Tribunal. The reason
      I reached the preliminary view that this appeal could be dealt with on
      the papers is that the grounds of appeal raise clear and narrow issues
      that do not require elaborate or nuanced submissions. There is nothing
      in the submissions of the claimant that leads me to revise this view
      and therefore I will decide the appeal without a hearing.

   Analysis

  13. As correctly identified by the judge, the applicable country guidance
      case in this appeal is SMO. SMO replaced all existing country guidance
      on Iraq and therefore the reference in the grounds of appeal to AAH is
      misplaced.

  14. SMO states the following in respect of the need for, and ability to
      obtain a replacement of, a CSID:

        C. CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION

       11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
           Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary
           for an individual to have one of these two documents in order to
           live and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or
           conditions which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.   Many of the
           checkpoints in the country are manned by Shia militia who are
           not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely to permit an
           individual without a CSID or an INID to pass.  A valid Iraqi
           passport is not recognised as acceptable proof of identity for
           internal travel.

       12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of a
           CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in
           any event, a recognised identity document.  There is
           insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
           'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
           such document would be recognised internally as acceptable proof
           of identity.

       13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
           replacement CSIDs remain available through Iraqi Consular
           facilities.  Whether an individual will be able to obtain a
           replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents
           available and, critically, the availability of the volume and
           page reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which
           system continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process.
           Given the importance of that information, most Iraqi citizens
           will recall it. That information may also be obtained from
           family members, although it is necessary to consider whether
           such relatives are on the father's or the mother's side because
           the registration system is patrilineal.

       14. Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is expected
           to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
           replacement document.  All CSA offices have now re-opened,
           although the extent to which records have been destroyed by the
           conflict with ISIL is unclear, and is likely to vary
           significantly depending on the extent and intensity of the
           conflict in the area in question.

       15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely to
           be able to obtain a replacement document there, and certainly
           not within a reasonable time.  Neither the Central Archive nor
           the assistance facilities for IDPs are likely to render
           documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.

       16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
           the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to Iraq,
           has reduced due to the introduction of the INID system.  In
           order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
           CSA office in person to enrol their biometrics, including
           fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices in which INID
           terminals have been installed are unlikely - as a result of the
           phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue a CSID, whether
           to an individual in person or to a proxy.   The reducing number
           of CSA offices in which INID terminals have not been installed
           will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals and their proxies
           upon production of the necessary information.

  15. Having found that the claimant does not have a passport or CSID, does
      not know the volume and page reference of the entry for his CSID in
      the Family Book, has lost contact with his family, and does not have
      family or friends who would be able to assist him in either Kirkuk or
      Baghdad, it was clearly consistent with SMO to find that (a) the
      claimant would not be able to obtain a CSID either prior to, or within
      a reasonable period of time after, arriving in Iraq; and that (b)
      consequently he would be at real risk of being unable to live and
      travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or conditions which
      are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

  16. The judge was entitled to make the findings identified in paragraph 15
      above for the reasons he gave in paragraphs 75 of the decision: that
      is, the claimant's evidence was not challenged, there were no
      significant credibility findings made against the claimant in the
      previous First-tier Tribunal decision concerning him (promulgated on
      23 December 2003) and the claimant had given a broadly plausible
      account. Moreover, at paragraph 74 of the decision the judge explained
      why he accepted that the claimant did not know the volume and page
      reference of his entry in the Family Book (which is an important point
      given that, as found in SMO, most Iraqi citizens would know and recall
      this information). The judge stated that he found it plausible the
      claimant did not recall this information given the length of time he
      has been in the UK. This is not a perverse/irrational finding and is
      one that was open to the judge.

  17. The judge therefore was entitled to find, for the reasons he gave,
      that deportation of the claimant would breach article 3 ECHR.

  18. At paragraph 55 of the decision, the judge noted that it was agreed by
      the parties that if the claimant succeeded in his article 3 appeal it
      was not necessary to consider the appeal under article 8 ECHR. Article
      8 was considered by the judge in the alternative, in case he erred in
      respect of article 3. As I have found that the judge did not err in
      respect of article 3, it is unnecessary to consider his findings in
      respect of article 8 as any error would be immaterial. I have
      therefore not considered the second ground of appeal.

   Notice of Decision

  19. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a material error of
      law and stands.

   Direction Regarding Anonymity

  20. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the claimant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
      or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
      direction applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure
      to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
      proceedings.


Signed:

D. Sheridan

Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan

Dated:  10 June 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email


