
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09753/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               mr Lalit Gurung
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms McCarthy of Counsel, Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal.  He was born on 8 September 1991.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse leave to  enter
    dated 14 March 2018.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by Judge Eldridge (the judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 January 2019.  There had been a previous  application
    and previous dismissal of an appeal which had not been overturned.  The
    judge took account of the facts found in terms of Devaseelan; the basis
    of the dependency claim was not made out and the judge found  similarly
    as Judge Keith.  The judge did not accept that there  was  family  life
    between the appellant and his mother such as would engage Article 8.

 4. The grounds were dated 18 February  2019.   They  claim  the  following
    errors of law:

      i) Evidence of real, committed support from mother to son.

     ii) Failure to consider mother's family life  with  the  appellant  and
         apply Beoku-Betts.

    iii) Failure to consider other factors indicating engagement of  Article
         8.

 5. Judge Murray refused permission in a decision dated 1 April 2019.   She
    said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in failing  adequately
             to consider the existence of family life between the appellant
             and his mother, the widow of a Ghurkha.  It is argued that the
             judge failed to adequately consider the factors  engaging  the
             operation of Article 8(1).

         3.   There is no arguable error of law in the decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal.  The judge  set  out  the  relevant  law,  made
             findings of fact that were open to him  on  the  evidence  and
             applied the law to the facts.  The finding that there  was  no
             family life between the adult appellant and  his  mother  took
             all  material  factors  into  account   and   was   adequately
             reasoned."

 6. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  The  main  thrust  was
    that in refusing permission, Judge Murray '......has not  examined  the
    substance of the grounds."  The grounds  were  repeated  in  substance,
    however, the following points were made:

      a) This was a compelling Ghurkha case in  which  had  the  appellant's
         widowed mother had the financial resources and legal assistance  to
         apply for the appellant at the same time as she herself applied  in
         2009, the appellant would have qualified outright under the  policy
         for minor dependants.  The appellant is still a young man  of  only
         27 years.

      b) The judge failed  to  consider  the  new  evidence  (that  is,  the
         evidence subsequent to the decision of Judge Keith  which  was  not
         appealed), that the money the  appellant's  mother  had  previously
         been sending to him had sometimes been wired to the appellant by  a
         relative.  That relative attended court to  give  evidence.   There
         was no reason to doubt his evidence.  The explanation clarified the
         main previous problems in the appellant's mother's evidence on  the
         basis of which Judge Keith had doubted her credibility  during  the
         2015 appeal.  The new  evidence  showed  that  far  from  being  an
         evasive witness, the  appellant's  mother  was  an  unsophisticated
         witness who had simply failed to explain the arrangement clearly in
         the previous appeal.

      c)  Having  accepted  that  the  appellant's  mother   was   providing
         "committed support" or "effective support" to the appellant in  the
         regular remittances, the judge failed to apply the case law on  the
         engagement of Article 8 in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 311.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7.  Ms  McCarthy  submitted  that  it  might  have  been  that  the  judge
    misunderstood the evidence.   The appellant's mother is  a  widow,  his
    Ghurkha father having died, such that he did not come within  Annex  K.
    It appeared the judge did not  understand  the  nature  of  the  family
    relationships.  See [30] where the judge  considered  the  decision  of
    Judge Keith in terms of Devaseelan.  There was no slip  in  description
    except that the bank transfer was made by the appellant's mother's "son-
    in-law, the husband of her daughter Sunita".  See page 5 at [15] of the
    appellant's bundle for an explanation of the family relationships.

 8. There was no Rule 24 response.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the  grounds
    raised issues of perversity in terms of error of law.  The judge had to
    take the findings of Judge Keith as his starting point.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge did not find family life was  engaged  within  the  terms  of
    Article 8(1).

10. The judge accepted that the appellant's mother had  made  a  number  of
    visits to Nepal and that although she had a large  family,  the  visits
    would  include  the  appellant.   The  judge  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant was receiving some maintenance from his mother.  He  drew  an
    adverse inference at [38] because there  was  no  suggestion  that  the
    appellant is unable to work and because it  was  "unhelpful"  that  the
    appellant's own up-to-date financial position,  as  evidenced  by  bank
    statements had not been produced.  To engage Article 8(1) the appellant
    did not need to show  dependence  of  necessity  but  rather  committed
    support.  The judge might have been misled at  [30]  by  Judge  Keith's
    previous  finding  that  there  was  evidence  of  funding   from   the
    appellant's "son in law". The evidence which had been clarified  before
    the judge  was  that  funding  was  from  the  appellant's  mother  but
    transferred via her son in law, her daughter's husband. The appellant's
    mother had  shown  committed  support,  by  visits  and  sending  money
    channelled via a close family member.

11. I find the judge erred because family life was engaged.  It  is  a  low
    threshold.  See Ghising (Ghurkhas/BOCs; historic wrong;  weight)  Nepal
    [2013] UKUT 567.

Notice of Decision

The judge materially erred.  The decision is set aside. The appeal  will  be
remitted to the First-tier for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
