
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals Number: HU/09295/2015
                                                               HU/09298/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th January 2019               |On 8th February 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD AFZAAL
                             MISS YAMEEN YAMEEN
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These appeals are brought against a decision by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Porter dismissing appeals against the refusal of entry
       clearance.  The applications for entry clearance were made on 17th
       June 2015 and refused on 16th September 2015.

    2. The first-named appellant was born on 1st December 1999 and the
       second-named on 10th February 2001.  They are both nationals of
       Pakistan.

    3. The appellants applied for entry clearance to join their mother,
       [TB], who is a British citizen and the sponsor for the applications
       leading to these appeals.  Entry clearance was refused on a number of
       grounds under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The grounds
       included issues about the reliability of documents pertaining to the
       appellants and whether their mother had had sole responsibility for
       them.

    4. Having considered the evidence the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       made several clear findings on the points at issue.  The judge found
       that the sponsor is the mother of the appellants.  She was divorced
       from the appellants' father, [MA], in 2000 in Pakistan.  On 27th
       March 2005 the sponsor married [MB] in Pakistan and in September 2006
       the sponsor came to the UK.  The appellants' father died on 20th
       August 2006 in Pakistan.

    5. The judge gave her reasons for the above findings, which have not
       been challenged.  She then proceeded to refuse the appeals on the
       grounds that the sponsor did not have sole responsibility for the
       appellants.  It is not now disputed that in so doing the judge erred
       in law.  Because the judge had found the appellants' father had died,
       consideration should have been under sub-paragraph 297(i)(d) of the
       Immigration Rules instead of sub-paragraph 297(i)(e).  Sub-paragraph
       297(i)(d) applies where one parent is settled in the UK and the other
       parent is dead.  There is no requirement under this provision to show
       sole responsibility for the children by the parent in the UK.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on this basis.

    7. At the hearing before me it was agreed that the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal should be set aside and re-made allowing the appeals.
       The basis for doing this was very clearly set out in the application
       for permission to appeal drafted by Mr Bryce for the Upper Tribunal.
       As the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant'
       father died in 2006, sole responsibility was no longer an issue in
       the appeals.  The appellants met the requirements of paragraph
       297(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules and, applying the principle from
       Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112, the appeals fell to be allowed.  The
       refusal of entry clearance was a disproportionate interference with
       the appellants' Article 8 rights.

    8. It was pointed out that no issues of maintenance or accommodation had
       been raised in the refusal decisions against which the appeals were
       brought.  Mr Govan suggested that these were matters on which the ECO
       might require further information before granting entry clearance.
       Hitherto, however, these requirements have been regarded as
       satisfied.

    9. The proper course is for me to give with the consent of the parties
       the decision which should have been given by the First-tier Tribunal,
       namely that the appeals are allowed under Article 8.

Conclusions

   10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error on appoint of law.

   11. The decision is set aside.

   12. I re-make the decisions by allowing the appeals.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance for
doing so.

Fee Award   (N.B. This is not part of the decision)

In view of the issues of fact which had to be decided by the First-tier
Tribunal I do not consider it appropriate to make a fee award.


M E Deans   30th January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

