
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09982/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 October 2017                  |On 21 December 2017                   |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                   ali [k]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Turkey, now aged 39.   He  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in May 1995 and claimed  asylum.   His  application  was
    refused but he was granted exceptional leave to  remain  from  1  April
    1999 to 1 April 2003.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain on  19
    April 2003.  His application for British citizenship failed, apparently
    for lack of reply to queries from the Home Office.

 2. On 28 October 2004, the  appellant  was  arrested  in  relation  to  an
    attempted burglary, and during the course of the  subsequent  enquiries
    talked to the police in what was  said  to  be  confused  manner  about
    having killed his mother.  Further investigations were  made,  and  the
    decapitated body of his mother was discovered at the flat that  he  had
    shared with her.  The history was that she had suffered a severe stroke
    over a year previously, and he had been her 24-hour care carer.  We  do
    not need to go further into the details of the  offence,  but  although
    charged with murder, his plea of guilty to manslaughter on  the  ground
    of diminished responsibility was accepted.  Reports were  obtained  and
    on 6 April 2005, at the Central Criminal Court, he was made subject  to
    a hospital order under s 37 and a restriction order under s. 41 of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983.  Those orders remain in force.

 3. Over ten years later, the Secretary of State appears  to  have  decided
    that the appellant should be deported.  The reasons for the decision to
    deport are in a letter from the  Home  Office  dated  20  August  2015.
    There were submissions in response made by the appellant's  solicitors,
    which the  respondent  treated  as  a  Human  Rights  claim.   She  was
    unpersuaded by them and the decision to deport the appellant  was  made
    on 21 October 2015.

 4. The appellant appealed.  The appeal was heard  by  Judge  Cary  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    sister and read  statements  from  other  members  of  the  appellant's
    family.  There was written medical evidence, notably  reports  from  Dr
    Ali Ajaz, who had been  the  appellant's  responsible  clinician  since
    February 2015 and had written reports dated 15 September  2015  and  27
    May 2016, the latter date being about a fortnight before  the  hearing.
    The judge set out the relevant  law  as  it  is  to  be  found  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)  and  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), applied
    it as he understood it to the facts, most of which were not in dispute,
    and dismissed the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge did not fully  engage  with  the  medical  reports,  did  not
    properly consider the  assessed  impact  on  the  appellant,  including
    reduction in family support, if he were to be deported, and  failed  to
    take into account the fact that the appellant remains detained.   There
    is a response under rule 24  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    pointing out that the judge agreed that it would not be  reasonable  to
    leave the public vulnerable to potential harm that might arise from the
    appellant's offending, that the judge had found that the appellant  had
    not shown that medical care would not be available in Turkey, where  he
    has one sister, and his family members in the United Kingdom  would  no
    doubt support him financially.  The Secretary of  State's  position  in
    summary is that the appeal simply  seeks  to  reargue  the  appellant's
    case.

 6. It is convenient to set out at this point the relevant  law  applicable
    to a person  such  as  the  appellant  who  raises  an  appeal  against
    deportation on human rights grounds. We first consider Part VA  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002.  Section  117A(2)  requires
    the Tribunal to have regard -


              "(a)    in all cases, to the consideration listed in  section
              117B, and
                      (b) in cases concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals, to  the    considerations  listed  in  section
                  117C."


 7. There is no doubt that the appellant is for these  purposes  a  foreign
    criminal who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
    four years: that is the effect of s 117D(2) and (4)(c) and (d)  on  the
    face of the wording of those paragraphs and as interpreted by the Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v KE (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 1382.

 8. Sections 117B and 117C are as follows:

          "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
          cases
          (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
          public interest.
          (2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
             are able to  speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
               (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
               (b) are better able to integrate into society.
          (3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
               (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
               (b) are better able to integrate into society.
          (4) Little weight should be given to-
               (a) a private life, or
               (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
             the United Kingdom unlawfully.
          (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time  when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.
          (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-
               (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a    qualifying child, and
               (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.


          117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
                 foreign criminals


          (1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
          interest.
          (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.
          (3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1
             or Exception 2 applies.
          (4) Exception 1 applies where-
               (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for
              most of C's life,
               (b) C is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  United
              Kingdom, and
               (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country   to which C is proposed  to
                  be deported.
          (5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would  be
             unduly harsh.
          (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2.
          (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the  extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

 9. Paragraphs A398 and following of the Immigration Rules make similar but
    not identical provision.  It is, in particular, not by any means  clear
    that on the wording of those rules the appellant, given the methods  of
    disposal of his case, falls within the category of persons sentenced to
    a term of imprisonment of at least four years.   But  in  Chege  [2015]
    UKUT 00165 (IAC) this Tribunal decided that the provision needs  to  be
    read together in such a way that the Immigration Rules could be seen to
    be implementing the statutory provisions.  The Secretary of  State,  in
    the decision letter, assessed the appellant's offence as having  caused
    serious harm, which was  clearly  sufficient  to  bring  the  appellant
    within the same category in any event: see para 398(b) and (c) and para
    399.   Chege  also  provides  guidance  on  the  meaning  of  the  word
    compelling in the phrase "very compelling circumstances".

10. As the rule 24 response points out, the judge's reasoning was based  at
    least in part on his agreement with the respondent that if he  remained
    in the United Kingdom the appellant posed a risk to the public.  It is,
    we have to say, by no means clear on what basis the judge reached  that
    view.  The clinician's judgment was that the removal of  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom would be a significant stress factor that might
    interfere with his treatment and his rehabilitation, but  thought  that
    whilst in the United Kingdom his family support  would  greatly  reduce
    the risk of any relapse.  It is clear that the appellant  has  suffered
    only one significant phase of acute illness, during which  the  offence
    was committed.  That is now a long time ago and although the results at
    the time were serious and tragic, it is not easy to see that  there  is
    any  real  risk  of  reoccurrence.   Further,   in   this   case   (and
    distinguishing it from the run of other cases  in  which  the  Tribunal
    needs to make an assessment of this sought),  there  is  a  restriction
    order under  s  41  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  in  force,  which  is
    specifically intended for the protection of  the  public  until  it  is
    clear that he does not pose a danger.   This  is  a  factor  which,  we
    think, ought to be taken into account in assessing the  risk.   On  the
    other hand, it is clear that although the appellant's offence has  been
    (undeniably correctly) assessed as causing serious harm, that of itself
    cannot be a pointer to a future risk.  We also think  it  is  right  to
    take into account the fact that the Secretary of State did  not  regard
    it as necessary for the protection of the public to make  any  decision
    as to the appellant's  deportation  in  the  ten  years  following  his
    conviction, and there is no evidence that the risk has escalated within
    that time.

11. For these reasons it seems to us  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    relevance of future  risk,  and  his  emphasis  on  it,  was  wrong  in
    principle.

12. So far as concerns the medical evidence, we cannot see any proper basis
    for criticising the judge's conclusion that it had not been established
    that appropriate medical support would be unavailable to the  appellant
    if he were returned to Turkey, assisted  if  necessary  by  remittances
    from his family based in the United Kingdom. But  the  availability  of
    strictly medical support (including medication) is not the only  matter
    that the responsible clinician deals with.  In passages that the  judge
    set out in his determination, Dr Ajaz emphasised the importance of  the
    family  support  he  receives  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  we  have
    indicated, the evidence from the family was before the judge largely in
    writing; the Presenting Officer had indicated that he  would  not  have
    any questions in cross-examination, so the deponents were  not  called.
    There is no good reason to doubt the level of support set  out  in  the
    evidence before the judge, and referred to by the doctor.

13. Looking first at the factors set out in section 117B, the  judge  found
    that the appellant speaks English and that he has a rental income  from
    a house that he owns, although it is unlikely that he is able to derive
    any useful income from work.  His presence in the  United  Kingdom  has
    not been precarious, because he has indefinite leave to remain.  He has
    built up a wide network of relationships with his  family.   The  judge
    describes this as "some degree of emotional dependency", but  it  seems
    to  us  that,  particularly  in  view  of  the  doctor's  report,   the
    relationship goes further than that: the appellant's own mental health,
    and the interest that his family members have  shown  in  him  and  his
    rehabilitation, takes the relationship, in our  judgment,  well  beyond
    the ordinary relationship of adult members of the same family.

14. It is accepted that neither exception 1  nor  exception  2  in  s  117C
    applies.  We need say no more about exception 2.  So  far  as  concerns
    exception 1, the appellant's lawful residence in the United Kingdom had
    at the date of the respondent's decision been sixteen years with  leave
    and a further four years as a person who had  claimed  asylum  promptly
    and was awaiting a decision.  That period of twenty years in total  was
    more than half of his life; the two years since the  decision  help  to
    tip this point in the appellant's direction.

15. There cannot, we think, be any doubt that the appellant is socially and
    culturally integrated into the United  Kingdom.   Certainly  the  judge
    made no findings to the contrary  effect.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    position in the decision letter is  that  as  the  appellant  had  been
    detained in a mental hospital since  April  2005,  he  could  not  have
    integrated into the "wider society", but that is not the test,  and  in
    any event it fails to take account of the ten years the appellant spent
    in the United Kingdom before his detention.

16. Whether there would be any significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration in Turkey is a matter of some difficulty.   Turkey  is  the
    country of his nationality, and so far as we know  he  speaks  Turkish.
    He has family in Turkey in the form of one sister, and we  accept  that
    his medical needs would be met.   Whether  true  integration  would  be
    possible after the disruption he would suffer by the cessation  of  his
    long-standing course of treatment in this country and  the  removal  of
    the family support he has here  is  problematic:  the  medical  support
    suggests that lasting damage might well be caused by his removal.

17. Sub-section (6) of s 117C refers  to  "very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in exceptions  1  and  2".   The  phrase
    "over and above" is not the same as "in addition to", nor should it  be
    read as though it were. If it were read in  that  way,  the  Act  would
    wholly prevent a human rights claim succeeding if  a  person  who  came
    within these provisions did not exactly meet the  requirements  in  the
    one of the exceptions.  Nevertheless, in deciding whether circumstances
    are "over and above" those described in the exceptions, the  extent  to
    which the person does meet the requirements of the exceptions  must  be
    of some relevance.  In this case our conclusion is that  the  appellant
    very nearly meets the requirements of s 117C(4)(a), does meet those  of
    (b), and may well meet those of (c).

18. We have felt able to leave our conclusions in that  rather  vague  way,
    because this is by any standards a wholly  exceptional  case.   In  our
    view, the position is that despite the seriousness of the  consequences
    of the appellant's offence, there is no real risk for the future whilst
    the restriction order remains in  force;  and,  as  we  understand  the
    evidence, there is no current proposal to withdraw it  save  to  enable
    the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.  On  the  other  hand,
    his treatment and rehabilitation benefit enormously from  the  interest
    his family shows in him and the continuity of treatment in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Those appear to us to be very compelling circumstances of the
    sort that would be "over and  above"  almost  anything  that  might  be
    specified as a routine exception  to  the  principle  that  the  public
    interest requires the deportation of foreign criminals.

19. At the hearing  we  indicated  to  Mr  Tarlow,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, that for those  reasons  we  proposed,  subject  to
    anything he might want to say, to allow the appeal.  He told us that he
    had no submission to make in response.

20. The judge erred in law in  failing  to  take  fully  into  account  the
    medical evidence and in treating the  evidence  of  future  risk  in  a
    manner  that  was  not  properly  open  to  him.   We  set  aside   his
    determination.  We substitute a determination allowing the  appellant's
    appeal.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 19 December 2017

