
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
hu/09766/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2018                   |    On 14 January 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                               miss Shuli Rian
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of Miss Shuli Rian, sometimes referred to  as  Tian,
    HU/09766/2014.  The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on  22
    February 1994 and had applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of long residence.  It was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State and came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie  on
    10 October 2017.

 2. By a determination promulgated on 24 November 2017 the judge determined
    that the appellant did not qualify under the  Rules.   The  reason  for
    doing so is that there was material before the judge that the appellant
    had been out of the country for a period of  672  days.   This  was  in
    excess of  the  concession  that  is  made  that,  for  long  residence
    purposes, an individual may be absent for a shorter  period.   In  this
    case the shorter period was 540 days in all.

 3. The Secretary of State in her refusal letter dated 28 August 2017  made
    the assertion that  the  stamps  in  her  passport,  airline  passenger
    information checks, had confirmed that the appellant  had  been  absent
    from the United Kingdom for at least 672 days  in  the  qualifying  ten
    year period and it was on that basis  that  the  judge  determined  the
    appeal.  The judge said in paragraph 10:

         "In her grounds of appeal, the appellant also does  not  appear  to
         dispute the Secretary of State's conclusion that she has  been  out
         of the United Kingdom for 672 days.  I am quite sure that there are
         different ways of calculating how many days amount  to  18  months,
         but it does not appear to me  that  any  calculation  method  would
         indicate the absences of 672 days (effectively two  years)  amounts
         to less than 18 months."

    That conclusion was properly open to the judge.

 4. The hearing was conducted at North Shields and the  appellant  was  not
    present nor was she represented, nor  was  the  respondent  present  or
    represented, consequently the judge had to do as best as  he  could  on
    the available material.

 5. The grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal  do  not  dispute  this  crucial
    finding.  What is said at paragraph (c) of the grounds is;

         The judge made the decision that I do not have continuous residence
         in the United Kingdom for a  period  of  ten  years  calculated  in
         accordance with the  Immigration  Rule  276A...and  my  appeal  was
         dismissed.

    There are no other grounds for saying why the decision of the judge was
    wrong.

 6. The appellant has not appeared before me to argue that the  calculation
    of the Secretary of State was incorrect.  It may be that she  left  the
    United Kingdom in June 2018.  Be that as  it  may,  she  has  not  come
    herself before the Tribunal nor is she represented in  order  to  argue
    her appeal.   In  those  circumstances,  I  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made no material error of law and the  determination  of
    the appellant's appeal shall stand.

DECISION

    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no  error  of   law   and   his
    determination of the appellant's appeal shall stand.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                       DATE:
                                                            29 December 2018
