
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09865/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th November 2018                     |On 28th November 2018             |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                 beauty [o]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Irvine Thanvi Natas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger in a decision promulgated on 9th  July
    2018.

 2. The judge noted that the Appellant relied upon her family life with her
    children who are British citizens (paragraph 29).  The judge noted  and
    the Respondent  accepted  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the Appellant and the children  and  that
    the best interests of the children was a primary consideration as  they
    would be affected by the refusal decision (paragraph  30).   The  judge
    went on to note that all the children had been born here and they  were
    presently aged 4 years, 1  year  and  1  month.   The  eldest  attended
    nursery school.  The judge accepted that they had been brought up in  a
    close and loving family with both parents and that is nearly always  in
    the best interests  of  a  child  to  remain  within  the  family  unit
    (paragraph 31).  The judge went on to find that the  Immigration  Rules
    were not satisfied giving reasons for that (paragraph 36 et seq).

 3. Having considered all the circumstances, the  judge  did  not  consider
    there were any exceptional or compelling factors such as to render  the
    refusal decision disproportionate (paragraph 44).  The judge took  into
    account that there was genuine family  life  that  would  be  adversely
    affected and also that her partner and children were British.  However,
    this was not a trump  card.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to leave the UK and  her  family  to
    make a choice to whether  to  join  her  or  whether  to  remain  here.
    Reference was made to Chikwamba v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  whereby  the
    Appellant could make an application for entry clearance.

 4. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 5. Grounds of application were lodged.  The  first  ground  was  that  the
    judge had  materially  misdirected  himself  in  his  consideration  of
    whether it would reasonable to expect the Appellant's British  children
    to leave the UK.  Reference was made to ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4  highlighted  at  paragraphs  30  to  32  noting  the  intrinsic
    importance of nationality in the assessment of the  best  interests  of
    the child that they would not be able to exercise that if they  had  to
    move to another country.  Reference was also made  to  Zambrano  [2011]
    EUECJ C-34/09.  Paragraph 11.2.3 of the  SSHD  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions Family Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0b; Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: Ten Year Routes,  (August  2015)
    stated that save in cases involving criminality the decision maker must
    not make a decision in relation to her parent or  primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen who by the effect of that decision would  be  to  force
    that British child to leave the EU.

 6. Similar observations were made in the February 2018  edition.   It  was
    said that the children's' best interest to live with the Appellant  and
    both their parents could continue to be met  by  remaining  within  the
    family unit.  The Appellant also placed reliance on the case of SF  and
    Others (guidance - post 2014)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  120  which  gives
    guidance on the approach to be taken where one is  considering  removal
    of a person that is a parent or primary carer of a British  child.   In
    paragraph 8 various factors were set out which could be said to justify
    removal even where there was a British citizen child and that  included
    whether or not there was any issue with  regard  to  criminality.   The
    case of SF involved the mother and several children of  whom  only  one
    was a British citizen.  The result of the  immigration  decision  would
    have been the separation of the youngest child from not only his mother
    but his siblings.  The family save the father had entered illegally  in
    2012 and had remained in the  UK.   The  father  appears  to  have  had
    settled status.  There was no criminality or  other  factor  justifying
    separation.

 7. In the present case there was clearly a father in  the  United  Kingdom
    and arguably the child  could  stay  with  the  father.   However,  the
    problem would be that the father working would have limited time either
    to work or look after the child.

 8. The conclusion in SF was that expecting the  mother  and  some  of  the
    children to  leave  the  youngest  child  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    effectively separating them was not in the circumstances reasonable  in
    terms the SSHD's own policy.  The result of failing to grant the mother
    leave would have been to force the  British  child  to  leave  the  UK.
    There were no other factors in this case which justified separation.

 9. Central to the policies is the fact that it is not reasonable to  force
    a British child to leave the United Kingdom.

10. It was said the judge had failed to consider the IDIs and the case  law
    of SF which amounted to a material error in law.  Other grounds  (which
    are not material to the outcome) are put forward.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    noting that it was arguable as set out in the grounds  that  the  judge
    had erred in his approach taken to the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    her British citizen children whether by reference to Section 117B(6) of
    the 2002 Act, the IDIs, the guidance to be found in MA (Pakistan) or SF
    (guidance - post 2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120.

12. Before me Mr Lee relied on his grounds. It was not reasonable to expect
    a British child to leave the United Kingdom  and  the  European  Union.
    The judge had ignored the relevant case law and the IDIs. Section  117B
    (6) said that there was public interest in removing the appellant.   So
    clear was the position that there was only one possible outcome  namely
    that there was a material error of law by the judge and as a result the
    decision should be set aside and the appeal allowed.

13. For the Home Office Ms Everett said that the judge had fully considered
    all the circumstances of the Appellant and  the  children.   There  was
    nothing perverse in the reasons given.  While there was some  force  in
    the grounds the judge had considered the reasonableness of her  removal
    and there was no material error in law.

14. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

15. In my view there is considerable force in the  grounds  of  application
    all as set out in some detail above and I do not require to repeat them
    here. While it can be said that the judge gave a careful  and  thorough
    decision looking at the best interests of the children and while it was
    unclear whether the judge was referred to SF it does seem to me to be a
    clear error in law for the judge not to have considered  the  IDIs  and
    what the Tribunal did say in SF (a  decision  of  the  Vice  President)
    about removal of someone such  as  the  Appellant.   In  terms  of  the
    reasonableness of the Appellant's removal it  was  incumbent  upon  the
    judge in terms of the balancing act under Article 8  to  consider  what
    was said in the IDIs highlighted in the case of SF.

16. In essence the Home Office do  not  require  removal  of  a  parent  of
    British children except in circumstances of criminality (there is  none
    here) and/or having a very poor immigration record (again that  is  not
    suggested here).  Had the judge been referred to SF then no  doubt  the
    judge would have taken the policy into account but not to consider  its
    contents in any way results in the judge failing to apply the law as it
    presently stands. There is a clear  material  error  in  law  with  the
    consequence that the decision has to be set aside.

17. Given the Home Office's own policy on these issues there  is  only  one
    possible outcome to this case namely that the appeal should  have  been
    allowed by the judge on human rights grounds because there is  no  good
    reason to force the removal of the Appellant and to separate  her  from
    her children who are British citizens. In  terms  of  the  Home  office
    policy I am satisfied that the proposed interference with  family  life
    is disproportionate and it  follows  that  the  appeal  is  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety and a fresh decision is made  allowing  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity order is required or made.


Signed     JG Macdonald                               Date    21st  November
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and because the Appellant came here  as
a visitor have decided to make no fee award.


Signed     JG Macdonald                               Date    21st  November
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald














