
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09831/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2020                           |On 27 January 2021            |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               Mrs Abida Rafiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by House of
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  16
    February 2018 to refuse the appellant's human rights claim made  on  23
    January 2017. The respondent's decision, and the reasons  for  it,  are
    set out in a reasons for refusal letter of the same date ("the RFRL").

Procedural history

 2. This matter has a lengthy procedural history. The appellant entered the
    United Kingdom in February 2012 with entry clearance as a student.  Her
    leave expired on 5 December 2013, and a subsequent in-time  application
    for further leave was refused on 3 June 2014 in circumstances which did
    not attract a right of appeal. On 2 July 2014,  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum. Her claim was refused on  10  September  2015,  and  an  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge S Pacey
    in a decision promulgated  on  24  May  2016.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision. On 14 December 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant exhausted all  avenues  of  appeal
    against that decision on 4 January 2017.

 3. The appellant's human rights application made on 23 January 2017 relied
    on much of the factual matrix, set out below, considered as part of her
    asylum claim.  The appellant originally appealed against the refusal of
    this human rights claim to the First-tier Tribunal in October 2018. Her
    appeal was dismissed but, on 12 December 2018,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Campbell allowed an appeal against that decision,  remitting  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.  On  3  July
    2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor dismissed the  remitted  appeal.
    There followed an appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision.
    On 13 December 2019, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  allowed  the
    appeal and set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    directed that the matter should be retained in the Upper Tribunal to be
    remade with certain findings  of  fact  preserved.   It  was  in  those
    circumstances that the matter was due to be heard by me.

 4. The case was listed to be reheard  in  April  2020.  That  hearing  was
    postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic. It resumed before  me  on  2
    November 2020, by Skype. The quality of the  internet  connection  with
    the interpreter was so poor that it was not possible  to  proceed  with
    the hearing on that occasion.  I adjourned the  proceedings,  directing
    they be resumed on a face-to-face basis in Field House.

 5. It was in those circumstances that I heard the matter  on  17  December
    2020.

 6. I explained to  the  parties  on  17  December  that  the  hearing  had
    originally been listed as a panel with a newly appointed  deputy  judge
    for training purposes. The deputy judge was, in the  event,  unable  to
    sit with me for reasons unconnected with the  case,  and  I  heard  the
    proceedings alone. No objections were raised.

Factual background

 7. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1987. The  human  rights
    claim she made in January 2017 was advanced on two  bases.  First,  she
    claimed to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her British
    husband, Saif  Shakir,  ("the  sponsor"),  and  that  they  would  face
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  continuing   their   relationship   in
    Pakistan, for the purposes of paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant claims to have  married  the  sponsor
    without the approval of her father in Pakistan, who has  now  not  only
    ostracised her, but had made threats against her: the  second  limb  of
    her human rights claim. The sponsor is younger than  the  appellant  by
    several years, and has brought dishonour on the family by marrying her,
    she claims.  As such, her life would be in danger if she were  required
    to return to Pakistan. The appellant and sponsor would not be  able  to
    support themselves  financially  there,  there  would  be  no  remitted
    support available from their family in this country,  and  due  to  the
    dispute between the appellant and her father, and the risk he poses  to
    her, she could not look too her father or his family  in  Pakistan  for
    assistance. Her mother has died.  Were she to return on her own,  as  a
    single woman with no family support, the  appellant  would  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to  her  integration  in  Pakistan,  within  the
    meaning of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The respondent does not accept the appellant's claims to  be  credible.
    She relies on the findings of  fact  reached  by  Judge  Pacey  in  his
    decision promulgated in May 2016,  which  found  that  the  appellant's
    asylum claim, which had been advanced on largely identical  grounds  to
    those based on the threat the appellant's father is  said  to  pose  to
    her, was not credible.  The RFRL noted how the sponsor was of Pakistani
    origin, having been born there, and having lived  there  until  he  was
    around 13 years of age.  The  couple  would  be  able  to  relocate  to
    Pakistan, and  integrate  without  significant  difficulty.   They  are
    familiar with the language, culture and customs.

 9. The Secretary of State also raised suitability concerns. The  appellant
    had failed to declare a caution she received on 18 September  2012  for
    three counts of theft (shoplifting). She had not declared that  caution
    in  an  earlier  application,  either.  In  relation  to  her   earlier
    application for leave to remain as a student, the respondent  contended
    that the appellant had  relied  on  a  fraudulently  obtained  English-
    language certificate.

10. In the course of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King's  decision,  he
    preserved earlier findings of fact reached by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Taylor that the appellant had not  used  deception  when  obtaining  an
    English-language certificate. In relation to  the  caution  issue,  the
    appellant had claimed that there had been  a  misunderstanding  at  the
    time, and  that  she  had  not  understood  what  the  implications  of
    accepting the caution were, nor that she was required to disclose it to
    the Secretary of State in her application.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor had rejected that explanation, and Deputy Judge King  considered
    there to be no reason to interfere with that finding.

Legal framework

11. This is an appeal brought under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for my consideration is  whether  it
    is proportionate under the terms of Article 8(2) of the Convention  for
    the appellant to be removed to Pakistan, in light of  the  family  life
    she enjoys with the sponsor.  This issue is to be  addressed  primarily
    through the lens of the Immigration Rules and also by reference to  the
    requirements of Article 8 of the Convention directly (see Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27 at 17).  The Rules relevant  to  this  case  are  contained  in
    Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  specifically  at  paragraph  E-
    ECP.2.6. and 2.10.

12.  In  addition,  there  are  a  number  of  statutory  public   interest
    considerations that  are  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") to which I  must  have
    regard.

13. It is for the appellant to establish on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that the refusal to grant  her  entry  clearance  breaches  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.

Documentary evidence

14. Over the course of the history of these proceedings, a large amount  of
    documentary evidence has been amassed. The appellant relied  on  a  264
    page bundle prepared for the proceedings before  Judge  Taylor  in  May
    2019, a  41  page  supplementary  bundle,  and  an  additional  witness
    statement provided by the appellant,  along  with  a  letter  from  her
    doctor.

15. The  respondent  relied  on  the  original  refusal  letter,  plus  the
    decisions of Judge pacey and Judge Hanson.

The hearing

16.  At  the  hearing,  the  appellant  and  sponsor  gave   evidence   and
    participated  in  the  hearing  in  Urdu  through  an  interpreter.   I
    established that the interpreter and witnesses were able to  understand
    each other and communicate through each other.  The witnesses  Basharat
    Hussain and Mohammed Sadeeq gave evidence in English.

17. Mr Sadeeq gave evidence over a Skype link, as he was said to  be  self-
    isolating following a return visit from  Pakistan.   No  concerns  were
    raised with the fairness of the  proceedings  at  any  stage,  and,  in
    contrast to the hearing on 2 November 2020, there were no  difficulties
    with the internet connection.

18. I will summarise the salient aspects of  the  evidence  to  the  extent
    necessary to reach my findings and give reasons  for  my  decision.   I
    considered the entirety of the evidence, in the round, before  reaching
    my decision, to the balance of probabilities standard.

Discussion

19. I find that the appellant's removal  would  be  an  interference  by  a
    public authority with her  right  to  private  and  family  life.   Her
    removal would have consequences of such gravity so  as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8 of the ECHR. Her removal would be  in
    accordance with the law, in  the  sense  that  it  would  be  conducted
    pursuant to an established legal framework, coupled  with  a  right  of
    appeal to this tribunal. Her removal would, in principle, be  necessary
    in a democratic society on grounds  of  the  permitted  derogations  in
    Article 8(2). The remaining question is whether her  removal  would  be
    proportionate. To address that issue,  I  will  analyse  the  following
    findings of fact through the lens of the Immigration  Rules,  and  then
    outside the rules.

20. The essential issues for me to determine are as follows.  In  light  of
    the findings I set out below, I will consider:

        a. Whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  and
           sponsor continuing  their  relationship  in  Pakistan,  for  the
           purposes of Appendix FM paragraph EX.1(b);

        b. Whether the appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to
           her integration in  Pakistan,  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi);

        c. Whether, in light of those findings, and outside the Immigration
           Rules, it would be disproportionate  under  Article  8  for  the
           appellant to be removed to Pakistan.

21. This human rights  appeal  has  been  heard  twice  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In relation to each First-tier decision, the Upper  Tribunal
    found that the First-tier judges failed to have regard to the  entirety
    of the evidence they heard, effectively treating the decision of  Judge
    Pacey as their "finishing point", rather than as the starting point for
    their analysis, pursuant to Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702.

22. The decision of Judge Pacey records credibility concerns  arising  from
    inconsistencies in the reasons given by the appellant for  the  reasons
    she claimed asylum, on the one hand, and her reasons for coming to this
    country, on the other: see  [15]  and  [17].  The  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's explanation for the delay in claiming asylum,  finding  she
    was an intelligent woman, who  had  received  education  both  in  this
    country and in Pakistan, and could have found out how to make  a  claim
    at an earlier stage. The judge drew an adverse  inference  against  her
    accordingly: see [16].  There are aspects of  the  appellant's  account
    relating to her marriage to her husband which the  judge  found  to  be
    inherently implausible, for example the fact they  lived  in  the  same
    house as their extended family members, but ostensibly managed to  keep
    their relationship secret: [19]. Some  of  the  answers  given  by  the
    appellant in her asylum interview conflicted with the evidence she  had
    given before the judge: [21].  In finding that the  decision  of  Judge
    pacey did not involve the making of an error  of  law,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson highlighted the analysis of the decision  under  challenge
    in those proceedings. See [8], where Judge Hanson outlined the contents
    of the refusal letter, which highlighted  inconsistencies  between  the
    appellant's asylum answers, and her asylum claim.

23. While the approach I am to take to the decision of Judge  Pacey  is  to
    treat it as my starting  point,  I  will  first  analyse  the  evidence
    adduced before me, before addressing the impact, if any, of the earlier
    findings of fact.

24. The appellant claims that when she arrived in  this  country,  she  had
    fled Pakistan without the knowledge of her  father,  as  he  wanted  to
    arrange a marriage for  her,  and  restrict  her  right  to  continuing
    education in Pakistan. She had studied political science at  university
    in Pakistan and engaged in some further studies in this  country.  Upon
    arrival here, she moved to a house  occupied  by  her  sister  and  her
    sister's husband, Basharat Hussain. Also living in the  house  was  the
    son of her sister's husband, the sponsor Saif Shakir,  whom  she  would
    later marry, in circumstances, she claims, that were kept  secret  from
    her controlling father in Pakistan.  Her secret  marriage  led  to  the
    rift and threats her father is said to have made.   The  appellant  and
    sponsor now live with her sister  and  Basharat  Hussain.   Mr  Hussain
    described himself as the brother in  law  and  father  in  law  of  the
    appellant.  He claims to  have  been  a  close  family  friend  of  the
    appellant's father in Pakistan, but that relations soured  as  soon  as
    the father found out about the marriage.  Part of the appellant's  case
    is that Mr Hussain has stayed in touch, to an extent, with her  father,
    and that through him, Mr Hussain, her father has  conveyed  threats  to
    kill her.

25. Although Judge  Pacey  suggested  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor was not genuine (see [18] and [19]),  in  the
    decision under challenge in these proceedings, the respondent  has  not
    contested the validity of the relationship, and I have  no  basis  upon
    which to do so of my own motion. I accept the sponsor and appellant  to
    be in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

26. The appellant's evidence demonstrated a subjective fear of threats from
    her father.  I accept that she believes that he has threatened her, and
    will do so, or harm her, if she returns to Pakistan.  However, for  the
    reasons  set  out  below,  there  is  no  objective  support  for   the
    appellant's subjective fear.  I also find that all four witnesses  have
    collectively exaggerated the  lack  of  contact  with  friendly  family
    members of the appellant in  Pakistan,  so  as  to  present  a  bleaker
    picture of her family links than is justified by the evidence.

27. The evidence of the sponsor, Mr Hussain and  Mr  Sadeeq  was  that  the
    appellant's father has threatened her, and she  would  be  at  risk  of
    reprisals, possibly death, in the event she was to return.

28. Under cross-examination, the appellant said she has no  family  members
    in Pakistan, other than her father's side  of  the  family.  Those  she
    lives within this country, she said,  are  the  extent  of  her  family
    relationships. The difficulty with that aspect of her evidence, is that
    she explained that, in 2015, Mr Hussain, her father and brother-in-law,
    returned to Pakistan for a family wedding.  She was vague  about  whose
    wedding it was.  That Mr Hussain returned  to  Pakistan  for  a  family
    wedding in 2015 was supported by the evidence of his son, the  sponsor.
    Under cross-examination, the sponsor  said  that  he  had  returned  to
    Pakistan for the  wedding  of  a  cousin  in  2015,  with  his  father,
    travelling together.   This suggests a  degree  of  family  contact  in
    Pakistan.

29. Pausing here, the sponsor's statement is  silent  as  to  the  fact  he
    accompanied his father on this return visit in 2015. I consider that to
    be a significant omission, most likely for  the  purposes  of  glossing
    over the true extent of family links  in  Pakistan,  given  it  is  the
    appellant's case, and was the sponsor's evidence, that when Mr  Hussain
    returned to Pakistan in 2015, the appellant's father renewed his threat
    of hostilities, conveying those threats  to  his  daughter  through  Mr
    Hussain. Given the centrality of the threats said to be  posed  by  the
    father in Pakistan, the absence  of  any  reference  in  the  sponsor's
    statement to the fact he accompanied Mr Hussain  on  the  return  visit
    which was said to have featured the threats now forming  the  basis  of
    this human rights claim is significant. The explanation  given  by  the
    sponsor for this omission in his written evidence was unconvincing.  He
    said he had forgotten and  had  been  unable  to  recall  all  relevant
    details in writing his witness statement. I find his return visit to be
    of such significance to the case advanced  by  his  wife,  and  in  his
    evidence on her behalf, that the omission of such a significant  factor
    cannot readily be explained by mere forgetfulness.

30. There were  further  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence.  Under  cross-
    examination, Mr Hussain said that he did  not  return  for  a  wedding,
    purporting not to be able to recall the purpose of his return visit. He
    insisted that he travelled alone, whereas  both  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant said in their evidence that Mr Hussain had  been  accompanied
    by the sponsor on the visit, which had been to attend  a  wedding.   Mr
    Hussain claims to have no family in Pakistan.

31. I find the evidence of Mr Hussain did not give the full picture of  his
    return visit to Pakistan in 2015; rather than revealing the true  state
    of the contact with his family in Pakistan,  which  involved  a  return
    visit for a wedding with his son, he purported to have travelled alone,
    not to have attended a wedding, and to have presented  the  purpose  of
    the return visit as having been to make an approach to the  appellant's
    father to reconcile the relationship between father and daughter.   The
    true purpose of the visit, I find, was to attend  a  wedding  with  his
    son.   He did not want to reveal this  in  his  evidence  as  it  would
    undermine the narrative he has sought to advance in  order  to  support
    the appellant's case that there are no family members in Pakistan  with
    whom the appellant, or his side of the family, are on good terms.

32. There were further unattractive elements to the evidence of the sponsor
    and Mr Hussain.

33. In her supplementary statement, the appellant writes at [7] that  "both
    families have  member  [sic]  in  Pakistan  and  are  closely  linked",
    referring to her sister's marriage to the father  of  her  husband.   I
    accept her evidence that "both families" have members in Pakistan,  and
    prefer her evidence to that of Mr Hussain and the sponsor in which they
    both claim, incredibly in light of my  analysis,  not  to  have  family
    there.

34. Although the sponsor was born in Pakistan and lived there until he  was
    around 13 years old, he purported not to have Pakistani nationality. Mr
    Hussain emphasised that the  only  nationality  held  by  his  son  was
    British. That contrasted with the evidence given by  the  appellant,  a
    political science graduate and recipient of further education  in  this
    country, that her husband has dual British and  Pakistani  nationality.
    Ms Iqbal confirmed in closing submissions that she did  not  advance  a
    case that the sponsor would be unable to acquire, or otherwise  confirm
    that he is entitled to, Pakistani  citizenship.  It  may  be  that  the
    sponsor and Mr Hussain were confused  as  to  the  distinction  between
    nationality, on the one hand, and possession  of  a  passport,  on  the
    other; the technical details do not matter. I accept that  the  sponsor
    may not have a Pakistani passport at the moment, but  I  find  that  in
    light of his Pakistani heritage, and early residence there, he will  be
    able to obtain a Pakistani passport, given the appellant's confirmation
    that he is a dual  British/Pakistan  citizen.   For  present  purposes,
    however, the significance of the sponsor and Mr Hussain's  emphasis  on
    the sponsor not holding Pakistani nationality is that it  represents  a
    further attempt to present the prospect of a return to Pakistan for the
    appellant and sponsor as being subject to an  insurmountable  obstacle.
    The sponsor has Pakistani nationality and would not face immigration or
    nationality-based obstacles to his return.

35. The sponsor said that during the return visit with his father in  2015,
    they stayed in a hotel. By contrast, Mr Hussain said that  they  stayed
    in the family property. That is a clear inconsistency in the  evidence.
    Mr Hussain also said under cross-examination that the  family  property
    in Pakistan  has  fallen  into  disrepair  and  is  derelict.  That  is
    inconsistent with his own evidence that he stayed in a family property,
    and a further basis upon which I find Mr Hussain  sought  to  give  the
    impression that there would be no support for  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor, or the appellant on her own, were she to return.

36. Through Ms Iqbal, the appellant sought to proffer  an  explanation  for
    the poor  quality  of  Mr  Hussain's  evidence,  stating  that  he  was
    diabetic, and that  he  experiences  difficulties  remembering  things.
    However, there was no medical evidence to that effect, and  Mr  Hussain
    himself did not mention memory problems in his evidence.

37. I turn to the evidence of Mr Sadeeq. In his statement, he  writes  that
    he has known the appellant's father for over  20  years.   At  [9],  he
    writes that the appellant's father  first  made  threats  to  kill  the
    appellant upon finding out she had fled to this country to continue her
    studies.  The threats were renewed  after  the  appellant  married  the
    sponsor, which defied her father's wishes for her: see  [15].  In  oral
    evidence, Mr Sadeeq said he had just returned from a visit to Pakistan,
    where he had again spoken to the appellant's father. He said her father
    was still very angry with her and  spoke  of  her  as  though  she  was
    "dead".

38. It is clear that Mr Sadeeq has had a central role  in  the  appellant's
    life in this country. He  collected  her  from  the  airport  when  she
    arrived initially. He arranged the marriage at the mosque. He has  been
    in recent, face to face, contact with her father.  While  his  evidence
    did not feature the inconsistencies which characterised the evidence of
    the sponsor and Mr Hussain, his evidence  was  high  level  and  lacked
    detail.

39. Drawing the  above  analysis  together,  considered  in  light  of  the
    established background materials concerning the position  of  women  in
    Pakistan, it is clear that there has been  a  family  dispute  of  some
    sort. That a father would become enraged when his daughter marries  and
    circumstances other than with his full consent is consistent  with  the
    well-established position of women in Pakistan. Mr  Hussain's  evidence
    featured weaknesses, but I do accept what he said about  the  need  for
    honour to be protected. That is an established phenomenon in  Pakistan.
    Ms Isherwood did not attempt to suggest otherwise. The question arises,
    however, as to the extent of the dispute. As Judge Hanson noted at  [8]
    of his decision, the asylum refusal letter highlighted  the  fact  that
    the appellant claimed her sister's marriage to Mr Hussain had  been  an
    arranged marriage and also purportedly a marriage that had taken  place
    in defiance of their father's wishes. The  refusal  letter  noted  that
    those two propositions were inconsistent, and therefore attracted  less
    weight. Those are considerations which  remain  valid  as  part  of  my
    analysis.  Although the appellant's sister provided a witness statement
    which is at pages 23 to 26 of the bundle, she  did  not  give  evidence
    before me.

40. For the reasons set out above, the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  Mr
    Hussain featured significant weaknesses, and  struck  me  as  testimony
    which sought to overstate the position in order to pave the way for the
    appellant's appeal to succeed. Both had a clear incentive to understate
    the extent of their links and family connections in  Pakistan,  and  to
    overstate  the  rift  between  the  appellant  and  her  father.   Both
    attributed the dispute to the marriage, whereas the  appellant's  first
    witness statement said that difficulties began when she  left  Pakistan
    to study here without her father's blessing.

41. I accept the submissions of Ms Isherwood that there has been no  detail
    as to the threats.  The  attempts  by  the  sponsor  to  speak  to  the
    appellant's  father  have  been  minimal.   The  sponsor  said  he  has
    attempted to engage with the appellant's father through messages, to no
    avail, yet there was no documentary evidence  of  the  sort  one  would
    readily expect in the face  of  a  long-standing  rift  between  family
    members in relation to which, as  the  sponsor  said,  there  had  been
    attempts at  reconciliation.   While  in  asylum  claims  there  is  no
    requirement for corroboration,  this  appeal  has  been  pursued  under
    Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  in  relation  to  which  the   balance   of
    probabilities standard applies. Ms Iqbal did not advance a case on  the
    basis of Article 3 of the ECHR.

42. Taken at its highest, the appellant has a subjective fear at the  hands
    of her father.  She experiences anxiety and depression, and while there
    is no medical report other than a short  GP  letter  dated  12  October
    2020, the uncertainty caused by her immigration status (which  entailed
    a clearly distressing arrest and period in detention,  which  I  accept
    will have been traumatic), combined with a dispute with her father, has
    led her to believe that the family dispute is far more serious than  it
    is in reality.  The claimed threats to the appellant have  mainly  been
    conveyed through people other than her father; specifically, they  have
    been communicated to her by the sponsor,  by  Mr  Hussain,  and  by  Mr
    Sadeeq. The evidence of Mr Sadeeq was high level, and lacked detail  of
    the sort one would readily expect in the event of  a  recent  visit  to
    Pakistan during which he met the appellant's father.  The  evidence  of
    the sponsor and Mr Hussain was  inconsistent,  and  plainly  sought  to
    gloss  over  matters  which,  properly  understood,  would  place   the
    appellant's case in a less favourable light.  The three witnesses  have
    catalysed the appellant's subjective fear.

43. I find that in the event the appellant returns to Pakistan,  she  would
    not return to no family reception.  She has extended family there.   Mr
    Hussain has a family property there.  There has been a  family  wedding
    there, albeit of a cousin of the sponsor who lives in  England.   While
    her father may have been unhappy at her marriage to a younger  man,  he
    has not made threats to her as claimed.  All witnesses have claimed  to
    have fewer family links in Pakistan than they do in reality.

44. In any event, the appellant's father is not in a position of authority,
    as the appellant confirmed in her  evidence.   There  is  no  basis  to
    conclude that, even if he had threatened her  in  her  home  area,  she
    would be at risk from him elsewhere  in  Pakistan,  a  country  of  200
    million people.

45. The findings I have reached independently of Judge Pacey's findings are
    entirely consistent with those which I must take as my starting  point.
    Accordingly, the analysis I have set out above is consistent with  that
    already conducted by Judge Pacey. It appears that  I  heard  additional
    oral evidence to that Judge
    Pacey heard in 2016, in particular Mr Hussain and Mr Sadeeq, but having
    done so,  for  the  reasons  set  out  above  I  do  not  consider  the
    appellant's case to be credible.

46. The sponsor claimed that he could  not  return  to  Pakistan  with  the
    appellant as his life is established here. He works as a  taxi  driver,
    although does not have any work at the  moment,  as  a  result  of  the
    pandemic. All his close family connections live in this country, and he
    has been here since the age of approximately 13. I accept  that  moving
    to Pakistan would be a major  upheaval.  However,  in  the  absence  of
    threats against the appellant from her father, and given the ability of
    the couple to draw on the family links  that  I  have  found  to  exist
    across the country, and in light of the Pakistani heritage of both  the
    sponsor and the appellant, I find  there  would  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to their relationship continuing in Pakistan. I  accept  that
    there would be difficulties, at least initially, especially as he  left
    the country before he was of working age.  However,  the  appellant  is
    highly educated, and the sponsor is a taxi driver. They will be able to
    find work, in time.  They speak Urdu in the family home, and  are  more
    comfortable conversing in that language than in  English.  Although  Mr
    Hussain contended that he would not be  able  to  remit  any  financial
    support to the couple in Pakistan, he said he would if he could. I find
    that he would be able to provide some support, and  that  he  would  be
    able to find work before a significant period, even  allowing  for  the
    impact of the pandemic.

47. In light of the preserved findings of fact, the appellant's failure  to
    disclose  her  caution  for  shoplifting  prevents  this  appeal   from
    succeeding under  the  Immigration  Rules:  see  S-LTR  2.2(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which concerns a failure to disclose material facts.
     However, it is still necessary to address the substantive  eligibility
    criteria under the rules, as that informs  my  Article  8  outside  the
    rules assessment.

48. For the reasons that follow, I find that  the  couple  would  not  face
    "insurmountable obstacles" to continuing their relationship in Pakistan
    for the purposes of EX.1(b).

49. In relation to the appellant  personally,  she  would  not  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to her own integration  in  Pakistan.   She  has
    spent most of her life there, and speaks the language.  She  is  highly
    educated. She would be able  to  draw  on  support  remitted  from  her
    husband, at least initially.  She would, within a reasonable  time,  be
    able to establish her own private life, drawing  on  her  knowledge  of
    Urdu, and Pakistani life and culture.  She lives within a predominantly
    Pakistani community in this country, and is well-placed to resume  life
    in Pakistan.  Her husband could return with her, at least initially  if
    he chose not  to  relocate  with  her,  to  assist  her  with  becoming
    established.  She would not face  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Article 8 outside the rules

50. I will conduct a "balance sheet" assessment to  determine  the  overall
    proportionality of the appellant's prospective removal.  References  in
    brackets to legislation  are  to  the  public  interest  considerations
    contained in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

51. Factors militating in favour of the appellant's removal include:

        a. The public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
           controls (section 117B(1)).  This is  a  consideration  of  some
           weight.

        b. The appellant does not meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
           Immigration Rules.  She fails on suitability grounds,  and  also
           on eligibility grounds, as set out above.

        c. The appellant does not speak English (section 117B(2)).

        d. The appellant would not be at risk upon her return to  Pakistan,
           and in any event has the option of locating around the world.

        e. The private life established by the appellant  has  been  during
           the currency of an initially precarious, and latterly  unlawful,
           stay in the country.

52. Factors militating against removal include:

        a. The appellant's private and family life is established here.

        b. Removal would present a significant  disruption,  not  only  for
           her, but for the sponsor as well.  Their joint return  would  be
           difficult and place them  under  pressure.   Alternatively,  the
           appellant's return alone would present  difficulties,  at  least
           initially, in light of the fact she has lived here since 2012.

        c. The appellant experiences  anxiety  and  depression,  and  takes
           Citalopram.  Her removal will inevitably cause her  symptoms  to
           worsen, at least initially.  The appellant's state  of  mind  is
           likely to present some obstacles to her integration, albeit  not
           very significant obstacles.

        d. The appellant has a subjective fear of her father.

53. I find the factors in favour of the removal of the  appellant  outweigh
    those mitigating against it. The public interest in the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is a weighty consideration. The appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the immigration rules, and nor  would
    there  be  "very  significant  obstacles"   to   her   integration   or
    "insurmountable obstacles" to her continuing her relationship with  the
    sponsor in Pakistan, the country where they were both  born,  and  they
    each enjoy either  Pakistani  nationality,  or,  in  the  case  of  the
    sponsor, a claim to it.  These are factors  of  far  more  significance
    than the appellant's  non-disclosure  of  her  caution  in  an  earlier
    immigration application.  The appellant has only ever held leave  as  a
    student, which can carry with it no expectation  of  settlement,  or  a
    right to remain.  Appropriate medical treatment will be  available  for
    the appellant's anxiety and  depression  in  Pakistan.    There  is  no
    medical evidence appropriate treatment is not available,  or  that  the
    experience of the return itself will exacerbate the appellant's medical
    conditions  to  the  extent  that  her  removal  would  no  longer   be
    proportionate.  She will be able to return with her husband, should  he
    choose to accompany her, and  there  are  some  family  connections  in
    Pakistan.  I find there are no exceptional circumstances such  that  it
    would be unjustifiably harsh for the appellant to be removed.

54. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                       Date 13 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed Stephen H Smith                       Date 13 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
