
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09981/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 24 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               abubakari adamu
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This decision was initially promulgated on 27 May  2020.  Subsequently,
    it was seen that the "Notice  of  Decision"  section  stated  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal "did/did not" involve the making of
    an error of law. As is plain from the substance of the decision, it was
    my intention to state  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did
    involve the making of an error of law. Therefore, pursuant to  rule  42
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I have corrected
    this typographical error. My corrected decision is hereby  promulgated,
    replacing the initial decision.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Green ("the judge"), promulgated as long ago as 28  June
    2017,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 30  March  2016,  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim.

 3. It is apparent from the two dates stated in the previous paragraph that
    this  appeal  has  a  lengthy   procedural   history.    In   all   the
    circumstances, I need only summarise it relatively briefly  here.   The
    appellant, a citizen of Ghana, applied for leave to remain on the basis
    of his relationship with his British partner, JA.  She suffered from  a
    number of medical conditions which, it was claimed, prevented her  from
    going to live  with  the  appellant  in  Ghana.   The  application  was
    refused, both in  respect  of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules") and in a wider  context.   On  appeal,  the  judge  essentially
    concluded that:

      i. there would be no "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  respect  of  the
         appellant returning to Ghana [12];

     ii. there would be no "very significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant
         reintegrating into Ghanaian society [14];

    iii. therefore, the appellant  could  not  succeed  in  respect  of  the
         relevant Rules;

     iv. that there were no  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the  case  to
         justify success under Article 8 on a wider basis;

      v. that the appellant could return to Ghana  alone  if  necessary  and
         make an appropriate entry clearance application from there [16].

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal sought to  challenge  each  of  those
    conclusions.

 5. An initial application for permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  A renewed application was refused  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 12 June  2018.   That  refusal  was  then  the  subject  of
    judicial review proceedings.   Following  a  substantive  hearing,  the
    Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission was reduced by the  Outer  House
    of the Court  of  Session  (AA  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] CSOH 56; the Opinion of Lady  Wise).   Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was then granted by the Vice-President  on
    15 April 2020.

 6. In this way the matter has come before me.

Procedural issues: the Covid-19 pandemic

 7. In light of the exceptional circumstances brought about by the Covid-19
    pandemic, on 23 March 2020 the Senior President of Tribunals  issued  a
    Pilot Practice Direction.  On that same  date,  the  President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (IAC) issued the Presidential Guidance Note  No.1  2020.
    These two documents highlighted  the  utility  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    making decisions without a hearing, with specific reference to rule  34
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  This course  of
    action is always, of course, subject to the  overriding  objective  and
    the need to ensure fairness to both parties in all the circumstances.

 8. In respect of the current appeal, directions were sent out at the  same
    time as the grant of permission (that  being  20  April  2020).   These
    directions sought submissions from the parties in respect of the  error
    of law issue.  In addition, they stipulated that any objections to  the
    error of law issue  being  determined  without  a  hearing  had  to  be
    submitted within a specified timeframe.

 9. In the event, both parties have provided helpful submissions as to  the
    merits  of  the  appellant's  appeal.   Neither  side  has  raised  any
    objections to the  error  of  law  issue  being  determined  without  a
    hearing.

10. Having given careful consideration to the matters set out in  paragraph
    6-8, above, and in particular the respondent's submissions (to which  I
    will return to shortly), I have concluded that the error of  law  issue
    in this appeal can fairly be determined without a hearing.  Pursuant to
    rule 34 of the Tribunal's Rules, I therefore proceed to undertake  this
    task.

The parties' written submissions

11. I wish to express my appreciation to both parties for the succinct  and
    considered submissions provided, particularly in light of  the  ongoing
    exceptional circumstances brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic.

12. The appellant's submissions reflect and  expand  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  It is asserted that the judge's conclusions in respect of  the
    Article 8 claim within and without  the  Rules  are  erroneous  in  the
    following  ways.   First,  that  the  finding  that   there   were   no
    "insurmountable obstacles" in  respect  of  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  was
    contrary to the evidence and, importantly, was based on  the  incorrect
    assumption that the  appellant's  partner  could/would  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom whilst he returned to Ghana.   Second,  that  the  judge
    effectively conflated the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  with  the
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences"  test:  there  should  have  been  a
    separate assessment for each with independent  reasoning.   Third,  the
    judge failed to apply the Chikwamba principle to the appellant's  case,
    in light of the finding that the couple  would  have  met  the  minimum
    income requirement under Appendix FM.

13. In response, the respondent accepts that the judge materially erred  in
    the following respect.  When conducting the "insurmountable  obstacles"
    assessment under EX.1 of Appendix FM, the  judge  inappropriately  took
    account of the fact (as he found it to be) that the appellant's partner
    could/would remain in the United Kingdom whilst he (the appellant) went
    to live in  Ghana.   It  is  acknowledged  that  EX.1   is  not  to  be
    approached on such a premise.  It  is  evident  from  the  respondent's
    submissions that she also accepts that the same erroneous approach  was
    applied to the judge's assessment of Article 8 outside the  context  of
    the Rules.  Thus, respondent confirms that  she  does  not  oppose  the
    first and second grounds of appeal.

14. In respect of the Chikwamba issue, the respondent asserts that there is
    no material error of law by the judge.  However, it is rightly conceded
    that in light of what is said in respect of the appellant's  first  two
    grounds, the opposition to the third ground is rendered otiose.

Decision on error of law

15. Having regard to the parties' respective submissions,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge materially erred in law in respect of his assessment  of
    the Article 8 claim,  both  within  and  without  the  context  of  the
    relevant Rules.

16.  It  is  clear  enough  to  me  that  the  judge   did   approach   the
    "insurmountable    obstacles"    and    the    "unjustifiably     harsh
    consequences"/"exceptional  circumstances"  issues  on  the   erroneous
    premise that the appellant's partner  could  or  would  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom whilst he left.  Such a premise plays  no  part  in  the
    assessment under EX.1 of Appendix FM.  In so far as the proportionality
    exercise outside of the Rules is concerned, the separation scenario (as
    it may be  described)  was  not  adequately  addressed  by  the  judge.
    Finally, I conclude that the judge erred by effectively relying on  his
    conclusions under EX.1 when undertaking the  proportionality  exercise.
    Given that the assessment of  EX.1  is  flawed,  it  follows  that  the
    conclusions on proportionality are also unsustainable (a  point  raised
    at [26] of the Court of Session's Opinion).

17. There is some merit in the respondent's opposition to  the  appellant's
    challenge on the Chikwamba issue, particularly in light of  the  recent
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Younas   (section   117B(6)(b);
    Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT  00129  (IAC).   However,  as  rightly
    accepted by the respondent, the success of the  appellant's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal does not depend upon this point.

18. It follows from the above that the  judge's  decision  is  vitiated  by
    errors of law and that it must, in all the circumstances, be set aside.

Disposal

19. Both parties have indicated that the most appropriate course of  action
    would be to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds
    that the significant passage of time since the respondent's refusal  of
    the human rights claim and, importantly, the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, is highly likely to necessitate the production and evaluation
    of up-to-date evidence.

20. Although remittal is the  exception  to  the  rule,  having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement and the realistic and  sensible
    views expressed by the parties, I agree  that  this  appeal  should  be
    remitted for a complete re-hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

21. None of the judge's findings shall be  preserved.   The  judge  dealing
    with the remitted appeal and the respondent will, no doubt, be at least
    cognisant  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  have
    previously been regarded as credible witnesses. This does not  however,
    bind the hands of any future judicial fact-finder.

22. In respect of the relevant legal framework, the appellant's  Article  8
    claim shall be considered both within and without the  context  of  the
    relevant Rules, having regard to any applicable guidance established by
    case-law.

Anonymity

23. The First-tier Tribunal made no direction and I have not been asked  to
    adopt a different position.  In all circumstances, I make no direction.



Notice of Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

25. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

26. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete
         re-hearing, with no preserved findings of fact;

      2) The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge A M S Green;

      3)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  shall  issue  further  case  management
         directions to the parties, as appropriate.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date: 22 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





                        Notification of appeal rights

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
