
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09890/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |17 October 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WARBY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 Adekola [A]
                              (aka: TOSIN [A])
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. West, instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 9 April 2018  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order  and  to  refuse  a  human  rights
    claim.

2.   The appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart
    ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 25 March  2019.   The  judge
    considered the appellant's immigration history  [2-6].   The  appellant
    has never had leave to remain in the UK. He has been removed to Nigeria
    on two occasions since he first arrived in the UK in October 2001. When
    he was removed to Nigeria on 17 July 2009 the appellant was subject  to
    a deportation order, which excluded him from the UK for a period of  at
    least ten years.  The judge noted that the appellant returned to the UK
    the same year and remained here ever since. The  judge  considered  the
    details of the offences committed by the appellant  which  led  to  the
    making of the deportation order [8-11].  She outlined the reasons given
    by the Secretary of State for refusing to revoke the deportation  order
    with reference to the relevant provisions relating to the assessment of
    the appellant's private and family life under Article 8 of the European
    Convention.  The judge  then  summarised  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and his  partner  at  the  hearing  [30-50].   She  made  her
    findings from [51] onwards.  At [56] the judge found that the appellant
    knowingly returned to the UK in breach of the deportation  order.   Not
    only did he return in breach, which is a criminal offence, but he  used
    a forged passport to do so.

3.   In considering whether there  were  any  grounds  for  the  deportation
    order to be revoked the judge referred to relevant  provisions  in  the
    immigration rules.  At [59] of the decision she set out the wording  of
    paragraphs 391 and  399D  of  the  immigration  rules.   At  [60],  she
    considered the substance of the test outlined  in  391(a).   She  found
    that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  for  ten  years
    exclusion. She noted that he spent little time in Nigeria following his
    deportation before returning to the UK in  breach  of  the  deportation
    order.  The judge concluded at  [60]  that  the  appellant  had  raised
    nothing that could be considered 'exceptional circumstances' to justify
    revoking the order.  At [61], the judge went  on  to  consider  whether
    there were any circumstances to justify revoking  the  order  on  human
    rights grounds.  In doing so, she referred to relevant aspects  of  the
    immigration rules at  paragraphs  399  and  399A,  which  set  out  the
    Secretary of State's position as to where  a  fair  balance  should  be
    struck in such cases.  She directed herself  to  the  correct  test  in
    those rules.

4.   The appellant's case relied on his relationship with  his  partner  and
    three children in the UK. The appellant's partner has two children from
    a previous relationship. The third child is the  appellant's  daughter,
    who was born in February 2017. The judge considered the best  interests
    of  the  children  at  [66].  She  went  on  to  consider  the   family
    circumstances. This included the fact that his partner's older children
    had different fathers with whom they have no contact.  The  judge  also
    considered the care the appellant gave to the children and the  support
    he provided to his partner [67-70].

5.   The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal's decision  on
    three grounds:

      i) The judge incorrectly applied the test outlined in paragraph 391 of
         the rules;

     ii) The judge failed to consider paragraphs 390 or 390A of the rules;

    iii) The judge failed to carry out an adequate assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children.

Decision and reasons

6.   We find the grounds fail to disclose errors  of  law  that  would  have
    made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

7.   In relation to  the  first  ground,  it  matters  not  that  the  judge
    considered the test in paragraph 391. The Court of Appeal in SSHD v  SU
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1069 made clear that this provision  is  applicable  to
    those making an application for revocation from outside  the  UK.  That
    was not this case but, in any event, it makes no difference because the
    judge found that the appellant did not meet any of the requirements.

8.   On behalf of the appellant it appears to  be  accepted  that  paragraph
    399D of the immigration rules applied in this  case.   Paragraph  399D,
    which was quoted by the judge at [59] of the decision, applies where  a
    foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of a deportation order. The rule states that enforcement of  the
    deportation order is in the public interest  and  will  be  implemented
    unless there are 'very exceptional circumstances'.

9.   If paragraph 399D was applicable, it is immaterial that the  judge  did
    not make  specific  findings  relating  to  paragraphs  390  and  390A.
    Paragraph 390 applies to  all  applications  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order. It requires the Secretary of State to consider  the  grounds  on
    which the original order was made, any representations which were  made
    in support of revocation, the interests of the community (including the
    maintenance of effective immigration control), and the interests of the
    applicant (including any compassionate circumstances).  Paragraph  390A
    states  that  where  paragraph  398  applies  (Article  8  claims)  the
    Secretary of State will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies,
    and if it does not it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that
    the public interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation  order  will  be
    outweighed by other factors.  The Court of Appeal in ZP (India) v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 made clear that paragraph 390A  applies  to  those
    who had not yet been deported from the UK. In this case  the  appellant
    had been deported and returned in breach of  the  order,  so  paragraph
    399D was the applicable provision.

10.  Nevertheless, the judge did conduct an  assessment  with  reference  to
    paragraphs 399 and 399A, and made clear that she did not consider  that
    the  circumstances  even  met  the  lower  threshold  of   'exceptional
    circumstances' to justify revoking the deportation order [60].  It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the circumstances fell far short  of
    the elevated threshold of 'very exceptional circumstances'.  For  these
    reasons we conclude that the first two grounds have no merit and do not
    disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

11.  In relation to the third ground, Mr West pointed us to several  factors
    relating to the children. He argued that it would be difficult for  the
    children, who were not of Nigerian origin, to live in Nigeria with  the
    appellant, but he identified no other factors to indicate that it would
    be unduly harsh for them to relocate as a family. Mr  West  highlighted
    the  general  family  circumstances,  including  the  nature   of   the
    relationship the appellant had with the three children,  the  level  of
    care that he gave to the children, and the assistance that his  support
    provides to his partner.  None of those facts were controversial and it
    seems clear to us that the judge considered the relevant circumstances,
    even if they were not considered in as much  detail  as  the  appellant
    might  have  liked:  see  [67-70].   None  of  those  factors,   either
    individually or taken together, came anywhere  close  to  showing  that
    there were 'very exceptional circumstances'  such  as  to  justify  the
    revocation of the  deportation  order  in  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular case.

12.  The Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  662  made
    clear that separation from a parent as a result of deportation  is  not
    usually in the best interests of  children,  but  that  was  the  usual
    negative effect of deportation. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  UKSC  53
    the Supreme Court said that something  more  than  the  usual  negative
    effect of deportation is needed to show a breach of Article 8. Clearly,
    the appellant's removal  to  Nigeria  might  cause  the  family  to  be
    separated, if his partner chose to remain in the UK with the  children,
    but the evidence showed nothing more than the usual negative effects of
    deportation.

13.  In this case something more again is needed to reach  the  even  higher
    threshold outlined in 399D of the immigration  rules.  Nothing  in  the
    circumstances of this case came close  to  the  threshold  required  to
    revoke the deportation order,  in  circumstances  where  the  appellant
    established a family life in the UK in the full knowledge that  he  was
    remaining unlawfully in breach of a deportation order. We are satisfied
    that the judge considered all the relevant factual  circumstances,  and
    that her findings were open to her to make on the evidence.

14.  We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error of law. The decision shall stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand

Signed   [pic]                  Date 15 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
