
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU091502015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th May 2017                      |On 2nd June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Slatter, Counsel on behalf of the Appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lucas) promulgated on 30th  September
    2016 in which the  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  JB  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against
    him under Section 32(5) (of the UK Borders Act 2007).

 2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly affect him or members of
    his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 3. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to
    JB as the Appellant as he  was  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 4. The background to the appeal is set out in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and also in the decision letter of the Secretary of
    State dated 7th  September  2015.   The  Appellant  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria.  In 2008 he met a British citizen whom  he  later  married  in
    2009 outside of the United Kingdom.  On 30th December 2010 he  made  an
    application for entry clearance as a spouse of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK  and  on  11th  March  2011,  he  was  granted  entry
    clearance, valid until 11th June 2013,  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen.  He arrived in the UK on 2nd April 2013 and on 30th April 2013
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 5. In July 2013 the Appellant was arrested in relation to sexual  offences
    (sexual assault on a female with no penetration) and released  on  bail
    to his home address.  Following a trial in October 2014  the  Appellant
    was convicted by the Crown  Court  of  two  sexual  assaults  that  had
    occurred in June and November  2012.   On  31st  October  2014  he  was
    sentenced to a period of twelve months' imprisonment concurrent and was
    also ordered to be the subject of notification requirements of the  sex
    offenders' register for ten years and to  pay  a  victim  surcharge  of
    �100.

 6. The judge's sentencing remarks are set out at B1  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle.

 7. On 3rd December 2014 the Appellant was served with a decision to deport
    dated 1st December 2014 under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.
      His   legal   representatives   responded   to   that   decision   in
    representations  dated  13th  December  2014;  the  Appellant   placing
    reliance upon Article 8 of the ECHR in the light  of  his  relationship
    with his British citizen wife and their two children, K, who is a child
    of the family and T who is the son of the Appellant and  his  wife.   A
    claim was also made in relation to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR however
    it is common  ground  that  reliance  upon  those  Articles  was  later
    withdrawn by his legal representatives  in  further  communications  in
    July 2015.

 8. The Appellant was released on licence in April 2015 with supervision at
    a hostel which expired on 31st October 2015.  He was then  released  on
    bail by the IAC on 18th May 2015 to the hostel and  restrictions  were
    imposed on 20th May 2015 by the Respondent.

 9. By a letter dated 7th September of 2015 the Appellant was  notified  of
    the decision to deport him from the UK [see Respondent's bundle  K1-2],
    the deportation order having  been  made  on  12th  August  2015.   The
    Appellant was deported to Nigeria on 29th September 2015 and lodged the
    present appeal against that decision on 26th October 2015.

Decision of the Secretary of State

10.  The   Appellant   had   provided   representations   via   his   legal
    representatives in February of 2015.   Those  representations  included
    confirmation of the nationality of the Appellant's spouse and children,
    including copies of their British passports, their marriage certificate
    and birth certificates of the children.  Other documentation  was  also
    provided to the Secretary of State.

11. In the decision letter of 7th September 2015, there was no dispute that
    the Appellant had a family life in the United Kingdom with two  British
    citizen children who were then aged 7 and 5.  It was accepted that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with them prior  to
    entering custody but that the offending history  demonstrated  that  he
    was prepared to jeopardise his responsibilities towards  his  children.
    The Respondent did not accept that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's children to live in Nigeria; both children could  adapt  to
    life in Nigeria where English was the primary language and  where  they
    could attend school.  It was  also  stated  that  the  Appellant  could
    support the children.  It was further not accepted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  even
    though the Appellant was to be deported.  The decision letter  went  on
    to state that it was considered to be in the children's best  interests
    to remain in the UK with their mother  and  enjoy  their  benefits  and
    rights as British citizen children.  The decision letter considered the
    circumstances of his wife that she had part-time  employment  and  that
    the welfare of the children had not  been  compromised  whilst  in  her
    care.  It was asserted that whilst deportation would have an  emotional
    impact on the children, it would be outweighed by the  public  interest
    and that the Appellant  could  remain  in  contact  with  the  children
    through modern means of communication.

12. As to family life with his wife, the Secretary of State  accepted  that
    his wife was a British citizen in the UK.  It was noted that there  had
    been previous marital problems but it was accepted that  the  Appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife having provided
    evidence of cohabitation and evidence from his wife  in  this  regards.
    It further noted that his relationship was formed when he  was  outside
    of the United Kingdom in 2008.  It was not accepted that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife to live in Nigeria and  that  she
    could apply for Nigerian citizenship.  The Respondent  did  not  accept
    also that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife  to  remain
    in the UK without the Appellant, stating that  she  would  be  able  to
    support herself and her children.

13. The Respondent gave consideration to the  private  life  exceptions  to
    deportation set out in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules but  did
    not accept that any of those requirements were  met.   Furthermore,  at
    page 7 of the decision letter, the Respondent  did  not  consider  that
    there were  any  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    exceptions set out in the Rules for the purposes of  paragraph  398  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.   In  this  context  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the medical evidence that had been produced on behalf of the
    Appellant.

14. The Secretary of State certified the human rights claim  under  Section
    94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and it was as a
    consequence of that certification that the Appellant  was  deported  in
    September 2015.

The Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal and in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30th September 2016 the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and in particular paragraph  399(a).



16. The judge set out the background  at  paragraphs  [1]  to  [20]  having
    summarised the Appellant's  immigration  history,  his  conviction  for
    sexual offences and sentencing remarks of the judge (paragraph [6]) and
    the contents of the  pre-sentence  report  at  [8].   The  Respondent's
    reasons for deportation set out in the letter of 7th September 2015  at
    K1-K12 was also summarised at paragraphs [13] to [20].

17. The Tribunal also made reference to the evidence provided in the appeal
    bundle submitted on the Appellant's behalf of 436 pages.   That  bundle
    contained witness statements from the Appellant and his wife and from a
    number of witnesses.  The judge recorded at paragraph [21]

         "The Tribunal explained at the commencement of  this  hearing  that
         the witness statements would be  heavily  summarised.   Mr  Slatter
         agreed and understood this course.  The Tribunal made it  clear  at
         the time and repeats it now, that it has fully  considered  all  of
         the witness statements contained in that bundle.  The following  is
         a summary only."

    The judge then went on at paragraphs [22] to [41] to make reference  to
    the evidence advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  As the judge set out
    it related to a number of witness statements from the Appellant's  wife
    in which she made reference to the  financial  and  other  support  the
    Appellant gave to her and the children, the maintenance of contact on a
    daily basis of her and the children, the circumstances of the  children
    and the effect upon them of a move to Nigeria and in  particular  their
    son's learning difficulties.  The statement made  a  reference  to  the
    strong family ties in the United Kingdom and that her daughter had also
    began to re-establish a relationship with her  own  biological  father.
    The evidence made reference to the differences in  the  children  since
    the Appellant had been deported.  There were further witness statements
    from family members, including the Appellant's brother, the Appellant's
    wife's father, family friends, and a pastor.   There  were  details  of
    contact and the mediation record of child K (pages  71  to  81  of  the
    bundle), there was a psychological and  speech  assessment  reports  in
    respect of T at pages 82 to 118 and a number of school reports at pages
    119-139.  At paragraph [39] the judge made reference to  the  Probation
    Service report set out at pages 146-147 confirming that  the  Appellant
    was assessed at a low risk of reoffending.

18. At paragraph [40] the judge went on to  make  reference  to  the  other
    evidence and letters/contact contained  within  pages  148-436  of  the
    bundle.  The Tribunal stated "the Tribunal does not propose  to  recite
    all of the other evidence and  letters/contact  that  is  contained  at
    pages 148-436 of the bundle with the undertaking contained at paragraph
    [21] above."

19. The judge also recorded the following:-

         "On behalf of the Respondent, Miss Martin stated that she  did  not
         propose to cross-examine any of those witnesses.  She  stated  that
         while the Respondent did not accept some of the assertions made, no
         useful purpose would be served through cross-examination.  This was
         her choice and the Tribunal  did  not  object.   Both  she  and  Mr
         Slatter agreed, therefore, that this hearing should proceed by  way
         of submissions."

20. Therefore it is plain that notwithstanding the large bundle of material
    and the witness statements  that  had  been  provided  and  indeed  the
    attendance of all of the witnesses who had made those statements  (with
    the exception of one) who had attended  the  hearing  and  had  adopted
    their witness statements as evidence-in-chief were  not  cross-examined
    upon the factual elements of their evidence.

21. The judge then went on to set out the submissions  of  the  parties  at
    paragraphs [44] to [56].  The findings of the  judge  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [59] to [69].

22. Those findings were as follows:-

         "[59]    The Appellant in this case can have  no  real  or  genuine
             objection to the decision of the Respondent to deport him from
             the UK.  He committed two serious sexual offences and used his
             position of trust to sexually assault two allegedly vulnerable
             women.  Both of the offences show a degree of  similarity  and
             were clearly planned with  an  element  of  grooming.   He  is
             fortunate indeed to have received a sentence  of  only  twelve
             months and equally so not to have received  a  consecutive  as
             opposed to a concurrent sentence for the two offences.   These
             were unpleasant  criminal  offences  committed  by  a  foreign
             national in the UK.  There is a clear public interest  imposed
             upon the Respondent to punish,  deter  and  ultimately  remove
             foreign nationals who commit criminal offences in the UK.   It
             matters not that he has had the  good  fortune  to  have  been
             granted  ILR  to  remain  in   the   UK.    He   is,   without
             qualification, a foreign national who has  committed  criminal
             offences in the UK.  The Tribunal  is  mindful  of  the  wider
             public interest and the individual interests of the victims in
             this case who have a right not to  be  sexually  assaulted  by
             anyone,   still   less   a   foreign   national.    In   these
             circumstances, there is an unequivocal public interest in  the
             deportation of the Appellant.

         [60]     The Tribunal is clearly concerned about the  offending  in
             itself.  It is also concerned that the Appellant denied  these
             offences and  contested  a  trial.   His  pre-sentence  report
             appeared to stress  the  Appellant  feels  that  he  has  been
             targeted by the victims rather than the other way  round.   He
             clearly did not accept at the time that he did anything  wrong
             and denied any criminal responsibility.  Also, his attempt  to
             justify it on the basis of his then lack of intimacy with  his
             wife is no explanation at all for what he did.   In  the  end,
             the Appellant is a convicted sex offender and he can  have  no
             real or genuine objection to his deportation.  The decision to
             deport  him  is  therefore  in  the  public  interest  and  is
             justified.  That is not, however, the end of  the  matter  and
             the Tribunal must consider the personal circumstances of  this
             Appellant  and  his  family.   The  proportionality   exercise
             requires an analysis of any  exceptions  and  very  compelling
             circumstances that may undermine the decision  to  deport  the
             Appellant.  With regard to the Appellant himself the  Tribunal
             has noted that he was described as being of previous good  and
             'exemplary character' by the  sentencing  judge.   He  has  an
             unremarkable immigration history and was granted ILR in  April
             2013.  He has not  committed  any  further  criminal  offences
             since the index offence and it is, of course, of  significance
             that he is assessed as a low risk of reoffending.  It is also,
             of course, of relevance  that  he  will  be  continued  to  be
             monitored as a sex offender until 2024.

         [62]     The Appellant has noted his remorse and regret for what he
             did, expressed after as opposed to before, his sentence.   His
             witnesses, including his wife  point  to  the  change  in  his
             behaviour and his remorse.  The Tribunal is  now  entitled  to
             presume that this remorse is genuine and that there is  a  low
             risk of reoffending.

         [63]     The Tribunal regards it as axiomatic that the heavier  the
             sentence imposed upon any foreign national,  the  greater  the
             public interest that there will be in their  deportation.   If
             this is correct, then it must be relevant that  the  Appellant
             received a medium sentence of imprisonment of twelve months.

         [64]     The Tribunal is mindful of  the  fact  that  the  criminal
             offending of the Appellant is his  responsibility  alone.   It
             agrees with Miss Martin that he  is  the  author  of  his  own
             stated misfortunes.  That said, the Tribunal is  also  mindful
             of the fact that the Appellant's wife and two children  should
             not also be punished for his actions.

         [65]     In reality, it would almost certainly be unduly  harsh  to
             expect and require the Appellant's wife and  two  children  to
             relocate to Nigeria.  All three are UK citizens and none  have
             any cultural links with Nigeria.   The  Appellant's  wife  has
             family here and the two children have their  own  difficulties
             which would - practically - prevent them from being able  to
             relocate to Nigeria.  T  has  learning  difficulties  and  the
             effect of relocation upon him would have a  real  impact  upon
             his progress.  K is also in a situation  where  she  has  made
             contact with her own biological father in the UK and it  would
             clearly not be in her best interests to relocate away from the
             country of her birth and in which she has settled status.

         [66]     The Tribunal has, only just, come to  the  view  that  the
             best interests of the children in this case and probably their
             mother, is to have their father back in their lives in the UK.
              In the view of the Tribunal, the overall  situation  of  this
             family amounts to a very significant set of circumstances  and
             exceptionality for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

         [67]     Had he been on his own, the Tribunal  would  have  had  no
             hesitation in dismissing this appeal.  However, in  the  light
             of  all  the  details -  risk   assessment,   remorse,   the
             disproportionate  effect  on  his  children  and  wife -  the
             Tribunal is prepared to give the Appellant  one  last  chance.
             It bears in mind that in doing so,  he  will  continue  to  be
             monitored as sex offender, albeit one that has  been  assessed
             as low risk of reoffending.

         [68]      The  Tribunal  needs  and  expects  this   Appellant   to
             understand quite unequivocally that if he commits any  further
             offending of any sort in the UK, the outcome for him will  not
             be favourable and he can or could not have any complaint about
             his deportation.

         [69]     The Tribunal concludes that the Appellant's case does fall
             within the exceptions set out under the Immigration Rules.  It
             therefore allows this appeal under those Rules."

         Thus the judge allowed the appeal.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal

23.  The Secretary of State sought to appeal that decision and on 7th April
    2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission.

24. The Upper Tribunal heard submissions from each of the parties and  took
    into account not only the written grounds advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State but also a Rule 24 response drafted by Mr Slatter in
    which he responded to the Secretary of State's grounds annexing to it a
    copy of the decision of the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v the SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  It is not necessary to set out the submissions of
    each of the parties as I will set out the  relevant  aspects  of  those
    submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and my consideration of those issues.

The legal framework

25. The relevant statutory background is set out in Sections 32 and  33  of
    the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   Section  32   provides   for   automatic
    deportation.  It defines a "foreign criminal" as a person

    (a)  who is not a British citizen;

    (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (c)  to whom condition (1) or (2) applies.

    It is common ground that the Appellant falls into all  three  of  those
    cases; he is not a British citizen and he has  been  convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom of an offence.

26. In respect of conditions (1) or (2), sub-Section (2)  is  the  relevant
    one which identifies condition (1) is that the person is sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment of at least twelve months.  As set  out  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant  was  sentenced
    to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  and  therefore  falls  within  those
    parameters.  For the purposes of Section 35A  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 the statute sets out that the deportation of a foreign criminal is
    conducive to the public good and in sub-Section (5)  the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation order in respect of a  foreign  criminal.
    Thus by operation of Section 32, subject to the exceptions to  which  I
    will refer later in the  Act,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  under  an
    obligation to make a deportation order.

27. Section 33 of the 2007 Act identifies the exceptions and provides  that
    Section 32(4) and [5] do not apply where  an  exception  in  this  case
    applies and that is exception (1) where removal of the foreign criminal
    in pursuance of the deportation order would breach

    (a)  a person's Convention rights; or

    (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

    In this case it is asserted  that  the  deportation  would  breach  the
    Appellant's Convention rights having withdrawn any other  grounds  that
    had been set out in the previous representations in June 2015.

28. In the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  made  reference  to
    paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules, which  deal  with  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, and Article 8.  These  paragraphs  of
    the Immigration  Rules  were  first  introduced  in  revisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules in July 2012, which replaced earlier Rules which were
    less  directly  focused  on  the  application  of  Article  8  in   the
    immigration context.

    Paragraph 396 provides:-

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007."

    Paragraphs 397 and 398 make clear  that  the  Rules  aim  to  encompass
    rights protected by the European Convention on Human Rights.  Paragraph
    397 provides:-

         "A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
         ............ .. where deportation would not be  contrary  to  these
         obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
         public interest in deportation is outweighed."

29. In relation to a claim by a person that his deportation  would  violate
    Article 8, paragraph 398 provides  in  relevant  part  that  where  the
    deportation of the person from the UK

         "is conducive to the public good and in the public interest because
         they have  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but
         at least twelve months ... the Secretary of State in assessing that
         claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
         it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
         outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
         399A."

30. Paragraph 399 states that it applies in a case like JB's if:

         "(a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in  the  UK  and



             (i)  the child is a British citizen: or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the seven years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision: and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it will be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported ...".



31. On 28th July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act")  came  into
    force.  It inserted a new part 5A into the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  Sections 117A and 117D of  the  2002
    Act provide in relevant part:



32. Part 5A provides in relevant part as follows:
      "PART 5A
      ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS
      117A Application of this Part
      (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
      under Article 8, and
      (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998.
      (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard-
      (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
      considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
      (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
      interest.
      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-
      (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
      independent, because such persons-
      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (4) Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
      that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
      United Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
      (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and
      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
           criminals

           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.

           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                exception E1 or exception E2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

           (5)    Exception E2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the
                public interest requires deportation unless there  are  very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                exceptions 1 and 2E.

           (7)    The considerations in sub-Sections (1) to (6) are  to  be
                taken into account where a court or Tribunal is  considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted.

    117D Interpretation of this part

           (1)    in this Part -

                "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
                Human Rights:

                "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
                and who -

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of seven years or more:

                "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                    meaning of the  Immigration  Act  1971 -  see  Sections
                    33(2A) of that Act).

           (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person -

                (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                (b)    who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence, and

                (c)    who -

                    (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                        at least twelve months,

                    (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has  caused
                        serious harm, or

                    (iii)  is a persistent offender.

33. Whilst the case advanced on behalf of the Appellant before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal relied upon paragraph 399(b) relating to the  Appellant's
    partner, and as the skeleton argument set out at paragraphs 21-27, that
    was an alternative submission premised upon the Tribunal  finding  that
    exception 2 in Section 117C(5)  in conjunction with  paragraphs  399(a)
    and (b) of the 2004 Rules were not met.  In essence, the central  issue
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal was whether or not  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for the children to live in Nigeria or whether or not it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the children to remain in  the  UK  without
    the person who is to be deported.   Thus  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider what is meant by "unduly harsh" within the context of the law.



34. The correct approach relating to what is meant by "unduly harsh" within
    the context of the legislation is set out in the  following  paragraphs
    from the judgment of Laws LJ, with whom Vos and Hamblen LJ  agreed,  in
    MM (Uganda) v the SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450:

         "[22]    I turn to the interpretation of the phrase 'unduly harsh'.
              Plainly it means the same in Section 117C(5) as in Rule  399.
             'Unduly harsh' is  an  ordinary  English  expression.   As  so
             often, its meaning is coloured by  its  context.   Authorities
             hardly  needed  for  such  a  proposition  but  it  is  anyway
             provided, for example by VIA  Rail  Calendar  [2000]  193  DLR
             (4th) 357 at paragraphs [35] to [37].

         [23]     The  context  in  these  cases  invites  emphasis  on  two
             factors, (1) the public interest in  the  removal  of  foreign
             criminals and (2) the need for a proportionate  assessment  of
             any interference with Article 8 rights.  In my judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by parliament in  Section  117C(1).   Section  117C(2)
             then provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  'The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.'

         [24]      This  steered  the  Tribunals  and  the   court   towards
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show  the  effect  on
             his child or partner will be unduly harsh.  Any other approach
             in my judgment dislocates the 'unduly harsh'  provisions  from
             their context.  It would  mean  that  the  question  of  undue
             hardship would be decided wholly without regard to  the  force
             of the public interest in deportation in the particular  case.
             But in that case the term 'unduly' is mistaken for 'excessive'
             which imports a different idea.  What is due or undue  depends
             on all the circumstances, not merely the impact on  the  child
             or partner in the given case.  In the present context relevant
             circumstances   could   certainly   include   the   criminal's
             immigration and criminal history."

35. This decision was followed by the Court of Appeal in R (MA  (Pakistan))
    v SSHD although Elias LJ with whom King LJ  and  Sir  Stephen  Richards
    agreed, express some  doubts  about  the  introduction  of  the  public
    interest into the test of undue harshness.

36. It is therefore clear from the decision in MM (Uganda) that it  is  not
    appropriate to consider the question of "unduly harsh" solely from  the
    perspective of the impact which deportation would  be  likely  to  have
    upon the children or partner involved.



Discussion

37. Mr Norton on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the  judge
    had not applied the correct legal framework which I have set out in the
    preceding paragraphs.  In particular, he submitted that the  judge  did
    not make reference to paragraph 398 in the Rules as it was not possible
    when looking at the determination to see  if  the  judge  did  properly
    apply the legal framework.  In essence he submitted that the judge went
    straight to the consideration of "unduly harsh" in his  conclusions  at
    paragraph [65].

38. Whilst this ground was not advanced in the written grounds, it  is  not
    one that I consider is made out when reading the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on the material that was before  him.   Contrary  to  the
    submission made, the judge in the determination did make  reference  to
    the legal framework which was set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraphs 8 to 13.  It is not in dispute that those paragraphs set out
    the basis upon which the case was advanced on behalf of the  Appellant.
    As the  judge  observed,  the  skeleton  argument  set  out  the  legal
    framework correctly within that skeleton argument (see paragraph [46]).
     Furthermore the judge went on to make  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    claim within the legal framework as follows:-

         "[46]    On behalf of the Appellant  Mr  Slatter  relied  upon  his
             skeleton  argument  dated  31st  August  2016.   The   refusal
             decision is correctly summarised at paragraphs 3-7.  The legal
             framework  is  again  correctly  at  paragraphs   8-13.    The
             Appellant is, correctly, described as a medium offender having
             been sentenced to a period of twelve months' imprisonment  and
             he therefore:

                  'Can in principle avail himself  of  the  safety  nets  of
                  exception 1 or 2 in Section 117C(3)  read  in  conjunction
                  with paragraphs 398-399 of  the  2014  Rules.   The  first
                  task, as stated in NA (Pakistan) at [36] is to see whether
                  the Appellant falls within exception 1 or 2 - if he does,
                  then his Article 8 claim succeeds.'"

39. Therefore at paragraph [46] the judge set  out  in  summary  terms  the
    issue that he had to decide; noting that the Appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal who had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  twelve
    months and thus the issue was whether he fell within exceptions 1 and 2
    (see Section 117C(5) and paragraph 399(a) or (b)) and  if  so,  whether
    his Article 8 claim succeeded.  This is in line with  the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v the SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  at
    [38] where Lord Reed said this:-

         "[38]    The implication of the new Rules is  Rules  399  and  399A
             identify particular categories of case in which the  Secretary
             of State accepts that the public interest in  the  deportation
             of  the  offender   is   outweighed   under   Article   8   by
             countervailing factors.  Cases  not  covered  by  those  Rules
             (that is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences
             of at least four years, or  who  have  received  sentences  of
             between twelve months and four  years  but  whose  private  or
             family life does not meet the requirements of  Rules  399  and
             399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight should
             generally be given to the public interest in  the  deportation
             of such offenders, but that it can be outweighed,  applying  a
             proportionality test, by  very  compelling  circumstances;  in
             other words, by a very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put  it
             in SS (Nigeria).  The countervailing  considerations  must  be
             very compelling  in  order  to  outweigh  the  general  public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed  by
             parliament  and  the  Secretary  of  State.   The   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence indicates  relevant  factors  to  consider,  and
             Rules 399 and 399A  provide  an  indication  of  the  sort  of
             matters  which  the  Secretary  of  State  regards   as   very
             compelling.  As explained at paragraph [26]  above,  they  can
             include factors bearing on the weight of the  public  interest
             in the deportation of the particular  offender,  such  as  his
             conduct since the offence was committed, as  well  as  factors
             relating to his private or family life.  ...".

40. It is plain from reading the determination at paragraph [46]  that  the
    judge had in mind the correct legal  framework.   As  set  out  in  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in NA (Nigeria) v the SSHD [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 10 at paragraph [27]:-

         "[27]    Decisions of Tribunals should  not  become  formulaic  and
             rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.   Arguments
             that reduce to the proposition that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             has failed to mention dicta from a  series  of  cases  in  the
             Court of Appeal or elsewhere will rarely prosper.   Similarly,
             as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowska  [1999]  1  WLR
             1360, 'reasons should be read on the assumption  that,  unless
             he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should
             perform his functions and which matters he  should  take  into
             account.'  He added that an 'appellate court should resist the
             temptation to subvert  the  principle  that  they  should  not
             substitute their own discretion for that of  the  judge  by  a
             narrow textual analysis which enables them to  claim  that  he
             misdirected himself.'  Moreover, some principles are so firmly
             embedded in judicial thinking that they  do  not  need  to  be
             recited.  For example, it would be surprising to see in  every
             civil  judgment  a  paragraph  dealing  with  the  burden  and
             standard of proof, or in every running down action a treatise,
             however short, on the  law  of  negligence.   That  said,  the
             reader of any judicial decision must  be  reassured  from  its
             content that the court or Tribunal  has  applied  the  correct
             legal test to any question it is deciding."

41. I now turn to the other grounds advanced by Mr Norton on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State which submit that the judge erred in law by  failing
    to correctly apply the  "unduly  harsh"  test  contained  in  paragraph
    399(a) and (b) and Section 117C of the 2002 Act.

42. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal in  determining  that  the
    Appellant's removal would  have  an  "unduly  harsh"  effect  upon  the
    Appellant's children and wife, the Tribunal failed to apply the correct
    threshold and failed to apply substantial weight to the public interest
    and failed to correctly apply the decision in MM (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 450  citing  paragraph  [26]  of  that  decision.   It  is  further
    submitted that the judge failed to  consider  the  Appellant's  serious
    criminality when deciding whether the Appellant's deportation would  be
    "unduly harsh" upon the family members.

43. Mr Norton relies upon the judge's finding set out  at  paragraphs  [65]
    and [66] in which he submits  there  is  no  balancing  of  the  public
    interest.  He further  seeks  to  criticise  the  judge's  decision  at
    paragraphs [67] and [68] whereby the judge made reference to a  "second
    chance" which Mr Norton said does not exist in the public interest  and
    the finding at [68] that if he  committed  further  offences  that  the
    outcome would not be favourable to the Appellant.   He  submitted  that
    that was improper to consider as  part  of  the  public  interest.   He
    further submitted that this was not simply an observation but was  part
    of the judge's reasoning.

44. I have made reference earlier in this determination to the decision  of
    MM (Uganda).  The facts of the case can be summarised shortly.  In  the
    appeal the Secretary of State appealed  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    finding that the Respondent M should not be deported.  He  had  arrived
    in 1990 and had one child.  He had been  convicted  of  drugs  offences
    (supplying  class  A)  and  had  received  a  sentence  of  22  months'
    imprisonment.  Upon appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, who applied  the
    old Immigration Rules in error, placed weight upon the relevant child's
    emotional  development  concluding  overall  that  deportation  of  the
    Appellant would be disproportionate and therefore in breach of  Article
    8.  The Upper Tribunal dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal on the
    basis that whilst the First-tier Tribunal had applied the wrong  Rules,
    the error was not one that was material given the finding made relating
    to the impact that deportation would have upon  the  Appellant's  child
    and her emotional development.  In the  second  appeal,  the  Appellant
    appealed against his  deportation.   He  had  been  living  in  the  UK
    illegally and had arrived with five dependants.  He had been  convicted
    of fraud and sentenced to imprisonment of 22  months.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed his appeal.  The Upper Tribunal thereafter allowed the
    Secretary of State's appeal holding that the seriousness of the foreign
    criminal's offence should  be  taken  into  account  in  assessment  of
    whether deporting  him  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  his  wife  and
    children.

45. The issue in MM (Uganda) was whether the seriousness  of  the  offences
    concerned were relevant when deciding if deportation was "unduly harsh"
    or whether the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MAB  (paragraph  399:
    "unduly harsh": US) [2015] UKUT 435 had been correct.  In that case the
    Upper Tribunal had found that the phrase "unduly harsh" did not  import
    a balancing exercise between the public interest in deportation and the
    effect on the Appellant's child or partner and that the focus should be
    exclusively on the effect upon them.

46. As set out the Court of Appeal held that the importance of  removing  a
    foreign criminal which was in the public  interest  was  emphasised  in
    Section 117C(1) and under Section 117C(2) it was clear  that  the  more
    serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal, the greater  the
    public interest  in  deportation.   That  steered  the  proportionality
    assessment.  Thus the more pressing the public interest in removal  the
    harder it would be to show its effects would be  "unduly  harsh".   The
    case also made it plain that the relevant  circumstances  included  the
    Appellant's criminal and immigration history thus the Court  of  Appeal
    found that the Upper Tribunal had wrongly decided MAB.

47. Therefore it is plain that it is not appropriate to consider the  issue
    of  "undue  harshness"  solely  from  the  perspective  of  the  impact
    deportation would have or would be likely to  have  upon  the  children
    involved.   The  court  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  all   the
    circumstances including the criminal immigration history of the  person
    to be deported.

48. It is against this background that I  have  considered  the  submission
    made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  It  would  be  wrong  in  my
    judgment to only consider the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  at
    paragraphs [65] and [66] as the  grounds  contend.   This  would  be  a
    failure to have regard to the earlier paragraphs which also set out the
    judge's analysis (see paragraphs [59] onwards).  As Mr Slatter submits,
    the judge applied the correct approach set out in MM (Uganda) which  he
    had been referred to by the parties (see skeleton argument,  paragraphs
    9-13).  In particular, the judge in determining whether  the  Appellant
    could meet the exceptions set out in Section 117(5) of  the  2002  Act,
    the judge properly had regard to the public interest and the  relevance
    of the Appellant's criminal and immigration history.

49. At paragraphs [59] and [60], the judge properly made reference  to  the
    seriousness of the offence  and  the  strong  public  interest  in  his
    deportation.  The judge had earlier set out the nature of the  offences
    and the judge's sentencing remarks at [6], to the sentence  imposed  at
    [7] and the content of the PSR [8].  At paragraph [59] the  judge  then
    analysed the offences further paying  due  weight  and  regard  to  the
    seriousness of those sexual offences by  reference  to  the  particular
    facts (at [60]) and in the context of the Appellant's  original  denial
    of the offences.  In doing so, the judge stated:-

         "At [59]  there  is  a  clear  public  interest  imposed  upon  the
         Respondent to punish, deter and ultimately remove foreign nationals
         who commit criminal offences in the UK.  It matters not that he has
         had the good fortune to have been granted ILR to remain in the  UK.
         He is, without qualification, a foreign national who has  committed
         criminal offences in the UK.  The Tribunal is mindful of the  wider
         public interest and the individual interests of the victims in this
         case who have a right not to be sexually assaulted by anyone, still
         less a foreign national.   In  these  circumstances,  there  is  an
         unequivocal public interest in the deportation of the Appellant".

50. And at paragraph [60] the judge stated following:-

         "[60]    ... in the end the Appellant is a convicted  sex  offender
             and  he  can  have  no  real  or  genuine  objection  to   his
             deportation.  The decision to deport him is therefore  in  the
             public interest and is justified.  That is not,  however,  the
             end of the matter and the Tribunal must consider the  personal
             circumstances  of  this  Appellant  and   his   family.    The
             proportionality  exercise  requires   an   analysis   of   any
             exceptions ...".

51. In my judgment those paragraphs properly reflect the words of Lord Reed
    in Hesham Ali in which Sections 32 and 33 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    make clear parliament's view that there is a strong public interest  in
    the  deportation  of  foreign  nationals  who  have  committed  serious
    offences  and  that  the  procedure  for  the  deportation  should   be
    expeditious and effective.  Those paragraphs when read  in  conjunction
    with the later paragraphs in  my  judgment  properly  reflect  Sections
    117B(1) that it is in  the  public  interest  for  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control but also that the deportation of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest (see Section 117C(1)) and that  the
    more  serious  the  offence,  the  greater  the  public   interest   in
    deportation (see Section 117C(2)).  The judge did not  seek  to  dilute
    the public interest by applying it solely to the  risk  of  reoffending
    but by reference to the strong public  interest  in  deterring  foreign
    criminals from committing offences and in the light of public revulsion
    of such offending (see paragraph  [59]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision).  The judge therefore properly applied MM  (Uganda)  and  had
    regard to the Appellant's criminal and immigration history.  The  judge
    made reference to the offences and their seriousness at paragraphs [59]
    and [60] when read in conjunction with the earlier paragraphs.  He took
    into account that the Appellant had been  of  previous  good  character
    which the sentencing judge had described as "exemplary  character"  and
    that he had not committed any further offences since the index offences
    in 2012 and upon his release (see paragraph [61]).  The judge also  had
    regard to the uncontested evidence regarding the  risk  of  reoffending
    which was said to be low (see the evidence recorded at  [39]  and  [53]
    and the conclusions at [61] and [62] that the  Appellant  posed  a  low
    risk of reoffending and that he  would  be  monitored  until  the  year
    2024).

52. The Tribunal also weighed in the balance his stated remorse, which  the
    judge accepted.  Whilst this was a case where  the  Appellant  did  not
    give oral evidence as he was out of country,  the  judge  accepted  the
    evidence of the  other  witnesses,  the  Appellant's  wife  and  family
    members who attested to his remorse.  None of that  evidence  had  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State (see paragraph [42]) and thus  the
    judge was therefore entitled  to  place  weight  on  that  evidence  in
    reaching his conclusions in this respect (at paragraph [62]).

53. As to his immigration history, the judge placed in the balance that  he
    had an "unremarkable immigration history" and that he was  granted  ILR
    in  April  2013.   When  looking  at  the  judge's  finding  that   his
    immigration history was "unremarkable" I understand that to mean  that
    this was a case whereby he had not entered the UK  unlawfully  but  had
    married a British citizen outside of  the  UK  in  2009  but  had  then
    applied lawfully for entry clearance which had been  granted  based  on
    his genuine and subsisting relationship with his spouse.  When  in  the
    UK he was here pursuant to leave and had been granted ILR based on  the
    relationship with his  spouse  in  April  2013.   Thus  there  were  no
    countervailing aspects of his immigration history.

54. At paragraph [63] the judge stated the following:-

         "[63]    The Tribunal regards it as axiomatic that the heavier  the
             sentence imposed upon any foreign national,  the  greater  the
             public interest there will be in their deportation.   If  this
             is correct, then  it  must  be  relevant  that  the  Appellant
             received a medium sentence of imprisonment of twelve  months."



    The judge went on to find at paragraph [64] that the criminal offending
    of the Appellant was his responsibility alone and that the judge agreed
    with the Presenting Officer's submission that he was the "author of his
    own stated misfortunes".

55. It had been submitted that the Appellant's offending had  been  at  the
    "bottom end" (see paragraph  [52]  reciting  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant).  Mr  Slatter  submitted  that  this  properly
    reflected Section 117C(2) as emphasised in MM (Uganda) of  a  relevance
    of the fact that the sentence imposed was at  the  bottom  end  of  the
    spectrum between twelve months and less than four years.  That seems to
    me to be reflected in the analysis of the judge at paragraph  [63]  and
    was a proper consideration to place in the balance.

56. Consequently I have reached the conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal
    did properly take into account the public interest and the  Appellant's
    circumstances and immigration history when reaching the conclusions  at
    paragraphs [65] and [66]  when  assessing  whether  the  exceptions  in
    Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act had been met and did so  in  accordance
    with the decision of MM (Uganda).

57. The next issue relates  to  whether  the  judge  properly  applied  the
    threshold test in the light of the particular factual matrix  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

58. There is no dispute as to the formulation of the "threshold" necessary.
     It is set out in the decision of KMO  (section  117 -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00534 which reaffirmed the  definition  of  "unduly
    harsh" from the earlier decision of MAB at paragraph [26],  stating  as
    follows:-

         "Whether the consequences of deportation will be 'unduly harsh' for
         an individual  involves  more  than  'uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging'
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.

         The consequences for an individual will  be  'harsh'  if  they  are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they  will  be  'unduly'  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  all  of
         the circumstances of the individual."  Although  I  would  add,  of
         course, that  'all  of  the  circumstances'  include  the  criminal
         history of the person facing deportation."

    Thus the question is whether the First-tier Tribunal  applied  that  in
    the context of the factual matrix of this particular Appellant and  the
    family's circumstances.

59. In this case there was no challenge to the evidence advanced on  behalf
    of the Appellant.  At paragraph [43] the judge records the position  of
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing who, despite the large number  of
    witnesses all of whom had been present save for one, chose not to cross-
    examine any of those witnesses and therefore their evidence  which  was
    adopted-in-chief was unchallenged.  The court therefore heard  no  oral
    evidence but proceeded by way of submissions.

60. I observe that whilst the judge recorded this,  he  also  recorded  the
    Presenting Officer's position that the Respondent did not  accept  some
    of the assertions made from those witnesses but that no useful  purpose
    would be served by cross-examining the witnesses.  However  there  does
    not appear to have been any schedule or record of any of the assertions
    made which were not accepted.  I therefore proceed, as  did  the  judge
    that the factual matrix upon which the analysis was undertaken is  that
    set out in the accompanying evidence which was not challenged.

61. The evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been  set  out  at
    paragraphs [22]-[41] of the decision and is a summarised note  of  that
    evidence.   On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  the  judge  reached  his
    conclusions on the issue of undue  harshness  at  paragraphs  [65]  and
    [66].  In summary he found that it would be unduly harsh to expect  the
    Appellant's wife and two  children  to  relocate  to  Nigeria.   In  my
    judgment, the judge gave adequate and sustainable  reasons  which  were
    evidence based which supported that conclusion, when seen in the  light
    of the evidence and the earlier paragraphs relating to the  Appellant's
    criminal history, his immigration status and the public interest.   The
    judge identified that all three were UK citizens with no cultural links
    to Nigeria.  There were strong family ties in the UK [the judge  having
    read the evidence of other family members before him].  The  judge  was
    also entitled to take into account the individual difficulties  of  the
    two children concerned which was  evidenced  in  the  material.   Those
    difficulties were identified in relation to K who had been developing a
    relationship with  her  biological  father  following  the  process  of
    mediation.  The outcome of this was set out at page 71 and was  further
    evidenced by messages (see page 74).  In  this  regard  the  judge  was
    entitled to place weight upon the impact upon K and not only  the  loss
    that there would be of being unable to  re-establish  her  relationship
    with her biological father but also the  impact  of  the  loss  of  the
    Appellant whom she had known as her father since a very young age.  The
    judge had evidence of the impact upon K from the evidence of her mother
    (in the witness statement of the Appellant's wife).

62. In relation to T, there was  a  psychological  report  and  speech  and
    language reports.  The judge  placed  weight  and  reliance  upon  that
    unchallenged evidence within the determination.  T was the  subject  of
    an individual educational plan as a  result  of  learning  difficulties
    which is evidenced by the  continuing  support  required  to  meet  his
    developmental needs.  The judge made reference  to  this  at  [38]  and
    [51].  As the judge  recorded,  the  effect  upon  T  set  out  in  the
    psychologist's report was evidenced by T's comments  about  his  father
    and the "sudden loss of a significant carer".  The  point  made  by  Mr
    Slatter was that the effect of the Appellant's deportation upon  T  was
    "unduly harsh" because the deportation of A placed the  onus  upon  the
    very skills that he had a deficit of in order to maintain  and  develop
    his relationship with his father.  The Appellant's involvement with T's
    education was documented in the evidence (see school  reports)  and  it
    was open to find that the physical presence of his father in the UK was
    likely to improve or support the progress in his developmental needs.

63. It was against this background that the judge's conclusions in my view,
    were open to him to reach that the effect of relocation of both T and K
    was such that it would cross the threshold  of  being  "unduly  harsh".
    The difficulties that the judge made reference  to  and  were  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  were  not  "commonplace"  incidents  of
    family life (see paragraph [33] of NA (Pakistan)).  The judge had found
    that it was in the best interests of both children to remain in the  UK
    with both their mother and father (see paragraphs [65]  and  [66])  and
    whilst they were a primary consideration this  was  a  factor  of  some
    weight.

64. Mr Norton relied upon the grounds in which the decisions of Lee  v  the
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 and PF (Nigeria) v the SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    251  are  cited.   These  decisions  make  reference  to   the   common
    consequences of deportation which necessarily result in a separation of
    children from their parents.  However this is a case in which the judge
    was entitled to reach the conclusion that  fell  outside  the  ordinary
    circumstances of separation for the reasons given.

65. Furthermore as Mr Slatter submits in this case the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision was based on the evidence  as  to  actual  experience  of  the
    Appellant's wife and children following the removal  of  the  Appellant
    pending the appeal  and  was  therefore  less  speculative  than  might
    otherwise have been.

66. The second point raised on behalf of the Secretary of State is that the
    judge failed to consider whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's partner and/or children to remain in the UK without him.

67. The grounds assert that the contact could and was maintained  following
    deportation and that the children could rely upon the modern methods of
    communication.  Whilst the grounds refer to  there  being  no  "special
    dependency" upon the A, this was not the position from the unchallenged
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  who  was  entitled  to  place
    weight upon the support and assistance  given  to  T  in  particular  a
    result of his learning difficulties and his developmental progress.  In
    my judgment, paragraphs [65] and [66] should be read  together  as  the
    conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal as to both limbs of  the
    "unduly harsh" test.  The factual assessment of the judge was that  the
    parental relationship was such to deliver the conclusion that it  would
    be unduly harsh for the children to leave  the  UK  and  also  for  the
    children to be in the UK without their father.  The judge did  look  at
    whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK  without
    their father at paragraph [66] relying principally on the same evidence
    that supported the first limb; the strength of  the  relationship,  the
    impact of separation  and  the  consequences  of  such  upon  both  the
    children.

68. I would observe that it  would  have  been  better  for  the  judge  to
    specifically have directed himself to  the  elevated  test  of  "unduly
    harsh" and to make it unambiguously  clear  that  he  had  applied  it.
    However looking at paragraphs [65] and [66] and in the context  of  the
    determination and the unchallenged  evidence  it  is  difficult  in  my
    judgment to say that he applied the lower test.   It  is  not  apparent
    that the judge left anything out of account and that it is a fact-based
    assessment that the judge was entitled to make.

69. It is plain that the decision was finely balanced as reflected  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision at paragraph [66] and  it  may  be  said
    that a different decision  could  have  been  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal however the decision was made following consideration  of  the
    evidence and in the context of the legislation.

70. I should also deal with  the  point  made  by  Mr  Norton  relating  to
    paragraphs [67] and [68] in which he submitted disclosed  an  error  of
    law.  In those paragraphs the judge made  reference  to  the  Appellant
    being given "one  last  chance"  (paragraph  [67])  and  at  [68]  made
    reference to the  Appellant  understanding  unequivocally  that  if  he
    committed any further offending then the  same  outcome  would  not  be
    favourable.

71. Mr Norton submits that this has no binding effect and that the  judge's
    reference to "last chance" had nothing to do with the public interest.

72. I have considered those submissions but I do not  consider  that  those
    paragraphs identified demonstrate an error of law.  In my judgment they
    are  simply  observations  made  by  the  judge  directed  towards  the
    Appellant.  I agree with Mr Norton that it cannot be binding  upon  the
    Tribunal but in the event  of  an  Appellant,  having  succeeded  in  a
    deportation appeal who then goes on to reoffend, it is likely that  the
    Secretary of State in those circumstances  would  commence  deportation
    provisions.  It is not unknown for judges to  make  such  observations.
    In the decision of Akinyemi v the SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236 at paragraph
    [53], the Tribunal in that case had given an explicit  warning  to  the
    Appellant as to the consequences of continuing to  offend.   The  court
    considered that this was a factor which the Tribunal would be  entitled
    to give considerable weight to.

73. This was, as both advocates have submitted, a finely balanced  decision
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.  It may well be that this was not  the
    only outcome possible on the facts but in this  particular  case  I  am
    satisfied that the judge did take into account the correct  legislative
    background and that the conclusions that were reached by the First-tier
    Tribunal, even if properly characterised as ones which might be thought
    to be generous, do not demonstrate any legal error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not demonstrate the  making  of
an error on a point of law.  Thus the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 1/6/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

