
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/09660/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 28 October 2020                   |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 23 October 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            NETRA BAHADUR GURUNG
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge J  C  Hamilton  promulgated  on  3  February  2020,
    dismissing his appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 against a decision of the respondent made on 7 May 2019 to  refuse
    him entry clearance and his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant sought entry to the United Kingdom as the adult dependant
    child of a Gurkha Veteran who had in 2016 been  granted  settlement  on
    that basis. It was not accepted that the appellant met the requirements
    of Appendix K of the Immigration Rules or any relevant policy.

 3. On appeal, the judge did not accept that the  appellant  has  a  family
    life with his family in the United Kingdom, and on that basis that  the
    respondent's decision did not engage article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, and then dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had  erred  in  not   putting   to   the   appellant's   witnesses   or
    representatives  matters  later  held  against  them;  in  misdirecting
    himself in law as to the correct test in establishing  if  family  life
    subsists; and, in his assessment of whether or  not  the  appellant  is
    unemployed.

 5. On 10 June 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher granted permission on
    all grounds.

 6. On 30 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-  gave  directions  which
    provided amongst other matters:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:

               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

               b) whether that decision should be set aside.

          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);

              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;

             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.

              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.

 7. Both parties made submissions in response to directions, the respondent
    on 4 September 2020 conceding that the judge had erred as is averred in
    ground 1 in not putting to the appellant's  representative  or  to  his
    witness points identified in the  grounds  of  appeal,  in  applying  a
    higher standard of proof in respect of evidential weight to be attached
    to phonecards. It was accepted that the decision should  be  set  aside
    and the issue of whether a family life exists be determined again.

 8. In reply, the appellant avers that the matter would better be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds as accepted indicating  a  lack
    of fairness.

 9. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Bearing in mind the overriding  objective
    in Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,
    and bearing in mind the concession by the respondent,  I  am  satisfied
    that in the particular circumstances of this  case  that  it  would  be
    correct to make a decision being made in the absence of a hearing.

10. I am satisfied that the judge did err in reaching his  decision  as  is
    claimed in the grounds of appeal and as is accepted by the  respondent.
    The decision clearly involved the making of an error of law as  claimed
    as these errors went to the core of the case.

11. I am persuaded that, as the evidence will in effect need  to  be  heard
    again, as the core issue  needs to be determined again and as there  is
    a taint of the appellant not being given a fair hearing, that it  would
    in all the circumstances be appropriate to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  all  issues.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt, none of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal are
    preserved.



Notice of Decision & Directions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
         on all issues to be heard by a judge other than Judge J C Hamilton.
         None of the findings made previously are preserved.




         Signed                                  Date 23 October 2020


         Jeremy K H Rintoul
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

