
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/09068/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th December 2019              |        On 23rd December 2019             |
|                                  |                                          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          mr Chinedu Henry Aguocha
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Uddin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated on 1st August 2019.  The  grounds
    of appeal assert that:-

      i. The judge fell into material error in  not  fully  appreciating  or
         assessing the merits of the case  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
         before him and  he  depended  overly  on  a  credibility  issue  in
         determining a human rights claim,  citing  Awala  [2015]  CSOH  73,
         paragraph 22, whereby it was held that it was "not proper to reject
         an applicant's account merely on the basis that it is not  credible
         or not plausible".  It was advanced that  at  paragraph  8  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal determination, the judge acknowledged that  the
         Secretary of State conceded that the  appellant  had  spent  almost
         half his life in the UK as  at  the  date  of  the  application  on
         3rd August  2017.   In  paragraph  10  there  appeared  to  be  an
         acceptance that the appellant had lived for more than half his life
         in the UK and thus the appeal should have been  in  favour  of  the
         appellant as opposed to the opposite.

     ii. The judge was not clear whether the matter was determined as at the
         date of hearing or the date of application and thus it was  unclear
         which date the judge considered when assessing the  merits  of  the
         case.  At paragraph 37 the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the
         appellant had formed a private life in the UK but went on to make a
         negative decision against the appellant.  At paragraph 44 the judge
         stated the appellant had not provided any  evidence  of  dependency
         apart from economic support and thus he is in effect accepting that
         there was dependency.

 2. The appellant was brought into the UK as a child  and  has  no  control
    over this and at paragraph 66 the judge accepted that the appellant was
    led to believe that he was allowed to work  but  then  criticised.   He
    could not be blamed for something that happened whilst he was a  minor.



 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge should have more clearly stated the material  date  and  when
    taken with the claimed contradictions in the Judge's findings  referred
    to above, whereby the judge accepted the appellant  had  no  family  or
    support in Nigeria, but then made a contrary finding on the same  point
    at 70.

Analysis

 4. At the hearing Mr Uddin relied  on  the  permission  granted  by  Judge
    Osborne such that the judge should have stated the  material  date  for
    considering evidence in relation to the appeal and he did  not  do  so.
    On this particular issue, however, the judge at paragraph 41 stated "In
    human rights appeals the burden of  proof  is  on  the  appellant,  the
    standard of proof is lower than the normal civil standard and the  date
    at which to consider the evidence is the  date  of  the  appeal".    In
    relation to Article 8 the standard of proof is the civil standard  (the
    balance  of  probabilities)  but  that  misapprehension  was   to   the
    appellant's advantage.   Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  reference  to
    'appeal' was shorthand for "the appeal hearing".

 5. On reading the decision it is clear  that  the  judge  considered  post
    decision evidence.  For example, on examining paragraph 55,  the  judge
    states "looking at the evidence as a whole" and  at  paragraph  56,  he
    refers to "my conclusion is fortified by the failure of the appellant's
    aunt to attend the hearing or to provide any evidence".   This  clearly
    indicates that the judge took into account the evidence that post-dated
    the application and decision and took into account  factors  that  were
    relevant as at the date  of  the  appeal  hearing.   When  reading  the
    decision as a whole it demonstrates  that  the  evidence  and  all  the
    evidence was carefully analysed by the judge and there was no confusion
    as to the date considered relevant for the determination of the  facts.
    The Immigration Rules with respect to paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) contain  a
    condition relating to the date of the application.

    "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

    ...

    (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
    half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any  period
    of imprisonment)"

 6. The judge had recorded and was aware at the outset that  the  appellant
    was born in 1993 and it was open to him to reject the evidence that the
    appellant had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2004.   The
    evidence for that proposition stemmed from letters  from  Mr  A  Roland
    Director of Studies at Arolly Secondary Commercial College  in  Nigeria
    but there were copies of the same letter one of which  was  dated  15th
    January 2005 and another  which  was  identical  dated  2007.   It  was
    entirely open to the judge to find those letters not  credible  because
    of their duplication and their alteration and the focus on  credibility
    was relevant to the finding as to the  appellant's  entry.   The  judge
    identified there were  blank  spaces  in  the  letters  and  they  were
    inconsistent with the appellant's own evidence.  The 2018 clarification
    letter from the Personal Assistant to the Director did not clarify  the
    concerns raised in respect  of  the  earlier  duplicated  letters.   At
    paragraph 53 the judge noted that both letters (2005 and  2007)  stated
    that it was the 'parent' who made it clear to the management  that  the
    appellant was leaving college albeit that the mother was said  to  have
    died in 2003 and the appellant had not mentioned  his  father  and  the
    evidence was that he had never known him.  The judge did  not  find  it
    credible, and it was open to him to do so, that  the  college  director
    would not use the word 'parent' if the  appellant  had  lost  his  only
    known parent more than a year and a half earlier and had  been  in  the
    care of a guardian since then.

 7. The judge gave, when looking  at  the  evidence  as  a  whole  adequate
    reasoning for placing no weight on the 2005, 2007 and 2018  letters  or
    the report from Arolly College which was undated and  therefore  of  no
    assistance.  That was cogently explained.

 8. Additionally, the judge factored  in  that  appellant's  aunt  did  not
    attend the hearing to provide evidence on matters which she could  have
    done and that the appellant although stating he travelled  on  his  own
    passport did not provide that passport. The judge also identified  that
    other witnesses, the cousins, as to the date of entry did  not  attend.
    In particular, the judge at paragraph 62 stated that he  did  not  find
    the appellant credible owing to the inconsistencies detailed as to  his
    entry in 2005. It was open to the judge  to  find  that  the  appellant
    entered in 2009.

 9. In sum, the focus on  the  credibility  was  not  misplaced  or  overly
    emphasised.  The evidence was simply not present in acceptable form and
    mere disagreement about the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  evidence,
    which is a matter for the judge, should  not  be  characterised  as  an
    error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

10. As Mr Tufan pointed out the apparent  contradictions  in  the  findings
    between paragraphs 8 and 10 was framed by the reasons for  the  refusal
    letter which mistakenly referred to him having  lived  in  the  UK  for
    eleven years as at the date of the application, however  the  paragraph
    above that statement in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  stated  "you
    claim to have entered the UK on 24th April  2005".   The  Secretary  of
    State's refusal letter proceeded to identify that  "despite  requesting
    further information showing you have been in the UK since 2005 you have
    not provided any evidence showing residence in the UK prior  to  2009".
    The letter specifically stated it was not accepted that he had been  in
    the UK for more than half his life.  That is not  a  concession  by  Mr
    Eaton during the First-tier Tribunal and indeed at paragraph  8  it  is
    recorded that "Mr  Eaton  acknowledged  mistakes  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and had conceded that the  appellant  had  spent  almost
    half his life in the UK at the date of application".  I  conclude  that
    the 'and' underlined was a typographical error  and  should  have  been
    'that'.   Even if I am wrong about that, the inclusion, however, of the
    word 'almost' is definitive in that the appellant had not succeeded  in
    fulfilling Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).

11. To my mind there is no contradiction and the judge  proceeded  properly
    to analyse and assess in terms open to him.  'Almost' half his life  at
    the date of application does not fulfil the Immigration Rules.   It  is
    clear from paragraph 64 of the judge's determination  that  he  made  a
    finding that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2009.  At that
    point the appellant would have been 16 years old (born in  1993).   The
    appellant therefore came nowhere near having spent half his life in the
    United Kingdom by the date of the application in 2017.

12. It was entirely open to the judge to find, at paragraph  37,  that  the
    appellant had formed a private life in the UK but to proceed to make  a
    negative decision against the appellant.  The appeal is made  on  human
    rights grounds but the fulfilment or otherwise of the Immigration Rules
    are relevant to a  proportionality  exercise.   The  judge  cited  Miah
    (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 00131(IAC) which states
    that Section 117B(1) to (5) applies to all  regardless  of  age  albeit
    that all other relevant factors may be weighed into  the  balance.  The
    judge accepted the appellant entered the United Kingdom as a minor  and
    there is no indication that that fact was not regarded.

13. Mr Uddin also took issue with the  judge's  approach  at  paragraph  70
    where he wrote: -

    'Even if I accepted Mr Lemer's submissions that the  appellant  had  no
    support or employment prospects in Nigeria, which I do not, that  would
    not alter my conclusion that the appellant has failed to show there are
    very significant obstacles preventing him reintegrating into Nigeria'.

14. This Mr Uddin suggested, showed  the  judge  concluded  that  under  no
    circumstances would even very significant obstacles prevent  a  removal
    to Nigeria.  I do not read the paragraph in that way.  First the judge
    clearly did not accept Mr  Lemer's,  the  appellant's  representatives,
    submissions.  Secondly albeit submissions were made on  that  basis  he
    found that the appellant had  failed  to  show  that  there  were  very
    significant  obstacles  preventing  him  reintegrating  into   Nigeria.
    Thirdly even if the statement  was  poorly  phrased  it  is  immaterial
    because he clearly  did  not  accept  the  submissions  made  that  the
    appellant had no support or employment prospects in Nigeria.

15. The judge from his analysis of the appellant's integration into the  UK
    and his ties to Nigeria clearly took a holistic  approach.   The  judge
    specifically  found  that  he  was  not  satisfied  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities that all the appellant's family were deceased or  outside
    Nigeria.  Not least the aunt had obtained  documentation  from  Nigeria
    which demonstrated that she had retained contacts there  and  whom  the
    judge found could "be able to advise the appellant and provide him with
    emotional support even if they are unable to offer financial support or
    accommodation" (paragraph 69).

16. The judge was thus fully aware of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    brought to the UK as a minor, was evidently schooled  in  Nigeria,  and
    even on his own case overstayed a visit visa.  The judge was obliged to
    apply Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    and proceeded correctly to find that little weight should  be  attached
    to any private life established by someone with precarious status.  The
    judge found that the appellant  had received an education and  accessed
    public funds through medical attention in the UK and it was open to the
    judge to find that the appellant had delayed regularising his statement
    after coming of age, (paragraph 73).  As set out at Section 17B (5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

     "Little weight should be given to a  private  life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious".

17. Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A  -  compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) also confirms that

    "The Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA 2002 is to give
    proper effect to Article 8 ECHR.  Thus  a  private  life  developed  or
    established during periods of unlawful or  precarious  residence  might
    conceivably qualify to be accorded more than little weight and  s  117B
    (4) and (5) are to be construed and applied accordingly".

18. Finally, there was a contradiction asserted on the part  of  the  judge
    who erred because at paragraph 44 he stated "there is  no  evidence  of
    dependency, apart from the economic support she  provides.   I  am  not
    satisfied that their ties amount to family  life  for  the  purpose  of
    Article  8".   That  was  a  finding  which  was   not   contradictory.
    Dependency can consist of a variety  of  factors,  including  emotional
    support and it was open to the judge to find that the economic  support
    did not necessarily equate to "family life for the purpose  of  Article
    8".  Family life is a particular concept and clearly not made out here,
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31; [2003] INLR 31.

19. Ultimately the judge found that  the  evidence  was  either  absent  or
    unreliable to support the contention that the appellant had been in the
    UK half his life at the date of the application, but, moreover,  having
    failed to fulfil the immigration  rules  there  were  no  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences to the appellant's return  to  Nigeria.   The  judge
    also considered all relevant facts when deciding the appeal and that is
    evident from a careful  reading  of  the  comprehensive  decision.  The
    claimed contradictions were not in fact contradictions.

20. I find therefore there are no material errors of law.  The judge looked
    at the evidence as a whole, and clearly fully appreciated and  assessed
    the evidence when finding that the  interference  with  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant, which were limited in degree of  private  life
    established in the UK, was justified and proportionate.

21. The grounds do not disclose any material errors of law and the decision
    will stand.

22. The appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date   17th December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

