
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09187/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th February 2019                |On 11th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  e. u. e.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod of Counsel instructed by Gordon &
Thompson
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellants.  No  report  of
these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   them.   This
direction applies to both the appellants  and  to  the  respondent  and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
I make this order because the appellant's child is a minor.

    1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  born  on  25th
         December 1971 and who claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom
         some time during 2000.  She adopted a child she claims was that  of
         her late sister who has  subsequently  died.   Notwithstanding  the
         fact that the appellant  claimed  to  have  arrived  in  2000,  the
         respondent had evidence that the appellant was in Nigeria  in  2005
         when she applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom,  which
         was refused.  She maintains that her child has been in  the  United
         Kingdom for more than seven years and,  as  a  result,  it  is  not
         reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.

    2.   The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
         the basis of her Article 8 ECHR rights but the respondent  rejected
         her claim and she appealed to the First Tier Tribunal.

    3.   The grounds of challenge to the Upper Tribunal asserted  that  the
         First Tier Tribunal Judge failed to properly consider the  evidence
         placed before him and whilst I am satisfied that there is no  merit
         in that challenge, what has been  established  during  the  hearing
         before me is that nowhere in the determination does the judge  give
         any self-direction on  the  standard  of  proof  or  indicate  what
         standard of proof she has applied.

    4.   It was claimed for example that in finding that the appellant  had
         not been in the United Kingdom since  2000,  the  judge  failed  to
         consider page 165 of the appellant's bundle being  the  appellant's
         daughter's health record, but that does not  help  in  establishing
         when the child entered the United Kingdom.  The appellant  has  not
         been able to satisfactorily explain what happened  to  the  child's
         passport, but she has produced evidence from  a  school  confirming
         that the child has been attending school since 11th September, 2012
         and claims that the child was registered with a  doctor  in  March,
         2010 and with a dentist in 2011.  The  appellant  did  not  provide
         copies of doctor's records or of  the  dentist's  records  and  the
         judge  was  obviously  concerned  with  the  credibility   of   the
         appellant, because she claimed to have arrived  in  2000  when  the
         Home Office had evidence to suggest she was in Nigeria in 2005.

    5.   However, it is clear to me that the determination cannot stand for
         the reasons I have identified above.   I  set  it  aside  since  it
         contains no self-direction on the burden and standard of proof  and
         nowhere indicates what standard of proof  the  judge  has  applied.
         The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing
         afresh before a judge other than Judge Quinn.







    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 07 March 2019
