
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/09625/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2019                           |On 10 September 2019              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            KIRITMA SARAH OKONNE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. By a decision dated 26 March 2018, the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK based on her family life  with  her  husband  and  daughter,  on
    grounds of eligibility and suitability.  It was not disputed  that  the
    appellant has genuine and subsisting relationships with her husband and
    daughter.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis allowed the appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 11 October 2018.

 4. The appellant had asked for her appeal to be  linked  to  that  of  her
    husband.  By the time the matter came before Judge  Hillis,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zahed had allowed her husband's appeal on  private  life
    article 8 grounds by a decision promulgated  on  3  July  2018.   Judge
    Hillis obtained a copy of that decision, and noted that Judge Zahed had
    found the appellant's husband to have an income  of  almost  twice  the
    minimum required for an application such  as  made  by  the  appellant.
    Judge Hillis took account of the interests of the child in  being  with
    both parents; thought that if the application been considered after the
    appellant's husband had succeeded, it was likely to have been found  to
    meet the requirements of the rules; and allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State for the Home Department's grounds of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal are (1) insufficient consideration of  how  the
    appellant met the requirements of the rules, including requirements for
    specified documents and English language ability and (2) no reasons for
    finding article 8 family  life  to  be  engaged,  no  consideration  of
    factors listed in section 117B [of the  2002  Act],  and  no  balancing
    exercise.

 6. Mr Govan accepted that the outcome of the  appeal  by  the  appellant's
    husband  had  not  been  challenged,  and  that  he  has  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  He submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    should have gone through the requirements of the rules, analysing  what
    the appellant could and could not meet, and that the  decision  in  the
    husband's case focused on circumstances at an earlier date, not at  the
    time relevant to his wife's application.

 7. The Secretary of State for the Home Department's decision was based  on
    issues which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  resolved  in  the  appellant's
    favour, and which are not challenged in the grounds.   We do not  think
    that the First-tier Tribunal was bound to embark  on  a  more  detailed
    examination, without the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    specifying where the application might further have  failed.   We  note
    that no such specification is offered in  the  grounds,  and  none  was
    suggested to us.  It was not for the First-tier Tribunal to make itself
    the primary scrutineer.

 8. We see no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal taking the outcome of
    the husband's appeal as the starting point, and proceeding  from  there
    to find that the appellant had  a  right  on  family  life  grounds  to
    remain.

 9. While preparing this decision  we  observe  a  feature  which  was  not
    commented on at the hearing.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department's decision dated 26 March  2018  certifies  the  appellant's
    claim as clearly unfounded under section 94  of  the  2002  Act.    The
    appellant did not leave the UK.  She should not have sought to file  an
    appeal without doing  so.   By  appearances,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should not have accepted or decided the case.  The Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department did  not  take  the  point  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or in the Upper Tribunal.  Matters having gone  this  far,  we
    are satisfied that the Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  by
    implication, waived the certificate, so that the case fell  within  the
    jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal and of the Upper Tribunal.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      9 September 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
