
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09034/2018
                                                               HU/09013/2018
                                                               HU/09018/2018
                                                               HU/09023/2018
                                                               HU/09028/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2019                     |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                       olalekan [g] (first appellant)
                       omotola [g] (second appellant)
                           [d g] (third appellant)
                          [a g] (fourth appellant)
                           [t g] (fifth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, have permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Cohen of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 28  November
    2018 dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the respondent on
    28 March 2018 refusing  to  grant  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellants' grounds are four-pronged.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge erred in:

         (i)  failing to consider the claim with due care,

         (ii) failing to conduct a proper assessment of the  best  interests
         of the children,

         (iii)    erroneously approaching the allegation of previous use  of
         false documents and in conducting matters in a procedurally  unfair
         manner, and

         (iv) adopting an erroneous approach  to  the  documentary  evidence
         relating to credibility assessment.

    I heard brief submissions from both representatives.  Both agreed  with
    me that this decision cannot stand.

3.   Ground 1 draws attention to a  number  of  references  in  the  judge's
    decision entirely unrelated to the appellants' appeals.  At  paragraphs
    25 to 27 the judge referred to entirely unrelated evidence from another
    case including  references  to  Tanzania,  a  Dutch  asylum  claim  and
    evidence from a person called Omar which were not  applicable  in  this
    case.  There were also mistakes in relation to the number of the  first
    two appellants' children (references to two rather than three children)
    and other mistakes in the form  of  typos  and  unclear  masculine  and
    feminine and possessive pronouns.

4.   Had these been the  only  matters  on  which  the  appellants'  grounds
    relied I may have been prepared to regard the decision as  sustainable.
    In relation to ground 2, I may also have been prepared to consider that
    notwithstanding the incorrect identification of two rather  than  three
    children, that the judge had at least  attempted  a  satisfactory  best
    interests of the child assessment.

5.   However, I see no answer to ground 3.  At paragraph 33 of the  decision
    the judge stated:

         "The appellant is seeking to remain in the  UK  on  long  residence
         grounds.  He claims to have resided in the  UK  continuously  since
         1996.  The appellant made  a  previous  application  for  leave  to
         remain in the UK on long residence grounds.   The  application  was
         refused because it  was  found  that  he  had  sought  to  rely  on
         unreliable  documentation.   I  accept   that   the   documentation
         submitted with  the  appellant's  application  was  unreliable  and
         contained many anomalies in respect of the  dates  and  information
         contained within that documentation in respect of  the  appropriate
         tax codes used at the time  and  energy  watch  references  on  the
         documentation before its existence.  The appellant  however  states
         that  the  documentation  was  not  submitted  by  him   and   that
         documentation that he sought to rely on  and  he  provided  to  the
         solicitor in support of his application was genuine."

6.   In the refusal decision of 28 March 2018, the  respondent  refused  the
    appellants' applications inter alia on  grounds  of  suitability  under
    Section S-LTR pertaining to paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of  the  Immigration
    Rules because it was:

         "... noted that in support of your application for indefinite leave
         to remain submitted on 23 October 2010 you submitted  a  number  of
         false documents in an attempt to gain leave to remain by deception,
         therefore you failed to meet S-LTR4.3 as indicated above."

    This clearly referenced back to the decision  made  on  4  August  2015
    refusing leave to remain in which a decision stating that there  was  a
    lack of suitability observed that:

         "With your application for ILR on the basis of your long  residence
         submitted on 23  October  2010  you  provided  a  number  of  false
         documents including payslips and energy bills in an attempt to gain
         leave to remain by deception.  It is  therefore  deemed  that  your
         provision of false documents  with  your  previous  application  is
         sufficient to indicate that it is  undesirable  to  permit  you  to
         remain in the United Kingdom due to your character and conduct  and
         you have been refused as unsuitable to  be  issued  with  leave  to
         remain under S-LTR1.6 of Appendix FM."

7.   However, none of the documents referred to by the respondent  had  been
    disclosed in the  refusal  decision.   Instead  the  respondent  relied
    solely on the conclusions of a 2011 refusal letter. Such non-production
    was contrary to the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules  2014  at  Rule
    24(1).  Further, although making negative findings in relation  to  the
    documentation  produced  by  the  appellants  in  relation   to   their
    application in October 2010, the letter from  the  respondent  dated  8
    January 2011 did  not  apply  any  suitability  requirements  or  their
    equivalent.  Nor did the March 2018 decision address the fact that  the
    respondent on 16 September 2014 had stated that the first appellant had
    lived in the UK for eighteen years and six months.  That  was  at  odds
    with the terms of the refusal in the 2011 and 2015  and  2018  decision
    letters doubting the claims to residence for such a  long  period.   At
    the very least it was incumbent on the judge to address these  apparent
    inconsistencies in the respondent's own assessment and to  ensure  that
    the appellants  had  full  disclosure  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    documentation relied on.

8.   There is also the difficulty that faced  with  the  production  by  the
    respondent of the decision letter of January 2011 on the morning of the
    hearing, the appellants' representatives applied for the  documentation
    relied on in relation to the doubts voiced by the respondent as to long
    residence to not be admitted.  The judge  made  no  reference  to  that
    application.  The decision of  the  judge  to  proceed  to  assess  the
    suitability requirements without  affording  the  appellants  a  proper
    opportunity to have the full documentation was a procedural error.

9.   Turning to ground 4, the grounds  take  aim  at  paragraph  36  of  the
    judge's decision:

         "The appellant has produced additional utility  bills  and  letters
         from friends in support of his claim to  have  resided  in  the  UK
         since 1996/1998.  However, in the light of my  adverse  credibility
         findings in respect of the appellant above  and  the  documentation
         that he has sought to rely upon and applying Tanveer Ahmed I attach
         no weight to that documentation."

    That formulation evinces a plain error in the approach to assessment of
    documentation.  What was required and is required by Tanveer  Ahmed  is
    that the evidence is considered as a whole and  that  documentation  is
    considered as part of a holistic process  of  arriving  at  credibility
    findings.

10.  There was also a fifth ground alleging error on the part of  the  judge
    in referring to an old appeal framework but  I  do  not  consider  that
    identifies  anything  of  materiality.   For  the  above  reasons,  the
    decision of the judge cannot  stand.   In  the  nature  of  the  errors
    identified, the case must be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    before Judge Cohen).

    Direction

    I make the following direction: that the  respondent  produces  to  the
    appellants' representatives within six weeks of  the  sending  of  this
    decision, the full set of documents referred to in the decision  letter
    in support of  the  finding  that  the  appellants  fail  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules.

11.  I note that the third appellant has now turned 7 which  gives  rise  to
    the issue of  whether  or  not  the  first  two  appellants  can  bring
    themselves within the ambit of  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That will  also  clearly  need  to  be
    addressed at the next hearing.

To conclude:

The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law;

The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Cohen).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 20 March 2019

     [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

