
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09056/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 26 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, HK, was born in 1993 and is a male  citizen  of  Malawi.
    He committed a number of  criminal  offences  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    details of which are set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  at
    [5].  The respondent made a decision to deport him and  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.  The appellant appealed against the refusal of  his
    human rights claim to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thorne) which,  in
    a decision promulgated on 3 April  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the  initial  hearing  at  Manchester  on  12  February  2019,  both
    representatives told me that they agreed that the  decision  should  be
    set  aside.   As  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  noted  when   granting
    permission to appeal, the judge had "erred in making no findings on the
    various strands of the appellant's private/family  life  pertaining  to
    relationships with  his  girlfriend  (albeit  of  just  one  year)  his
    grandmother and his brother all of whom gave evidence in support of the
    appeal".

 3. I note that those witnesses referred to by  Judge  Keki?  did,  indeed,
    give evidence.  The judge gives a very brief summary  of  the  evidence
    which they gave to the Tribunal at [13-19].  Thereafter, the judge sets
    out in extenso the law relating to deportation and then  identifies  as
    "the real question" whether there are  "very  compelling  circumstances
    which outweigh the public interest in deportation" [36].  At [41],  the
    judge indicated "the hard life and sad personal circumstances"  of  the
    appellant did not constitute "very compelling circumstances".  At [42],
    the judge concluded "in all the circumstances" that the  appeal  should
    be dismissed.  He has not, as the grounds point out, made  any  attempt
    to analyse the various relationships upon which the appellant seeks  to
    rely including that with his girlfriend who the judge noted at [13]  is
    "expecting a child".  It may well be  the  case  that  the  appellant's
    relationships with adult family members are not such as to  enable  him
    to succeed in his human rights appeal but the analysis  of  the  judge,
    without making findings regarding their evidence, is  unfortunately  so
    brusque as to render it inadequate.  I agree with both  advocates  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be set  aside.   Given
    the extent of fact-finding required in this  appeal,  the  appeal  will
    need to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  3
    April 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Thorne)
    for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 5. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

