
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09950/2018
                                                               HU/10664/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16.4.2019                                 |On 09.05.2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                donald [a] &
                                roseline [a]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing. The appellants appeal the decision  of
    the First - tier Tribunal (Judge G. Jones QC) (FtT) promulgated on 12th
    December 2018 in which  the  appellants  respective  applications  were
    dismissed on human rights grounds. The first appellant applied for  ILR
    based on his long residence of 10 years lawful  leave  and  the  second
    appellant applied as a dependant partner under Appendix FM and  Article
    8 ECHR.

Background

2.     The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.   They  have  three  children
    aged 9, 8, and 5 years old all of whom were born in the UK.  The  first
    and second children are "qualified children" to  whom  section  117B(6)
    applies.

Grounds of appeal

3.    In grounds of appeal the  appellant  argued  that  the  FTT  erred  by
    making an error of fact  in  terms  of  the  first  appellant's  lawful
    residence in the  UK  [13].   The  appellant  had  lawful  leave  until
    25.7.2010 and returned to Nigeria from where  he  was  granted  further
    leave as a dependant on 23.6.2010.   The FTT erred in  respect  of  the
    second appellant's period of residence in the UK which  was  from  2008
    and not 2011.

4.   The FTT was wrong to find that the first appellant  was  dishonest  for
    his failure to disclose his income to HMRC and failed to properly apply
    paragraph 322(5) which applied to cases involving criminality.

5.   The FTT failed to  consider  the  test  under  section  117B(6)  as  to
    whether or not it would be reasonable for the  children  to  return  to
    Nigeria, following MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA civ 705.

Permission to appeal
6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Saffer on 4.1.2019.  In granting permission  the  FTJ  considered  that
    there was no merit in respect of the ground  arguing  that  the  second
    appellant had established 10  years  residence  in  the  UK.   The  FTT
    arguably erred regarding the length of lawful residence  of  the  first
    appellant and whether there were powerful reasons to  require  the  two
    older children to have to leave the UK.

Submissions

Lawful leave for first appellant
7.    At the hearing before me Mr Khan argued  that  the  facts  as  to  the
    period of residence of the first appellant were wrong.   The  appellant
    had leave until 25.7.2010 and in early July he returned to Nigeria from
    where he had made an application as  a  dependant  relative  which  was
    successful.  He was granted leave issued on 28.6.2010 until  30.1.2012.
    Mr Khan relied on a skeleton argument.

8.   Mr Tufan was able to access the records held in Nigeria  and  confirmed
    that the appellant had indeed made the application in Nigeria  and  was
    granted leave until 30.1.2012.  It was conceded that the appellant  had
    established lawful residence for 10 years.

Paragraph 322(5)
9.    Mr Khan submitted that the FTT ought not to have made a  finding  that
    the appellant had  acted  dishonestly  as  not  all  the  evidence  was
    considered; there was no evidence  of  deliberate  failure  to  declare
    income.  Mr Khan relied on the Opinion [2018] CSOH 127.

10.    Mr  Tufan  responded  by  referring  to  a  JR  decision  before  UTJ
    Rimmington (JR/13807/ 2016 at paragraph 77 in which the UT held that it
    was open to the SSHD to  apply  paragraph  322(5)  to  cases  involving
    deficiencies in tax returns.

Section 117B(6)
11.  Mr Khan cited the recent UT decision  of  JG  (s  117B(6):  "reasonable
    leave " UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC).  The headnote  states  that
    this section requires the court or Tribunal  to  hypothesise  that  the
    child in question would leave the UK, even if this is not likely to  be
    the case, and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to
    do so.

12. Mr Tufan submitted that the position  was  as  per  KO  (Nigeria).   The
    children should return to Nigeria  with  their  parents  which  was  in
    accordance with the "real world" view.

Discussion and conclusion

13.   I find that there were errors of  fact  made  by  the  FTT  that  were
    material to the appeals. Firstly, in respect of the  period  of  lawful
    leave of the first appellant, no account was taken of the leave granted
    following the appellant's application made in Nigeria.  I was fortunate
    that Mr Tufan was able to confirm this with reference to  visa  records
    in Nigeria which showed  that  he  was  granted  leave  until  30.1.12.
    Further I  find  that  the  FTT  [9]  erred  in  recording  the  second
    appellant's date of entry into the UK as 24.11.2011 when her first visa
    was granted  on  14.11.2008.  Clearly  these  facts  are  relevant  and
    material to the first appellant's application for long residence  under
    the rules. Further, I found that there was a material error in  law  in
    the decision of the FTT  in  that  it  failed  to  make  an  assessment
    pursuant to section 117B(6) as to the reasonableness of  the  qualified
    children having to leave the UK.  The UT President in has now clarified
    KO (Nigeria) (paras 18 & 19) in JG at (24-41).

14.   As to paragraph 322(5) I consider that there was  sufficient  evidence
    before the FTT [24 & 25] to make a  finding  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden on him to establish that the appellant had  acted
    dishonestly [26]. Mr Khan submitted that the respondent failed to  take
    into account all the available evidence  in  reaching  its  conclusion.
    The refusal letter sets out the reasons in support and  made  it  clear
    that the allegation made was that  appellant  acted  dishonestly.   The
    respondent considered the response made by the appellant and  found  it
    to be lacking. In this regard I conclude that there  was  no  error  in
    law.

15.  There are material errors of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside. I was satisfied that the appellants had made out their  case  in
    respect of the ground as to the failure of the FTT to consider the test
    in section 117B(6) in terms of whether or  not  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the children to return to Nigeria with their parents.  In  short
    there simply was no proper consideration by the  FTT.  I  proceeded  to
    hear submissions and decided to remake the decision with  reference  to
    section 117B(6).

Re making decision - section 117B(6)

16.  I offered to Mr Khan the opportunity to apply  for  an  adjournment  in
    the event that he wished to  adduce  any  further  evidence  about  the
    children.  He relied on the bundle  submitted  for  the  hearing  which
    contained relevant information about the  children.   Mr  Khan  further
    submitted that the second appellant had now attained 10 years residence
    in the UK and that in 8 months time the children would be able to  make
    an application for British citizenship.  I accept that  the  appellants
    have lived lawfully in the UK for 12 and 10 years respectively.

17.  I am satisfied that all three children are settled and doing  well  and
    achieving  their  educational  milestones.   I  have  school   reports,
    progress certificates and letters of support.  Two of the children have
    lived in the UK for more than 7 years and will  be  in  a  position  to
    apply for British citizenship  shortly.   None  of  the  children  have
    travelled to Nigeria and have no direct experience of that  country  or
    of its educational system.  Whilst they are clearly dependant on  their
    parents, I find that the two eldest children are now of  an  age  where
    their life  at  school  is  of  significant  importance  and  they  are
    developing independence.  I am satisfied that the best interests of the
    children lie in their remaining in the UK with their  parents.  I  find
    that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  as  it
    would be a very significant disruption for them  socially,  emotionally
    and educationally given the length of residence in the UK. If they were
    to return to Nigeria they  would  have  to  start  again  socially  and
    educationally in a country where they have no  real  connection.  Their
    parents have lived for a long period of time in the UK and are entitled
    to apply under the long residence rules  for  ILR  and  the  two  older
    children would be eligible to apply  for  British  citizenship  in  due
    course. The FTT erred in its factual analysis of the  lawful  residence
    period of the first appellant, and it has now been accepted that he met
    the residence requirements subject  to  the  application  of  paragraph
    322(5).  The second appellant is now in a position to  apply  for  long
    residence leave. Both appellants have regularised their stay in the  UK
    and obtained leave as required. A return to Nigeria  would  necessitate
    having to find new accommodation and employment in order to  provide  a
    home and financial  support  for  the  family.  That  would  result  in
    considerable disruption for the family as a whole,  in  particular  the
    children who have integrated into the UK.

18.  In terms of  Article  8  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances such that Article 8 is engaged to  the  extent  that  the
    appellants have resided for a long period of time and the children  are
    established in the UK.  Article 8(1) is engaged  because  the  children
    have established private life and family life in the UK. Similarly  the
    appellants themselves have family life in the UK  and  have  lived  and
    worked for a significant period of time in the UK. There  would  be  an
    interference with that life in the event that the parents were removed.
     The decision made was lawful.

19.   I consider the public interest factors as provided in  section  117A-D
    2002 Act.  The appellants are working  and  earning  and  there  is  no
    reliance on public funds for financial support.   They  speak  English.
    Their private lives were built up when they had lawful leave but it was
    leave under the PBS as students and general migrants, and  so  to  that
    extent it was precarious but that carries little  weight  in  my  view.
    Both are established in the UK through employment and socially and  are
    members of their local Catholic church.  Neither appellant  has  strong
    family connections  with  Nigeria.   Neither  appellant  is  liable  to
    deportation and so section 117B(6) applies as both  appellants  have  a
    genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  two  qualifying  children.
    Following MA (Pakistan) & ors.  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the  nature  of
    section 117B(6) is free standing. I considered  above  where  the  best
    interest of the children lie. JG requires the Tribunal  to  hypothesise
    that the child in question would leave the UK and ask whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect the child to do so. I have  concluded  that  it
    would not be reasonable for the children to be expected  to  leave  for
    the reasons set out in paragraph 17 above.

20.   In terms of proportionality I find that the interest of  the  children
    outweighs the public interest in immigration control.  Section  117B(6)
    applies and so there is no public interest in removal. The parents have
    established lawful leave for over 10 years and are employed.  The  only
    factor  weighing  against  the  appellants  is  paragraph  322(5)  with
    reference to the first appellant's failure to declare  income.   Whilst
    accepting that paragraph 322(5) can apply to such conduct, it is  clear
    that the conduct of the parents will not be  taken  into  account  when
    considering the interests of the children (MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    civ 705), Zoumbas and EV (Philippines).  I take into account  that  the
    appellant is paying off the outstanding amount and that there had  been
    no prosecution and that the amount was not significant.  I  acknowledge
    that it is not the HMRC issue rather the immigration advantage that  it
    relevant in this context.  The appellants have otherwise lived  in  the
    UK making a positive contribution and  been  employed  throughout.  The
    second appellant has no negative issues in  terms  of  her  immigration
    history or conduct. There is therefore no public interest in  requiring
    the removal of the appellants and to do so would be a  disproportionate
    interference.

Decision

21. I substitute a decision to allow the appeals on human rights grounds.


Signed                     Date 23.4.2019


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD

Signed                     Date  23.4.2019

GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


