
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09517/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2020                            |On 05 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                            MR JASVIR SINGH BHOOT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Nadeem, Dassaur Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Jasvir Singh Bhoot, is a citizen of India,  born  on  16
    April 1974.  He appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    NMK Lawrence promulgated on 5  September  2019  dismissing  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent to refuse his human  rights  claim
    made on the basis of his long residence, dated 16 May 2019.


Factual background

 2. The applicant claims to have resided in the United Kingdom since  1995.
    His case is that he meets the criteria in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of
    the Immigration Rules for a grant of limited leave to  remain  on  long
    residence grounds.  The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant
    had demonstrated  that  he  had  been  continuously  resident  for  the
    requisite 20 years.

 3. The judge accepted that the appellant had resided in the United Kingdom
    for most of the time since 1995 but was not satisfied that he had  been
    resident from 2012 to 2013, and in 2016.  The judge  was  concerned  at
    the absence of documentary evidence covering those  periods.   Part  of
    the appellant's case was that he had instructed a firm of solicitors in
    the past in an attempt to regularise his  status,  but  that  they  had
    since destroyed his documents.  The appellant had provided a number  of
    supporters' letters to the respondent in his human rights  application.
    Only one of his supporters attended  the  hearing,  Balkar  Singh,  his
    priest.

 4. The judge found the appellant to lack credibility, in part because  the
    appellant had not pursued an appeal against the refusal of  his  asylum
    claim.    He  rejected  as  not  credible  the  suggestion   that   the
    appellant's former solicitors  would  have  destroyed  the  appellant's
    documents in their possession.  The judge rejected Mr Singh's evidence;
    he had only provided a statement on the morning of  the  hearing,  "and
    there was no need for him to attend as  a  replacement  for  the  other
    witnesses, including the appellant's  own  brother."   The  appellant's
    case had been that he had fallen out with his brother, who had  refused
    to cooperate with the appeal proceedings.

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on the  basis  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  by
    rejecting the suggestion that the appellant's former  solicitors  would
    have destroyed the appellant's files, given  it  is  "common  practice"
    that files can be destroyed by solicitors  after  six  years.   It  was
    arguable that the judge's reasons for  rejecting  Mr  Singh's  evidence
    were inadequate.

Discussion

 6. At the outset of my analysis,  it  is  important  to  recall  that  the
    jurisdiction of the Upper  Tribunal  in  this  context  is  limited  to
    considering whether the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law. It is not possible to appeal on a  point
    of fact. However, certain findings of  fact  may  be  infected  by  the
    making of an error of  law,  and  thus  be  subject  to  the  appellate
    jurisdiction of this tribunal. For example, in R (Iran) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982, the Court of  Appeal
    outlined a number of errors of law  which  can  arise  in  relation  to
    findings of fact. These include making perverse or irrational  findings
    on a matter or matters that were material to the outcome and failing to
    give reasons,  or  any  adequate  reasons,  for  findings  on  material
    matters. It is only  within  those  confines  that  this  tribunal  can
    interfere with the finding of fact reached by a judge below.

 7. There is no merit to the suggestion that the judge fell into error when
    considering  the  appellant's  former  solicitors'   claimed   document
    destruction practice. Not only was there no evidence before  the  judge
    concerning the claimed "common practice" of which he was supposed to be
    aware, but the appellant's evidence concerning the significance of  the
    solicitors' destruction of his records or documents he had provided  to
    them concerned his residence prior to 2010, which was not  in  dispute.
    It was common ground that the appellant had resided here  between  1995
    and 2012. Any documents in the possession of the appellant's solicitors
    could only have gone to the period  prior  to  2012:  see  [9]  of  the
    appellant's statement dated 19 August 2019 from before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. In any event, the judge had not been provided  with  any  evidence,  or
    legal argument concerning document retention obligations  imposed  upon
    the solicitors' profession.  I do not consider that it  may  simply  be
    assumed that  judges  should  take  judicial  notice  of  the  internal
    document retention policies adopted by law  firms  and  others  in  the
    legal profession.  Practices will vary.  It was not irrational for  the
    judge to approach this matter in this way. It was for the appellant  to
    prove his case.

 9. Turning  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  concerning  the  judge's
    treatment of Mr Singh's evidence, it is necessary to consider what  the
    judge said in more detail. He noted at [10]  that  Mr  Singh  had  "not
    provided a written statement until the morning  of  the  hearing."   Mr
    Singh's statement ahead of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  had  been
    provided in handwritten form.  The handwritten statement provided by Mr
    Singh appears to have been drafted on the morning of the hearing.

10. The judge continued:

         "[Mr Singh] appears to have been a person who came very late in the
         day to provide evidence for the gap in the  evidence.  He  told  me
         that he met the appellant in a temple in  2010  and  has  seen  him
         practically every day since. [The  presenting  officer]  asked  him
         what was it  that  made  him  remember  [when]  he  first  met  the
         appellant in 2010. Mr Singh told me  that  that  was  the  year  he
         entered the UK as a priest. He claims he still is a  priest.  I  do
         not find it credible that Mr Singh saw  the  appellant  practically
         every day since 2010. If he has there is no logical reason  why  he
         did not provide written evidence prior to the hearing."

11. There is, in principle, nothing wrong  with  a  judge  being  concerned
    about the provenance of witness evidence  on  these  grounds.  Where  a
    witness has provided a written account, the circumstances, and  timing,
    of the account  are  relevant  factors  which  a  judge  assessing  the
    credibility of that evidence may take into account.  The judge on  this
    occasion was entitled to express concern, and to  factor  such  concern
    into  his  credibility  analysis,  about  the  timing  of  the  witness
    statement. This was not an  account  that  had  been  provided  to  the
    respondent as part of the application process. It had not been included
    in the extensive bundle of documents which were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. If, as the appellant claimed, he had  seen  Mr  Singh  almost
    daily since 2010, it was entirely reasonable for the  judge  to  expect
    such a significant and central aspect of his case to have been advanced
    to the Secretary of State as part of the application process, or at the
    very least when the bundle was prepared for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It would have enabled  the  respondent  to  consider  her  position  in
    advance of the hearing.  Instead, the respondent and the tribunal  were
    ambushed.  It was, therefore, entirely appropriate  for  the  judge  to
    express concerns about the evidence being produced at the last minute.

12. It was also open to the judge to express concerns about the contents of
    the statement provided by Mr Singh. Taken at face value,  his  evidence
    was that he had seen the appellant virtually daily for a period of - by
    the time of the hearing in late August 2019 -  over  nine  and  a  half
    years.

13. Mr Nadeem submits that the judge gave no reasons  for  his  credibility
    concerns on that basis. I accept that the judge gave only brief reasons
    at [10].  He gave further reasons, at [13]:

         "I do not find it credible that  Mr  Balkar  Singh  could  truthful
         [sic] vouch that he saw the appellant practically every  day  since
         their first meeting in 2010... I do not  find  it  credible,  on  a
         human level, that he could have possibly seen the  appellant  every
         day since 2010."

14. Brief reasons can be sufficient reasons. For Mr Singh to have seen  the
    appellant daily for a  period  of  9  and  a  half  years  would  be  a
    considerable undertaking. It was a significant claim for  Mr  Singh  to
    make, involving many thousands of daily meetings.  Such  frequency  and
    regularity of contact would be a significant feature in  the  lives  of
    both individuals, on any view. Strikingly, however, as set  out  above,
    the evidence of Mr Singh  was  entirely  omitted  from  the  supporting
    materials the appellant submitted  to  the  respondent,  and  from  the
    bundle prepared by the appellant - who  has  been  legally  represented
    throughout - for the First-tier Tribunal.  There was no mention  of  Mr
    Singh in the appellant's witness statement. The judge was  entitled  to
    consider that the evidence submitted by Mr  Singh  may  not  have  been
    accurate, or would otherwise attract little  weight,  in  view  of  the
    seemingly tall nature of the account that it  provided,  when  combined
    with the circumstances of his statement's admission.

15. One  aspect  of  the  judge's  treatment  of  Mr  Singh's  evidence  is
    troubling.  The judge continued at [10] in these terms:

         "There is no need for him to attend as a replacement for the  other
         witnesses, including the appellant's own brother." (emphasis added)

16. In contrast to what the judge held here, there was every reason for  Mr
    Singh to attend the hearing; he was a witness the appellant  sought  to
    rely  on  for  oral  evidence.   The  other  character/long   residence
    witnesses had not attended, so the appellant  secured  another  witness
    who,  on  his  case,  provided  testimony  which  supported  his  case.
    Although the judge was entitled to outline his  legitimate  credibility
    concerns about the evidence of Mr Singh, the  judge  was  unnecessarily
    critical and sceptical about his attendance at the hearing.  It was not
    open to the judge to assert, without any reasons, that  there  was  "no
    need" for Mr Singh's attendance at the  hearing.    The  appellant  was
    advancing a case and brought a witness in support.  It may be that  the
    judge meant that, in view of the lack  of  weight  he  ascribed  to  Mr
    Singh's evidence, he did not need to attend the hearing; he should  not
    have bothered attending, so to speak.  The difficulty is that, if  that
    is what the judge meant, he did not say so.

17. I consider that the judge gave weight to an immaterial  matter,  namely
    the attendance of Balkar Singh in the place of the other witnesses  who
    had authored letters in support of the appellant.

18. The question then arises as to whether the above error of law was  such
    that the decision must be set aside.  In my view,  the  error  was  not
    material.  The judge's criticism of the appellant attending in place of
    the appellant was otiose.  He did not need to express himself  in  that
    way concerning Mr  Singh's  attendance  at  the  hearing,  but  he  was
    entitled to ascribe little weight to the contents of his evidence,  for
    the reasons given above.

19. I therefore reject Mr Nadeem's submissions  that  the  judge  erred  in
    relation to his treatment of Mr Singh's evidence.

20. Mr Nadeem  submits  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    statements and letters of support from the absent witnesses.   None  of
    the letters support the appellant's case that he was  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom in the disputed years, 2012, 2013 and  2016.   Taken  at
    their highest,  they  demonstrate  that  the  authors  have  known  the
    appellant for relatively lengthy  periods  of  time.   For  example,  a
    Charan Sekhon wrote on 16 March 2018 that he had  known  the  appellant
    for "nearly 6  years".   No  other  detail  is  provided,  for  example
    concerning the appellant's location during the disputed years, and  the
    context in which the author of the letter purportedly saw the appellant
    during that time.  The letter does not assist the  appellant.   Similar
    considerations apply to the other letters.  Nothing,  therefore,  turns
    on the judge's treatment of the letters as they do  not  speak  to  the
    disputed periods.

21. Mr Nadeem submits that the judge's analysis  concerning  whether  there
    were exceptional circumstances such that  the  appellant's  removal  to
    India would be unjustifiably harsh  was  inadequate.  I  disagree.   Mr
    Nadeem  did  not  advance  any  submissions   concerning   particularly
    significant aspects of the appellant's private life which would merit a
    different approach on this issue.  On the appellant's case, he spends a
    lot of time with the Indian diaspora community and is a regular at  the
    temple.  He still speaks  the  language.   While  he  will  undoubtedly
    struggle upon his return, at least initially, there was nothing  before
    the judge which necessitated a different conclusion  on  the  issue  of
    Article 8, whether in relation to the  presence  of  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's  integration  in  India  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, or leave outside the rules.

22. The decision of Judge Lawrence did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law on a material matter.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law on a material matter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                    Date 28 Jan 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



