
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09226/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2018                            |On 30 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                             Santu Kumari Khand
                       (anonymity DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Afolake Jaja, Copunsel, instructed by Howe & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Broklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Grant, promulgated on 20 July 2017. The appellant is  Nepalese.  Her
       father served as a soldier in the Gurkha army. He died in 1994.  The
       appellant's mother took advantage of  favourable  visa  arrangements
       and came to the United Kingdom in January 2014.


    2.   The preponderance of the evidence and argument before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal was directed to compliance with the Immigration  Rules
       and the  judge's  findings  are  at  paragraphs  26  and  following.
       Paragraph 27 concludes that there can be no valid  claim  under  the
       Rules in the absence of a formal dependency. There is  no  challenge
       within this appeal to that factual conclusion.


    3.   Paragraphs 28 and following discuss  whether  a  family  life  was
       enjoyed under Article 8.  The judge's findings are briefly stated as
       follows.

         "29. I find that the appellant does not enjoy family life with  her
             mother over and above the normal emotional family  ties  which
             exist between a mother and child.  This is emphasised  by  the
             decision of the sponsor to leave her daughter when the sponsor
             leaves the United Kingdom.  I therefore find the  respondent's
             decision does not amount to a breach of a right to respect for
             family life between the appellant and the sponsor.

         30.  With regard to private life I find the  respondent's  decision
             does not amount to a  breach  to  the  right  to  respect  for
             private life because the appellant's private life  has  always
             been enjoyed and established in  Nepal  where  she  will  have
             friends as well as her siblings.   Her  whole  life  has  been
             spent in Nepal.  The respondent's decision does not amount  to
             an interference with her right to respect for private life  on
             any basis."

    4.   Cases concerning the dependency of spouses, children  and  remoter
       issue of Gurkha soldiers have  been  the  subject  of  a  number  of
       appeals in the Upper Tribunal and the  Court  of  Appeal  in  recent
       years, in consequence of a Home Office policy introduced to  redress
       historic injustice. The principal authorities are cited by the judge
       at paragraph 9, Gurung v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising and others [2013] UKUT 567.


    5.   The case-law, however,  prescribes  a  sophisticated  and  nuanced
       approach to the redressing of historic injustice and the grounds  of
       appeal rely on a number of instances in which it is  suggested  that
       the judge's analysis in  this  instance  was  inadequate.  The  most
       persuasive of the grounds are the first two, namely the  absence  of
       reasoning and the wrong judicial approach.


    6.   The absence of reasoning is  implicit  from  the  brevity  of  the
       paragraphs I have quoted which marks the  totality  of  the  judge's
       analysis.  In  a  more  straightforward  case,   briefly   expressed
       conclusions may suffice, but  where  one  is  dealing  with  complex
       issues of redressing historic injustice upon which the higher courts
       have developed a nuanced approach, the paucity of reasoning  renders
       the determination porous such that it amounts to an error of law.


    7.   The judgment of Lindblom LJ in Rai v Entry Clearance  Officer  New
       Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320  makes  plain  that  determinations  under
       Article 8 in Ghurka cases are more than usually fact sensitive. They
       call for a level of analysis and clarity of conclusion significantly
       greater than is to be  found  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       tribunal.


    8.   I do not consider it helpful to  recite  the  authorities  at  any
       greater length or to  rehearse  their  application  to  the  factual
       background as found by the judge.  As I have indicated  the  judge's
       reasoning is less than adequate having regard to  the  jurisprudence
       it is inevitable that this matter must be remitted to a  differently
       constituted First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


    9.   The setting aside of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       should be interpreted as an indication as to the likely outcome when
       it is remade. Indeed, after the hearing of this matter on 8  January
       2018, when  I  delivered  an  ex  tempore  judgment,  the  following
       judgment was published in the Times Law Reports: Pun v Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2106.  I  did  not
       consider it appropriate to revisit  my  decision,  even  if  such  a
       course were available to  me,  since  on  any  account  the  judge's
       expressed reasoning was inadequate and the decision still  needs  to
       be remade.


   10. When this matter is heard afresh in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
       judge  will  give  full  consideration  to  all  the  jurisprudence,
       including the Court of Appeal's recent comments  in  Pun  and  apply
       them to the facts as found in determining this appeal de novo.

Notice of decision

   1) Having found a material error of law, the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal herein is set aside.

   2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other that Judge Grant.

   3) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date 29 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
