
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09726/2017
     HU/09727/2017
     HU/09729/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2018                           |On 05 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR M J U
                                   MRS S Y
                                 MASTER Y U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Edward Alam and
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh. The first-named appellant
    entered the United Kingdom as a student on December 16, 1999 and his
    leave was subsequently extended until March 31, 2004. On October 29,
    2005 the first-named appellant was served with form IS151A as an
    overstayer. An application to extend his stay further was refused on
    November 10, 2005 with no right of appeal.


 2. On August 23, 2008 the second-named appellant entered the United
    Kingdom as a student and was granted leave until September 30, 2010.


 3. On June 23, 2010 the first and second-named appellants made an
    application for a Certificate of Approval for Marriage but this was
    refused on March 15, 2011.

 4. On September 24, 2010 the second-named appellant made an application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) student migrant and was given
    leave to remain in this country and that leave was subsequently
    extended until September 21, 2015. These applications included the
    third-named appellant who had been born in the United Kingdom.

 5. On February 12, 2012 the first-named appellant submitted a human rights
    article 8 application on behalf of all the appellants, but this was
    refused and certified on October 22, 2015.

 6. On January 9, 2017 the appellants applied for leave to remain, as a
    family. The respondent considered this application under Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules but refused the application on August 22, 2017.
    He refused the application because the appellants did not satisfy the
    requirements necessary for either the partner or parent route. The
    respondent also refused the application under paragraph 276ADE HC 395
    because there were no "very significant obstacles" to their integration
    into Bangladesh. Additionally, the respondent concluded that it would
    not be unreasonable to require the third-named appellant to leave the
    United Kingdom with his parents. In considering whether there were any
    exceptional circumstances that would lead to a breach of article 8 ECHR
    the respondent had regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009 and concluded it would be in the third-named
    appellant's best interest to remain with his parents.

 7. The appellant appealed this decision under Section 82 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on September 4, 2017 and
    their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson on
    November 20, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on December 6, 2017 the
    Judge dismissed their appeals.

 8. The appellant's appealed that decision on December 21, 2017 but Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes refused permission to appeal finding
    the application was out of time and that this was a disagreement with
    the Judge's assessment of the evidence. Permission to appeal was
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted
    permission to appeal on August 1, 2018 finding it arguable the Judge
    had not properly considered the best interests of the child and the
    reasonableness of leaving the United Kingdom when considering section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 9. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person  who  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified.  The effect of such an "anonymity order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant information.   Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Bellara adopted the grounds of  appeal  that  had  been  lodged  but
    submitted the real issue for this Tribunal was whether  the  Judge  had
    failed to assess reasonableness. The Judge had erred  when  considering
    evidence relating to which language the child spoke  and  he  submitted
    that the Judge in finding the third-named appellant was  bilingual  had
    speculated. Whilst the Judge  had  made  adverse  findings  on  certain
    aspects of the first and second-named appellant's evidence, Mr  Bellara
    submitted that such discrepancies did not  go  to  the  issue  of  what
    language  the  child  understood.  Following  the  decisions  in   Kaur
    (children's best interests/public interest interface)  [2017]  UKUT  14
    and MA (Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705 Mr Bellara submitted the Judge had
    to identify strong adverse features which  would  outweigh  allowing  a
    child  who  has  lived  here  for  seven  years  to  remain.   In   the
    circumstances, he submitted there was an error in law.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no error of law. This  was  not  a
    case where the Judge rejected the appellants' claims to  speak  English
    but concluded that given their heritage and culture it  was  reasonably
    likely they were all bilingual. In  particular,  the  Judge  took  into
    account the fact the third-named appellant had never been to Bangladesh
    and had lived here all his life but in considering  the  reasonableness
    of return the Judge found that the adult appellants lacked  credibility
    when considering the impact of  relocation  to  Bangladesh.  The  Judge
    referred  to  the  fact  that  the  covering  letter  accompanying  the
    application made no reference to problems the third-named appellant may
    face in Bangladesh and simply relied on the fact that he had lived here
    for over seven years. The findings in paragraph 33 were, he  submitted,
    open to the Judge.

12. Mr Whitwell also referred to the fact that  the  extensive  grounds  of
    appeal did not place any weight on the Judge's finding on language.  He
    referred to the decisions of Kaur and MA (Pakistan) and submitted  that
    the real issue was reasonableness and the Judge had considered the best
    interests of the child and then reasonableness of return. The Judge was
    entitled to find that the adult poor immigration history was  a  strong
    enough reason to outweigh the wishes of the child to  remain  here  and
    whilst a different Tribunal  may  have  reached  a  different  decision
    nevertheless this decision was open to the Judge.

13. In response, Mr Bellara submitted that more  weight  should  have  been
    placed on how well the third-named appellant was doing  at  school  and
    whilst the child's parent's immigration  history  was  not  glowing  he
    submitted  this  was  not  a  strong  enough  reason  to   refuse   the
    application.

    FINDINGS

14. The appellants had each applied for leave  to  remain  and  it  appears
    accepted both in the First-tier Tribunal and  today  that  this  appeal
    centred around  the  third-named  appellant.  Without  the  third-named
    appellant's case the first and second-named appellants were unlikely to
    succeed given:

      a) The fact the first-named appellant had been here  unlawfully  since
         late 2004.

      b) The fact the second-named appellant had been here unlawfully  since
         late 2015.

      c) The fact they formed  their  relationship  whilst  the  first-named
         appellant was here unlawfully.

      d) Their immigration status had always been precarious.

      e) They had ties to Bangladesh.

15. When the appellants applied for leave to remain on January 9, 2017  the
    third-named appellant had been living in the United  Kingdom  for  just
    over  seven  years  and   accordingly   the   third-named   appellant's
    application fell to be considered by  the  respondent  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395 and article 8 ECHR.  When  considering  article  8
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act would apply. The Judge had to  consider
    whether it would be reasonable to require the third-named appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

16. It is clear from the Judge's decision that he was fully  aware  of  the
    respective arguments being advanced both by the parties. In particular,
    the Judge noted the  third-named  appellant  had  integrated  into  the
    British way of life and spoke English as his  first  language  and  had
    always been educated in this country.

17. The appellants argued that were he to  be  removed  his  education  and
    welfare would be severely disturbed  and  disrupted  and  he  would  be
    taught in Bengali and would not be able to adjust to that language.  It
    was claimed, on his behalf, that he only spoke a few words of  Bengali.
    The respondent disputed this claim and highlighted  inconsistencies  in
    the evidence given by the adult  appellants  and  submitted  that  this
    called into question their claims that the  third-named  appellant  did
    not speak Bengali.

18. Having heard the evidence and submissions the Judge  then  went  on  to
    consider  the  credibility   issues   and   identified   two   material
    discrepancies concerning whether the first-named appellant  had  worked
    unlawfully and secondly whether the  third-named  appellant  was  aware
    that relocation to Bangladesh was a possibility.

19. The Judge concluded that these discrepancies undermined  their  general
    credibility and the reliability  of  their  evidence  and  taking  into
    account the original application made  no  reference  to  any  specific
    problems that the third-named appellant would experience in  Bangladesh
    the Judge found that it was unlikely that the third-named appellant was
    not bilingual especially as he had a number of relatives of Bangladeshi
    heritage who were likely, like his parents did from time  to  time,  to
    communicate in Bengali given that they were living in a part of  London
    where there was likely to be a  significant  Bangladeshi  diaspora.  Mr
    Bellara submitted that the Judge speculated on issues  and  placed  too
    much weight on inconsistencies in evidence.

20. The Judge, in my assessment, was entitled to make the findings  he  did
    on credibility and  where  adverse  findings  were  made  he  was  then
    entitled  to  place  such  weight  on  those  findings,  as   he   felt
    appropriate, when  he  considered  other  aspects  of  the  appellants'
    evidence.

21. Looking at the grounds of appeal I note  that  with  the  exception  of
    paragraphs 9 and 14 the grounds made  no  reference  to  the  issue  of
    language. Paragraphs 9 and 14 were recognised by the Judge who accepted
    the third-named appellant would speak English in school. Accordingly, I
    do not find the Judge erred in his approach to language.

22. Both representatives agreed the issue  was  reasonableness  and  I  was
    referred to the leading authority is on this matter. I should add  that
    subsequent to today's hearing the Supreme Court have handed down  their
    decision in KO (Nigeria) and others v The Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53. This appears to make clear that Section
    117B(6)  incorporated  the  substance  of  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  without
    material change, but in the context of  the  right  of  the  parent  to
    remain. It was intended to have the same effect. The question was  what
    was "reasonable" for the child. Nothing in the  subsection  imported  a
    reference to the parent's conduct but it was relevant to consider where
    the parents were expected to be, since it would normally be  reasonable
    to expect the child to be with  them.  To  that  extent,  the  parents'
    record could become indirectly material, if it led to their  having  to
    leave. It was only if,  even  on  that  hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the child to leave that the  provision  could  give  the
    parents a right to remain.

23. The Supreme Court therefore emphasised that "there is  nothing  in  the
    section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered  otherwise
    than in the real world in which the children find  themselves"  and  if
    neither parent had the right to remain, then  that  is  the  background
    against which the assessment is conducted.

24. The ultimate question will be is whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to follow a parent with no right to remain to the country  of
    origin?

25. The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) made it clear that  they  did  not
    have to be compelling reasons in order to disrupt a child's life in the
    United Kingdom where that child had lived  here  for  more  than  seven
    years but instead the Court had to consider whether it  was  reasonable
    to require the child to leave where there  were  good  cogent  reasons,
    even if those reasons were are not compelling. The Court concluded that
    the conduct of the parents  should  be  taken  into  account  when  the
    general public interest in  effective  immigration  control  was  under
    consideration.

26. In Kaur the Tribunal made clear that where  there  was  a  "qualifying"
    child under 117B (6)(a) of the 2002 Act "strong" or "powerful"  reasons
    were required to outweigh the child's best interests.

27. The Judge considered in detail not only the best interests of the third-
    named appellant and had regard to the decision in Kaur but concluded at
    paragraph 49 of his decision that the best interests of the child  must
    yield to the public interest.

28. A very poor immigration history and the fact  neither  parent  had  any
    right to remain themselves is a factor which  can  be  weighed  in  the
    balance and whilst the third-named appellant's  mother  had  been  here
    unlawfully for  only  two  years  the  child's  father  had  been  here
    unlawfully since his leave ended on March 31, 2004. The family life had
    started whilst he was here unlawfully.

29. Mr Bellara accepted that there is  a  fine  line  between  success  and
    failure for an appellant when the real issue was the reasonableness  of
    removal from the United Kingdom.

30. I am satisfied that in a detailed and thorough decision the  Judge  had
    full regard to all matters but ultimately concluded the public interest
    including the very poor  immigration  history  outweighed  the  child's
    desire to remain in the United Kingdom and whilst a different Judge may
    have reached a different decision the fact remained this  decision  was
    open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

31. I therefore find there was no error of law.

Notice of Decision

32. There is no error of law. I uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     24/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.



Signed                              Date     24/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

