
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09172/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th October 2020               |On 22nd October 2020               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  EMRI DOCI
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr, of Counsel, instructed by Karis
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born in 1980. He arrived  in  the
    UK on 6th June 2002, and on 7th June 2002 applied for leave  to  remain
    using the false name Kelvis Doci with a date of birth  in  1985.  As  a
    result of being found to be a minor, due to the false date of birth, he
    was granted exceptional leave to remain in the UK until 31st May  2003.
    He overstayed when his period of exceptional leave to  remain  expired.
    In 2007 he received a police  caution  for  battery.  He  made  further
    submissions to the respondent in 2007 which were refused,  and  he  was
    removed to Albania on 21st May 2010.

 2. The appellant re-entered the UK illegally in  2011  and  remained  here
    until he left to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  at  the
    beginning of October 2018. On arrival in Albania he applied  for  entry
    clearance to re-enter the UK as the partner of a British citizen, Ms  E
    [C]. The couple had commenced a relationship in 2013 and married on 8th
    October 2018 in Albania. The  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse was refused on  9th  January  2019.   His  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Peer
    in a determination promulgated on the 25th October 2019.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bristow
    on 14th March 2020 and I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law in a decision dated 10th June 2020, the reasons are set  out  at
    Annex A to this decision.

 4. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19
    and with regard to the overriding object set out in the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules to decide  matters  fairly  and  justly  this  remaking
    hearing took place via a remote Skype  for  Business  hearing.  Neither
    party submitted any submissions objecting to this mode of  remaking  in
    response to the directions appended to my error of  law  decision,  and
    there were no significant issues of connectivity or  audibility  during
    the hearing.

    Evidence & Submission - Remaking

 5. The appellant's wife, Ms  E  [C],  a  British  citizen,  confirmed  her
    identity and that the contents of her statement included in the  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the letter of 8th July 2020  in  the
    small additional bundle were true and gave oral evidence in response to
    cross examination by Mr Melvin. A summary of her  key  evidence  is  as
    follows.

 6. She met the appellant in 2012, and  very  soon  he  had  explained  his
    immigration situation to her. He has  never  hidden  any  of  his  past
    actions breaching immigration law from her, and her parents  were  also
    aware of his lack of immigration status but were happy to have  him  in
    their homes and lives because they could see that the relationship  was
    a good one for her and they grew fond of him, and he  developed  family
    relationships with her  extended  family.  Her  relationship  with  the
    appellant developed, and about a year after meeting the  appellant,  in
    August 2013, he moved in with her at her dad and  step-mother's  house.
    He became an integral part of their  family,  which  included  spending
    time with her  grandma,  and  her  mother  and  step-father  and  other
    extended family. Ms [C] decided  she  wanted  to  become  a  paediatric
    nurse, and so did a  three  year  degree,  obtaining  a  first  in  her
    bachelor's degree in child nursing science, and then started work  full
    time in her "dream job" at  Great  Ormond  Street  Hospital  (GOSH)  in
    September 2017, working on the bone marrow transplant and gene  therapy
    ward. She loves her work, and has been doing a further master's  degree
    module at South Bank University. The appellant delayed leaving  the  UK
    because of their committed relationship as she  was  studying  for  her
    nursing degree and there was no way in  which  she  could  sponsor  him
    until she had worked for  a  year  in  her  job  having  completed  her
    studies. She does not think that it is reasonable for the appellant  to
    be penalised for having applied immediately on  return  to  Albania  as
    they had had to wait for over 6 years to sort things  out  due  to  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules making a prior  application  impossible.
    She accepts that his earlier immigration history is not good but points
    out that the errors he made were a long time ago, when he  was  a  much
    younger man, and further she does not accept that seeking a better life
    for himself and his family when he was,  by  unfortunate  chance,  born
    into an impoverished environment in Albania makes the appellant  a  bad
    person. Immigration law should not, she argues, keep  apart  a  genuine
    couple who can support themselves financially and who have followed the
    Immigration Rules to get the correct entry clearance.

 7. Ms [C] outlines how the appellant and she have shown  their  dedication
    to each other since he left the UK in  October  2018  by  a  number  of
    visits to see each other in Albania, France, Italy  and  most  recently
    Germany. He has a Schengen visa which means that he can spend up to  90
    days in any 180 in those countries. However, for Ms [C],  these  visits
    are not a satisfactory way to conduct married life. Ms [C] has suffered
    mental  health  problems  as  a  result  of  her  separation  from  the
    appellant: she is on medication for depression and anxiety;  is  having
    counselling; and has had to have time off sick from  work  due  to  her
    mental health, her work being naturally complex and intense and all the
    more so in the Covid-19 world.

 8. Ms [C] does not feel able to move to Albania for the following reasons.
    Her prospects working as a nurse in Albania  would  be  very  poor,  as
    Albania is a very poor  country and salaries are very  low  (with  data
    cited in support of this), and she  believes  that  her  income  levels
    would affect not only her life and that of the appellant but  also  the
    lives of the children they plan to have in the  future.  The  appellant
    has not followed the advice of previous  solicitors  that  she  and  he
    could have a child to strengthen the appellant's application to  be  in
    the UK as she wants her children to grow up in a stable home in the UK,
    after the immigration matters  are  sorted  out,  as  British  citizens
    living in the UK with access to better schooling  and  healthcare  than
    they would get in Albania.  She would also have to learn good  Albanian
    to work as a nurse in Albania,  which  currently  she  does  not  have.
    Further if she were to have to move to Albania she would not be able to
    continue to have the very regular contact and close relations with  her
    family including parents, their partners, her grandmother who has is 90
    years old and has serious health problems and benefits  from  her  love
    and care. Also, if she were  to  move  to  Albania  the  UK,  and  most
    particularly GOSH, would lose a specialist  nurse  which  the  NHS  and
    taxpayer has paid to train, and she would lose the job that she loves.

 9. Mr Melvin, for the respondent relies upon the refusal decision and  the
    skeleton argument of Mr Tan, as well as his own  oral  submissions.  In
    summary he argues  that  the  appellant  does  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules  because  he  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    320(11) to be refused under the general grounds for refusal and is  not
    suitable under EC-P.1.1 (c) of Appendix FM so does  not  qualify  under
    these  provisions,  although  it  is  accepted  that   he   meets   the
    relationship requirements, the English  language  requirement  and  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM.

10. It is argued for the respondent that the normal course under  paragraph
    320(11)  should  be  followed  given  that  the  appellant  meets   the
    requirements  for  this  refusal,   and   there   is   an   aggravating
    circumstance. It is argued that PS  makes  little  difference  to  this
    consideration as there is still a public interest in the  exclusion  of
    this appellant as he has a truly  aggravating  history  in  undermining
    immigration control and because there are no exceptional  circumstances
    making refusal unjustifiably harsh because  all  parties  have  ignored
    immigration control in this case until the point when  the  Immigration
    Rules could be met and he returned to make his  application  for  entry
    clearance. Further there is  insufficient  evidence  that  family  life
    could not reasonably take place in  Albania,  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's wife suffers from anxiety in the  context  of  the  current
    arrangement is insufficient  to  mean  that  the  normal  course  under
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.

11. It is also argued that the suitability requirement  at  paragraph  S-EC
    1.5 of Appendix FM is a mandatory ground and that it is met because the
    appellant's conduct, character, associations or other reasons  make  it
    undesirable to grant  him  entry  clearance,  because  of  his  adverse
    immigration history.

12.  The  respondent  argues  that  if  the  appellant  cannot   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules then this is an extremely weighty
    factor which means that  the  interference  with  his  family  life  is
    proportionate under  Article  8  ECHR.  The  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife was formed whilst the appellant  was  unlawfully
    in the UK; the relationship continues by way of  visits  and  that  the
    appellant and his wife would have a support network in Albania if  they
    live there; and as outlined above the factors argued in the appellant's
    favour do not suffice to outweigh the public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control.

13. In oral submissions of  Mr  Kerr,  and  as  set  out  in  his  skeleton
    argument, it is argued that  discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the
    appellant's favour so that the normal course should not be followed  of
    refusing under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules  because  the
    matters which lead to this refusal took place when  the  appellant  was
    much younger; because he is now in a genuine and committed relationship
    with a British citizen; because his  British  citizen  wife  has  close
    relationships with her family (particularly her mother,  father,  step-
    mother and grandmother); and because his wife has an important job as a
    child nurse at Great Ormond Street hospital,  particularly  during  the
    coronavirus pandemic; and because trying to conduct their  relationship
    long distance is causing his wife to  suffer  from  suicidal  ideation,
    panic attacks and severe anxiety which is impacting on her  health  and
    work and causing her to have time off sick.

14. It is argued that the appellant  has  now  done  the  right  thing  and
    returned to Albania and made an application for  entry  clearance,  and
    thus, applying PS, the public interest in encouraging those  unlawfully
    in the UK to leave  and  make  entry  clearance  applications  must  be
    weighed in his favour in considering whether the normal  course  should
    be followed. It is argued that  it  makes  no  sense  to  criticise  or
    penalise the appellant for having waited until he was eligible to apply
    before returning, and further that the respondent has  failed  to  give
    the  appellant  credit  for  his  past  two  years  in  complying  with
    immigration control residing in Albania; and the  fact  that  he  would
    have been able to reapply after one  year  abroad  if  he  had  made  a
    voluntary departure under paragraph 320(7B) of the  Immigration  Rules;
    and the fact that the appellant and his wife have not had a child  when
    they would not ordinarily have chosen to  do  so  to  make  their  case
    cynically more compelling as they were advised by previous  immigration
    solicitors would be possible.

15. With respect to the refusal under the Immigration Rules by reference to
    paragraph S-EC.1.4 of Appendix FM that the exclusion  is  conducive  to
    the public good the only issue if the appellant's immigration  history,
    and there is a need to have regard to that significant  time  that  has
    passed since the most serious conduct was committed and the appellant's
    positive history in leaving the UK. It  is  submitted  that  this  test
    cannot be met as it is primarily aimed at those who have been convicted
    of crime and received a sentence of up to 12 months  imprisonment,  and
    so are not caught by the deportation Immigration Rules.

16. With respect to the wider consideration under Article 8 ECHR if  it  is
    found that the Immigration Rules cannot be met it is  argued  that  the
    following is relevant: the important work  and  contribution  to  child
    health made by the appellant's wife by her work in GOSH in the UK; that
    her ability to work as a nurse would be compromised in Albania  by  her
    inability to speak Albanian and the quality of life  in  that  country;
    that the appellant's  wife  has  close  caring  relationship  with  her
    parents and their partners, her grandmother and a cousin,  H,  who  has
    grown up without a colon and that H  is  a  relevant  child;  that  the
    absence from the UK of the appellant  has  had  a  serious  deleterious
    effect on his wife's mental health. It is argued that  the  exceptional
    features of this case  mean  that  it  would  not  be  a  proportionate
    interference with the appellant and his  wife's  right  to  respect  to
    family life to refuse to admit the appellant.

    Conclusions - Remaking

17. I must first consider whether the appellant can meet  the  requirements
    of the family life Immigration Rules. There are  two  provisions  which
    are argued to prevent this from  being  the  case  by  the  respondent,
    namely paragraph 320(11) and paragraph S-EC.1.5 of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. I will examine each in turn.

18. Paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules states that entry  clearance
    should normally be refused:

         "where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant way
         to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

         (i)  overstaying; or

         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

         (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave
         to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the
         Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
         application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
         not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
         conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple identities,
         switching nationality, making frivolous applications or not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

19. In my error of law decision I have preserve the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the appellant did  not  fall  to  be  refused  under
    paragraph 320(3) of the Immigration Rules but found that he  meets  the
    provision of paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by  having
    overstayed, entered the UK illegally and obtained leave  to  remain  by
    deception and that there is an aggravating circumstance in  his  having
    used an assumed identity, but that the appeal needed to  be  remade  to
    establish whether  discretion is properly applied  to  refuse  on  this
    basis or not, as paragraph  320(11)  is  a  discretionary  rather  than
    mandatory ground of refusal. This in turn relates to the issue  of  the
    public interest identified in PS (paragraph  320(11)  discretion:  care
    needed) India [2010] UKUT 440, and a consideration of all of the  wider
    facts of this case.

20. In PS  it is said that a decision-maker must  exercise  great  care  in
    assessing aggravating circumstances where the automatic prohibition  on
    entry clearance in paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C)
    of the Immigration Rules and where  the  respondent  must  having  keen
    regard to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in the UK
    to leave and seek to regularise their status by making  an  application
    for entry clearance. As set out  in  my  error  of  law  decisions  the
    central question to determine is: was the appellant's use of an assumed
    identity to obtain exceptional leave to remain in 2002 when he  was  22
    years old, now some 18 years ago, a  sufficiently  serious  aggravating
    circumstance to mean, in the context of his subsequent overstaying  and
    illegal entry, that the respondent had shown that the normal course  to
    refuse under paragraph  320(11)  should  be  followed  given  that  the
    appellant returned to Albania two years ago and made an entry clearance
    application?

21. I find that Mr Kerr also raises a relevant consideration with reference
    to the  operation  of  the  mandatory  general  ground  of  refusal  at
    paragraph 320 (7B) of the Immigration Rules under which  the  appellant
    would no longer fall to be refused  on  this  basis  in  light  of  his
    overstaying, illegal entry and any deception as he left voluntarily  at
    his own expense and has been out of the UK for more than 12  months.  I
    accept, as submitted by Mr Melvin, that there is a public  interest  in
    the refusal of those who have breach immigration control in these ways,
    and that parliament has expressed their view on this issue through  the
    general grounds of refusal, but find that this must be tempered as  set
    out in PS with the public interest in encouraging  those  illegally  in
    the UK to regularise their stay through the prescribed entry  clearance
    system. Ultimately I find  that  despite  the  number  of  breaches  of
    control committed by this appellant that the fact that the most serious
    (deception and false identity) were now a very long time  ago  and  the
    fact that he has now been out of the UK for two years  means  that  the
    public interest in encouraging use of the  legitimate  entry  clearance
    system weighs heavily in favour of the normal  course  of  refusal  not
    being followed.

22. In determining the question as to whether the normal course  should  be
    followed in refusing under paragraph 320(11) of the  Immigration  Rules
    consideration I also needs to be given to the wider facts of the  case.
    I find that the evidence of the appellant's wife, Ms [C],  is  credible
    and indeed Mr Melvin did not attempt to submit otherwise,  although  he
    was clearly critical of her for what he saw as her lack of prioritising
    immigration control over her love for the appellant. I  find  that  she
    gave an  entirely  honest  account  of  her  relationship  and  current
    situation which is consistent with the supporting documentary evidence.
    I find all of the documentary evidence in the  updating  bundle  to  be
    genuine and worthy of weight in the determination of the appeal.

23. My key factual findings are that I  find  that  Ms  [C]  is  absolutely
    committed to living in the UK where she has her extended  family,  with
    whom she has particularly close and mutually caring relationships,  and
    to continuing her work at GOSH and enhancing her nursing skills through
    higher studies. The letter from Ms Newton, Ward Sister  at  GOSH  Robin
    Ward, sets out that she works in a very  specialised  area  of  nursing
    involving  specialist   immunotherapy   treatments   to   bone   marrow
    transplants for children, and that Ms [C] is a  valued  member  of  the
    team and an asset to the NHS. I find that Ms [C] is unlikely to be able
    to do this type of  work  in  Albania,  particularly  as  some  of  the
    treatments she gives are unique to GOSH, and would struggle to get even
    regular child nursing work for sometime until she could speak and  read
    competent Albanian. I also find that her separation  from  her  husband
    for the past two years, and  conducting  the  relationship  via  phone,
    internet chat and visits,  has  led  to  her  suffering  from  reactive
    depression and anxiety which in turn has led to her being off sick from
    work since June 2020, being prescribed medication and  having  on-going
    counselling from a psychotherapist. Her  psychotherapist  reports  that
    recently Ms [C] has developed suicidal ideation and there  has  been  a
    decline in her mental health, and I accept this is the case.  Ms  [C]'s
    presentation whilst giving evidence was entirely consistent with  these
    documents: she was notably distressed and needed her mother to come and
    sit with her. I also accept that were Ms [C] to join the appellant  and
    live in Albania that they would not have the same  standard  of  living
    due to the levels of poverty in that country, but I do  not  find  that
    this last matter is a factor which is one I  give  significant  weight.



24. I therefore find that key considerations in relation to  the  issue  of
    discretion are, the public interest point aside:  that  the  appellant,
    bar questions over his suitability which overlap  factually  with  this
    question, qualifies for  leave  to  enter  under  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as the respondent accepts that the
    English  language,  eligibility  and  financial  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules are met;  the fact that the  appellant's  wife  is  a
    highly specialist nurse working at GOSH  for  whom  there  is  reliable
    evidence that she would be a loss to vulnerable children in the  UK  if
    she relocated to Albania; the fact that the appellant's wife  has  very
    close relationship with her original family which include the fact that
    she lives with her father and his partner and spends  substantial  time
    with her mother and grandmother and would find it very  hard  not  live
    with this family close to hand; and that the  fact  that  conducting  a
    long distance relationship is having very serious consequences for  her
    mental health, leading to anxiety, depression and suicidal ideation  as
    evidenced by her own statement  and  evidence,  letter  from  her  ward
    sister from Great Ormond Street Hospital, her  counsellor  and  GP.   I
    find that when these issues are added to my  conclusions  at  paragraph
    21, about the public interest and proper operation of this provision in
    that context, that discretion should not be exercised to  refuse  under
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.

25. I accept that the suitability requirement at paragraph  S-EC.1.5  is  a
    mandatory ground so if the exclusion of the appellant from  the  UK  is
    conducive to the public good as  a  result  of  his  multiple  historic
    breaches of immigration control detailed in this decision then he  must
    be refused and clearly the fact that the appellant  fulfils  the  other
    requirements of the family life Immigration Rules at Appendix FM is not
    a reason to give no weight to this section of the Rules.  However,  for
    the other reasons I set out above (particularly the public interest  in
    encouraging the reversion to the proper systems of immigration  control
    by those unlawfully in the UK and the distance in time since the  worse
    breaches of immigration control by the  appellant  and  elapse  of  two
    years  since  the  appellant  left  the  UK;  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's wife is a higher trained and valued child nurse working  on
    the front line with immune  suppressed  children  during  the  Covid-19
    pandemic who may be lost to  the  UK  if  she  has  to  live  with  the
    appellant in Albania) I find that it  is not conducive  to  the  public
    good to refuse the appellant, and so the appellant does not fall to  be
    refused under this provision either as  I  find  that  he  fulfils  the
    suitability requirements.

26. As a result, I conclude that  there  is  no  public  interests  in  the
    appellant's refusal of entry clearance as he  fulfils  the  Immigration
    Rules at Appendix FM for entry clearance as  a  husband  of  a  British
    citizen partner settled in the UK. It  follows  that  the  interference
    with  his  family  life,  which  refusal  of   that   entry   clearance
    constitutes, is a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for family life as protected by Article 8 ECHR.

27. I come to this conclusion whilst acknowledging the factors which I must
    consider under s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, namely the fact that the relationship between the  appellant  and
    Ms [C] was commenced at a time when he was illegally in  the  UK  means
    little weight should be given to  it;  and  the  fact  that  he  speaks
    English and will be financially independent due to  his  wife's  income
    are to be seen as neutral factors. However,  as  I  find  there  is  no
    public interest in the refusal, due to the appellant's ability to  meet
    the Immigration Rules, the appellant  is  still  entitled  to  win  his
    appeal as there is nothing which weighs  against  the  factors  in  his
    favour.

    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 3. I remake the appeal by allowing it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    15th October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

    Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born in 1980. He arrived  in  the
    UK on 6th June 2002, and on 7th June 2002 applied for indefinite  leave
    to remain using the false name Kelvis Doci with  a  date  of  birth  in
    1985. As a result of being found to be a minor, due to the  false  date
    of birth, he was granted exceptional leave to remain in  the  UK  until
    31st May 2003. He  overstayed  when  his  period  of  leave  to  remain
    expired. In 2007 he received a police  caution  for  battery.  He  made
    further submissions to the respondent in 2007 which were  refused,  and
    he was removed to Albania on  21st  May  2010.  He  re-entered  the  UK
    illegally  in  2011  and  remained  here  until  he  left  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance at the beginning of  October  2018.  On
    arrival in Albania he immediately applied for entry  clearance  to  re-
    enter the UK as the partner of a British citizen, Ms E [C]. The  couple
    had commenced a relationship in 2013 and married on 8th October 2018 in
    Albania. The application for entry clearance as a spouse was refused on
    9th January 2019.  His appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  on
    all grounds by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Peer  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 25th October 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bristow
    on 14th March 2020 on all grounds on the basis that it is arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in placing the burden of proof  on
    the appellant rather than the respondent.

 3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19
    and with regard to the overriding object set out in the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules to decide matters fairly  and  justly  directions  were
    sent out to the parties by email on 23rd  April  2020  seeking  written
    submissions on the assertion  of  an  error  of  law  with  a  view  to
    determining that issue on the papers, and giving an opportunity for any
    party who felt that a hearing was necessary in the interests of justice
    to make submissions on that issue too. Submissions were  received  from
    both parties in response to these directions.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in  the  interests
    of justice to decide this  matter  without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law. I find that
    it is appropriate to determine whether there is an error of law on  the
    papers given the submissions of the parties and the fact  that  neither
    object to proceeding in this way. Further Ms [C], the appellant's  wife
    and sponsor, has written to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  22nd  march  2020
    making it plain that she would like the appeal to progress  as  she  is
    naturally very anxious about the  outcome  and  wishes  to  reduce  any
    further delay, and it would enable her to focus fully on her vital work
    as a paediatric nurse at Great  Ormond  Street  Hospital  working  with
    immune suppressed children during the global Covid-19 pandemic.

    Submissions - Error of Law

 5. The application for entry clearance was found to meet  the  eligibility
    (relationship & finance) requirements by the entry  clearance  officer,
    and it was accepted that the appellant satisfied the  English  language
    requirements, but he was refused under paragraphs 320(3) and 320(11) of
    the Immigration Rules, which led to a  refusal  under  the  suitability
    requirements at EC-P 1.1 (c  )  and  S.EC1.5  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  under
    paragraph 320(11), but found that the paragraph 320(3) refusal was  not
    made out.

 6. In the grounds of appeal it is  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    firstly erred in law because at paragraph 12 the Judge directs  herself
    that the burden of proof is on the  appellant.  It  is  clear  that  in
    relation to the general grounds of refusal that the burden lies on  the
    respondent, see JC (Part 9 HC 395 - burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT
    00027. However it is accepted in the later submissions of Mr S Kerr  of
    Counsel for the appellant, dated 21st May 2020, that this error was not
    a material one, his having read the  submissions  of  Mr  Tan  on  this
    issue, as set out below.

 7. Secondly, it is argued for the appellant that with respect to paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules the  First-tier  Tribunal  misdirected
    itself that the police caution that the appellant received in 2007  for
    battery could be an aggravating  factor  when  this  is  not  a  factor
    identified within the Rules. It was also irrational to find  a  caution
    for battery which was 12 years old could be a  factor  which  indicated
    that the appellant had contrived to frustrate the Immigration Rules. It
    is also argued  that  the  respondent  erred  by  failing  to  exercise
    discretion, when in accordance with PS (paragraph  320(11)  discretion:
    care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 it is  said  that  a  decision-maker
    must exercise great care in assessing aggravating  circumstances  where
    the automatic prohibition on entry clearance in  paragraph  320(7B)  is
    disapplied by paragraph 320(7C) of the Immigration Rules and where  the
    respondent  must  having  keen  regard  to  the  public   interest   in
    encouraging those unlawfully in the UK to leave and seek to  regularise
    their status by making an application for entry clearance.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to carry out the second part of this exercise, and
    to give proper weight to the appellant's voluntary departure  from  the
    UK. It is also argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  errs  in  law  by
    failing to appreciate that this is a discretionary  refusal,  and  that
    the Judge failed to  consider  whether  discretion  was  considered  in
    relation to whether this appellant should be refused as someone who had
    contrived to frustrate the purpose of the Immigration Rules,  and  thus
    there was a failure to appreciate that this is  structurally  different
    from a mandatory paragraph 320(7B) refusal.

 8. Thirdly, it is argued that there was failure to take into  account,  at
    paragraph 40 of the decision, a material fact, namely the  evidence  of
    appellant's strong connection with his wife's ill young cousin,  Harry,
    from Harry's mother. It is further argued that the First-tier  Tribunal
    errs in  failing  to  consider  the  strong  relationship  between  the
    appellant's wife and her grandmother; in  asserting  with  no  evidence
    that the cost of living is less in Albania  than  in  the  UK;  in  not
    giving weight to  the  family  life  that  has  developed  between  the
    appellant and his wife after his voluntary departure from the  UK  when
    he was not illegally or precariously in the UK; and in failing to  make
    a finding on the  ultimate  question  as  to  whether  the  appellant's
    presence is not conducive to the public good.

 9. In the submissions of Mr A Tan, Specialist Appeals Team, dated 5th  May
    2020 it is argued that there are no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed. It is accepted that the burden of proof is wrongly stated as
    being on the appellant at paragraph 12  of  the  decision,  but  it  is
    argued that this does not result in their being  a  material  error  of
    law. This is because when dealing  with  the  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(3) at paragraph 35 of the decision, which the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided had not been made out, it is clear that it was understood  that
    the burden was on the entry clearance officer.  It  is  submitted  that
    this approach is carried over to the consideration of paragraph 320(11)
    at paragraph 36 of the decision as there is reference to the rule being
    "made out".

10. Mr Tan argues that the appellant accepts that he has used an  alias  to
    obtain leave to remain, he has entered the UK illegally more than  once
    and been removed, and that he has been given a police  caution.  It  is
    argued that the alias and the police caution are both  correctly  found
    to be aggravating factors at paragraphs 36 and 38 of the decision,  and
    that the list set out in PS is non-exhaustive, and the  fact  that  the
    caution was a long time ago was considered by the First-tier  Tribunal.
    There was an entry clearance manager  review  of  the  decision,  which
    indicates  that  the  discretionary  nature  of   the   provision   was
    appreciated by  the  respondent,  and  this  is  also  referred  to  at
    paragraph 37 of the decision, and it is also expressly  appreciated  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  is  important  to  encourage  those
    unlawfully present  to  regularise  their  status  when  applying  this
    paragraph at paragraph 44 of the decision.

11. Consideration is given to the sponsor's family and  relationships  with
    them, see paragraph 40 of the decision; consideration is given  to  the
    development of the relationship outside of the UK at paragraph 44;  the
    consideration that family  life  could  continue  in  Albania  is  well
    reasoned at paragraph 45 and it was reasonable to assume that the  cost
    of living would be lower in Albania given the information  on  salaries
    and  other  economic  data.  Ultimately  the  First-tier  tribunal  has
    conducted a proper balancing exercise  under  Article  8  ECHR,  giving
    proper weight to the failure of the appellant to be able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

12. The first issue to resolve is whether the approach taken  to  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules is a lawful one. This provision states
    that entry clearance should normally be refused :

         "where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant way
         to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

         (i)  overstaying; or

         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

         (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave
         to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the
         Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
         application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
         not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
         conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple identities,
         switching nationality, making frivolous applications or not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

13. This is dealt with at paragraphs 36 to 38 of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. It is clearly accepted for the  appellant  that  he  has
    overstayed, used deception to obtain leave  and  had  been  an  illegal
    entrant, but the appellant challenges: the approach taken with  respect
    to the second requirement of the provision and the conclusions that the
    caution amounted to another aggravating circumstance on top of his  use
    of an alias; the approach taken to the public interest  in  encouraging
    those unlawfully in the UK to  leave  and  obtain  entry  clearance  as
    raised in PS; and the approach taken with respect to the fact that this
    is a discretionary rather than mandatory ground for refusal.

14. It is clear that it is accepted for the  appellant  that  there  is  an
    aggravating circumstance (the appellant's use of an  assumed  identity)
    but it is argued that it was  not  legally  correct  to  designate  the
    police caution he  received  in  2007  for  battery  as  an  additional
    aggravating circumstance as well.  At paragraph 38 of the decision  the
    First-tier Tribunal finds that it would be wrong for too much weight to
    be  given  to  the  caution,  after  a  full   consideration   of   the
    circumstances in which it came about at paragraph 34 of  the  decision,
    and given particularly that it is over a decade old and for one  single
    incident. I find however that it was an error of law to  have  included
    it as an aggravating circumstance as  I  do  not  find  that  it  added
    anything to the appellant's profile as a person intending to  frustrate
    the intention of the Immigration Rules. The  aggravating  circumstances
    outlined in the Rules are all matters which go against the  smooth  and
    proper operation of immigration control.  The  battery  for  which  the
    appellant was cautioned by the police involved the appellant, as  a  22
    year old man, being involved in a fight  and  hitting  a  drunk  person
    outside a pub, and thus had no immigration control context or relevance
    whatsoever.

15. The question then arises as to  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    lawfully found that the respondent has firstly exercised discretion and
    secondly if discretion has been exercised whether in so  doing  it  has
    been lawfully found that the respondent has  struck  a  proper  balance
    between the public interest as outlined  in  PS  in  encouraging  those
    unlawfully in the UK to leave and seek to regularise  their  status  by
    applying for entry clearance and that of keeping out those who  try  to
    seriously frustrate the operation and  intentions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules; and  if  more  generally  the  normal  course  of  applying  the
    provision should follow on a full consideration of the  facts  of  this
    case.

16. It is correct to observe, as the  appellant  does,  that  the  original
    decision does not indicate that the entry clearance officer  understood
    that paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules  was  a  discretionary
    general ground of refusal rather than a mandatory one. I  do  not  find
    the fact that it is said that the decision was  reviewed  by  an  entry
    clearance manager indicates that this was understood, and this fact  is
    not explicitly identified by the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal does however record at paragraph 13 of the decision that  this
    is a general  ground  of  refusal  on  which  "entry  clearance  should
    normally be refused", thereby setting out its  own  correct  understand
    that the refusal is discretionary rather than mandatory.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not generally consider whether  there
    are reasons why the normal course should not be followed beyond finding
    that the provisions of the paragraph are, in her view, properly met and
    the public interest point  identified  in  PS  does  not  fall  in  the
    appellant's favour. The consideration  of  the  public  interest  point
    raised in PS is found by the First-tier  Tribunal  not  to  be  in  the
    appellant's favour as he and  his  partner  had  waited  to  return  to
    Albania to the point when he could qualify financially to return to the
    UK under the Immigration Rules on the basis of  her  earnings  and  had
    only spent a short time in Albania before applying for  him  to  obtain
    entry clearance to come back to the UK.

18. I do not find that the reasoning relating to the public interest  issue
    is consistent with the underlying principle as set  out  in  PS,  which
    might be summarised as the discretion to use paragraph 320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules should not be exercised to keep genuine couples  able
    to meet the Immigration Rules out of  the  UK  unless  the  aggravating
    circumstances were  sufficiently  serious.  I  find  that  the  central
    question for this First-tier Tribunal to determine ought to have  been:
    was the appellant's use of an assumed identity  to  obtain  exceptional
    leave to remain in 2002 when he was 22 years old a sufficiently serious
    aggravating circumstance to mean that the respondent should  have  been
    found to have shown that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  to
    refuse under paragraph 320(11) were met given that he had now done  the
    right thing and returned to make an entry clearance  application.  Both
    this appellant and that in PS had spent many years  unlawfully  in  the
    UK, and I find it of no significance that PS delayed  in  applying  for
    entry clearance and this appellant made the application immediately.  I
    therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  giving
    consideration to irrelevant matters in this consideration, and  failing
    to focus on the relevant evidence.

19. Even if it were found that the aggravating circumstances of the assumed
    identity used to obtain exceptional leave to remain  were  sufficiently
    serious so that all of the requirements of paragraph 320(11) were met I
    find that the  other  facts  of  the  case  ought  to  have  then  been
    considered to see if the normal course of refusal under  the  provision
    should follow. I find that it was therefore a further error of  law  in
    failing to give consideration to relevant matters not to  consider  all
    of the surrounding circumstances, and particularly that  the  appellant
    otherwise qualified for  leave  to  enter  under  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and the fact that the  appellant's  wife  is  a  specialist
    nurse working at GOSH for whom there was  reliable  evidence  that  she
    would be a loss to vulnerable children in the UK if  she  relocated  to
    Albania, before  finding  that  the  normal  course  of  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules should follow, and that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

20. As I find that  that  the  analysis  under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules was flawed for the reasons set out above I find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  consideration  of  the  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR because  it  was  clearly  of  central  importance
    whether the appellant could meet the requirements of  the  family  life
    Immigration Rules at Appendix FM, as if this was the case  there  would
    be no public interest in his removal.

21. I preserve the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that  the  respondent
    had not shown that the appellant fell to  be  refused  under  paragraph
    320(3) of the Immigration Rules. I also preserve the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant meets the provision of paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules by having overstayed, entered  the  UK
    illegally and obtained leave to remain by deception and that  there  is
    an aggravating circumstance in his having used an assumed identity. All
    other findings are set aside. What needs to be remade is the  issue  of
    whether discretion is properly applied to refuse on this basis or  not:
    this in turn relates to the issue of the public interest identified  in
    PS and a consideration of all of the wider  facts  of  this  case.  The
    Article 8 ECHR appeal will then need to be remade in the context of the
    conclusion  as  to  whether  the  appellant  can  show  he  meets   the
    requirements to enter the UK as a  spouse  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules or not.

    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal, but with some findings preserved as set out above.

 3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.



Directions - Remaking

1.   Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal might properly be held remotely,
    by Skype for Business, on a date to be fixed within the period June  to
    September 2020.

2.   No later than 14 days after these directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (the date of sending is on the  covering  letter  or  covering
    email):

    (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email  any  objection  to  the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

    (b)  without prejudice to the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

         (i)  Skype contact details and a contact telephone number  for  any
             person who wishes to attend the hearing remotely, which  might
             include  the  advocates,  the   original   appellant   or   an
             instructing solicitor; and

         (ii) dates to avoid in the period specified.

3.   If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper  Tribunal will
    consider  the  submissions  and  will  make  any   further   directions
    considered necessary.

4.   If there is no objection to a remote hearing, the following  directions
    supersede any previous case management directions and shall apply.

      i. The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note: No
         1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19  Pandemic  when  complying
         with these directions.

    ii.  The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and serve  on  each
         other (a) an electronic skeleton argument and (b) any  rule  15(2A)
         notice to be relied upon within 28 days of the date this notice  is
         sent.

    iii. The appellant shall be responsible for compiling  and  serving  an
         agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely
         on at the hearing. The bundle should  be  compiled  and  served  in
         accordance with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at  least  7
         days before the hearing.

5.   The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
    reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.

6.   Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line. Attachments must not exceed 15 MB. This address is not  generally
    available for the filing of documents.

7.   Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
    original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use
    of any address apparent from the service of these directions.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    10th June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

