

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09757/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 August and 18 October 2018                 |On 12 November 2018            |
|                                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     A G
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    on 31 August, Mrs M O'Brien, and on 18 October, Mr M
                    Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's deportation decision, dated 23 and  served  on  24
         August 2017.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge M A Khan promulgated on 1  November  2017
         (set aside, and relevant only as a record of the case then  put  by
         both sides).

     iv) The grant of permission to appeal to  the  UT,  dated  19  December
         2017, on the issue of whether the FtT took account of  evidence  of
         the appellant's relationship with his daughter, C G.

      v)  The  decision  of  UT  Judge  Canavan,  dated  21  February  2018,
         adjourning  the  hearing  (because  the  appellant  was  unable  to
         attend), and directing the  appellant  and  respondent  to  provide
         evidence.

     vi) The decision of UT Judge Canavan,  dated  24  April  2018,  finding
         error of law, and setting aside the decision  of  Judge  Khan,  and
         observing at paragraph 7, "The main issue is whether the effect  of
         deportation would be unduly harsh on the appellant's daughter, C G,
         born on 14 April 2002".

    vii) The note and further directions of  the  UT  dated  31  August  and
         issued on 4 September 2018.

 2. The respondent filed a bundle on 18 October 2018 replicating the SSHD's
    materials before the FtT, items A - H, and adding further items 1 - 3.

 3. The appellant's solicitors filed a first inventory of productions on 12
    October 2018, comprising:

      i) Statement of appellant, 2 October 2018.

     ii) Statement of C G, 2 October 2018.

    iii) Statement of C C, the mother of C G, 3 October 2018.

     iv) Statement by social worker, Mr Golding, who has been the  allocated
         social worker of CG sine 4 June 2018.  It is undated, but based  in
         part on a discussion with C G on 24 September 2018.

      v) Updated statement by Mr Golding, 9 October 2018.

 4. On 18 October 2018, the appellant was the  only  witness  present.   He
    adopted his statement, gave brief further evidence-in-chief, was cross-
    examined, and briefly re-examined.  Parties made their submissions, and
    I reserved my decision.

 5. The case falls within  the  following  paragraphs  of  the  immigration
    rules:

   Deportation and Article 8




   A398. These rules apply where:

   (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his  deportation
   would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8  of
   the Human Rights Convention;

   (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against  him
   to be revoked.

   398. Where a person claims that their deportation would  be  contrary  to
   the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and

   (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
   good and in the public interest because they have been  convicted  of  an
   offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
   at least 4 years;

   (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
   good and in the public interest because they have been  convicted  of  an
   offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
   less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

   (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
   good and in the public interest because, in the view of the Secretary  of
   State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are  a  persistent
   offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the  Secretary  of
   State in assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
   applies and, if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only
   be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are   very   compelling
   circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

   399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

   (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
   child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

        (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
        (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
        years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration  decision;
        and in either case

        (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country
        to which the person is to be deported; and

        (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  UK
        without the person who is to be deported; or
   (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  partner
   who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK, and

        (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
        (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was
        not precarious; and
        (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
        country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
        compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
        paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
        (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
        without the person who is to be deported.
   399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

   (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life;
   and
   (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
   (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the
   country to which it is proposed he is deported.




 6. The appellant is a foreign criminal, having been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

 7. The appellant is not in a relationship with a partner.

 8. The appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
    life.

 9. The appellant is the father of C G (his only child), born on  14  April
    2002, a UK citizen.

10. There is no question of C  G  going  to  live  with  the  appellant  in
    Barbados, and no need to consider whether that would be unduly harsh.

11. The issues for decision, as identified by the parties, are:

      i) whether  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with C G;

     ii) if so, whether it would be unduly harsh for C G to remain in the UK
         without the appellant; and

    iii) (if not allowed within paragraph 399) whether the  public  interest
         is outweighed by very compelling circumstances over and above those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

12. The appellant lived with C G and her mother until C G was aged about  3
    1/2.  He claims to have lived with them both thereafter  "on  and  off"
    until she was aged about 5.  Supporting evidence  that  he  did  so  is
    sparse; but that part of  his  account  may  be  accepted  for  present
    purposes.

13. There are copies of recent  exchanges  of  text  messages  between  the
    appellant and C G, not clearly dated, but apparently over the last  few
    months.

14. The appellant has had some direct contact with C G over the  period  of
    11 years or so since  he  finally  split  with  her  mother,  including
    residential contact at weekends, although  that  has  not  occurred  in
    recent years.  By his account, their relationship has been limited  and
    sporadic.   He claimed in his statement, and in oral evidence, to  have
    been in direct touch with C G until about the time  of  his  arrest  in
    early 2016.

15. Evidence from the Family Court at Manchester and from  Manchester  City
    Council Social Services shows that C G has been brought  up  against  a
    troubled family background, spending periods in  foster  care,  periods
    with her mother  and  half-siblings,  and  periods  with  her  maternal
    grandmother.  There is a large volume of evidence about the family from
    these sources, but it makes very little reference to the appellant.  Mr
    Matthews put it to the appellant (and maintained in  submissions)  that
    this was because the appellant played very little part in her life.  He
    also put a passage from a core assessment prepared by the  Council  for
    the Court, dated 4 March 2013, at 15.2.4:

      "Mr G has failed to keep his promises to C in terms of contact and has
      upset her as a result".

16. The appellant's response was not very cogent, but I understood the gist
    to be that he denied letting C G down  other  than  a  few  times,  and
    unavoidably; and  that  he  and  C  G  did  not  have  "a  social  work
    relationship", meaning that their  contact  was  governed  by  informal
    agreement, not in dispute or officially supervised.

17. The absence of any need for official supervision  might  be  a  healthy
    sign.  However, the family situation surrounding C G has  been  subject
    to scrutiny of social workers and the Court over many years. Mr Forrest
    invited me to consider that this tranche of evidence showed the chaotic
    situation in which C G and her half-siblings were brought up,  but  was
    neutral regarding the appellant's relationship with C G, and  could  be
    put to one side.   I  do  not  agree.   If  the  appellant  played  any
    significant and positive part in her life, that would be recorded.   It
    is telling that such record as there is points in the other direction.

18. The first statement by Mr Golding says  that  the  appellant  had  very
    little meaningful contact with C G throughout her childhood;  that  she
    is subject to the Children Act 1989; that only indirect  contact  would
    at first be permitted, if the appellant were to be released;  and  that
    on 24 September, C G  was  asked  if  she  would  like  contact  to  be
    arranged, and answered in the negative.

19. In her brief statement of 2  October,  C  G  says  she  speaks  to  the
    appellant every day; they have a very close bond; she has fond memories
    of him from growing up; and that if he were to be deported,  she  would
    feel no-one had listened to her, and people do not realise how hurt she
    would be.

20. C C says in her statement that she and the appellant "brought  C  G  up
    together for many years"; he has been "a  great  father  ...  hands  on
    since she was born"; and his deportation would have "a great impact" on
    her.

21. In his later statement, Mr Golding says that some previous points  were
    incorrect, and are revised in light of additional information from C  G
    and C C; the appellant had  a  good  relationship  with  his  daughter,
    maintained contact after  separating  from  her  mother,  and  saw  her
    regularly until he  was  imprisoned;  and  the  local  authority  would
    encourage contact.  Although C G  was  negative  about  contact  on  24
    September, on 8 October she was positive, and  said  that  her  earlier
    view was due to annoyance about her father not being there to help  her
    in her current situation.

22. The appellant was derogatory in cross-examination about  the  knowledge
    Mr Golding had about the case, the length  and  degree  of  his  active
    involvement,  and  his  professionalism.   However,  Mr   Golding   had
    available to him extensive records, no doubt of a similar tone to those
    before the tribunal, and he has no reason to  offer  anything  but  his
    best professional assistance, or to seek to sway the tribunal.

23. Also in cross-examination, the appellant denied pressing C G and C C on
    what they might say about his case; but his reaction to the  suggestion
    struck me as defensive and unconvincing.

24. Unlike the social  worker,  the  appellant  has  a  clear  interest  in
    encouraging the witnesses to maximise his role as a parent.

25. C G and C C did not attend to give evidence.  I  appreciate  that  they
    live at some distance, and their attendance might not have been easy or
    convenient.  However,  no  explanation  was  advanced  for  their  non-
    attendance.  I accept the submission that  their  statements  have  not
    been tested before the tribunal, and that the weight  to  be  given  to
    them is thereby lessened.

26. The statement of CG says at paragraph 4, "My social worker has said  he
    does not want me to see my dad."  Given the considerations above, I  am
    unable to give that particular assertion any credit.

27. I am unable to uphold the submission of Mr Forrest that the  statements
    of C G and C C might be taken  as  clear  and  concise  evidence  of  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

28. Mr Matthews asked me to  find  that  there  is  no  such  relationship,
    relying on SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 at paragraphs  42
    - 43.  There was some force in that submission.  This case  is  on  the
    borderline of what constitutes a relationship in terms  of  the  rules.
    The appellant has not been a principal or direct carer for his daughter
    for many years.  I am satisfied  that  he  has  had  only  limited  and
    sporadic contact with her and has  recently  being  trying  to  magnify
    this, more in the hope of  avoiding  deportation  rather  than  through
    concern for her wellbeing.  I am, just, persuaded that the relationship
    is genuine, subsisting and paternal, but I find  it  well  towards  the
    weaker end of  such  relationships,  which  is  relevant  to  the  next
    question.

29. I attempted at the hearing to clarify the detriment C  G  might  suffer
    through removal of the appellant.  I accept that she  might  be  upset.
    She has had an  unfortunate  childhood,  which  makes  it  particularly
    undesirable that any further adversity should be added.   Contact  over
    the last two to three years has been indirect, of a nature which can be
    carried on  as  easily  between  Manchester  and  Barbados  as  between
    Manchester and Glasgow.  I accept the submission  by  Mr  Forrest  that
    indirect contact is a poor substitute.  C G will be legally a child for
    another year and a half.   I take it that (although C  G  has  recently
    been on holiday in the USA) there is no realistic expectation of direct
    contact in Barbados, or elsewhere, during that  time.   The  extent  of
    deprivation, then, is that C G will have  no  direct  contact  for  the
    relatively short remaining period of her childhood, having  had  little
    benefit of such contact previously, and none in the last two years.

30. As UTJ Canavan observed in her error of law decision, the term  "unduly
    harsh"  represents  something  more  than  the  negative   effects   of
    separation of a parent from a child which one might usually expect from
    the process of deportation.  Where there is a relationship, deportation
    inevitably carries some detriment.  The relationship in this case,  and
    the difference made to it by  removal,  are  vestigial.   I  have  been
    referred to nothing whereby it might be held unduly harsh for  C  G  to
    remain in the UK without the appellant.

31. Mr Forrest submitted that everything relevant  to  paragraphs  399  and
    399A, but falling short of success, might be added towards a finding of
    very compelling circumstances.   He  said  that  even  if  not  "unduly
    harsh", the appellant's  departure  would  deprive  the  child  of  one
    constant in a chaotic upbringing; the part of his life spent in the  UK
    was little less than  in  Barbados;  and  he  could  be  considered  as
    socially and culturally integrated.

32. The appellant's offending  is  not  just  on  the  trigger  point,  but
    persistent and serious.  His integration into the UK is  of  a  dubious
    nature, given his criminal history.  There is no  difficulty  over  his
    integration into Barbados.  Everything available has been prayed in the
    appellant's aid, but it all falls short of paragraphs 399 and 399A, and
    does not approach the target of very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those considerations.

33. For all those reasons, but principally on the view that the appellant's
    departure is a marginal disadvantage to his  daughter,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

34. The anonymity order made  earlier  in  the  proceedings  is  maintained
    herein.


            [pic]

            23 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




