
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/09783/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 09 July 2020                      |
|On 25 June 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  URIM [P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas promulgated on 6 November 2019 ("the  Decision").   By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decisions dated 20 May  2018  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim (under Article 8 ECHR).

2.   The Appellant is a national of Albania.  He entered  the  UK  illegally
    in 2012.  He was  encountered  when  arrested  on  11  April  2018  and
    interviewed.  He stated that he was single.   His  human  rights  claim
    focusses however on a relationship with Ms [S].  He married her  on  27
    June 2018.   [S] is said to suffer from mental health problems due to a
    previous violent relationship and other traumatic events in  her  past.
    It is said that she suffers  from  PTSD  and  a  dependent  personality
    disorder and is at risk of suicide.  A psychiatric report was  produced
    in support of those matters.

3.   The Respondent did not accept that the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    therefore did not consider  that  [S]  would  leave  the  UK  with  the
    Appellant.  In the alternative, she concluded that there  would  be  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing in the UK.  The
    Appellant contends that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  the
    relationship continuing in Albania if he were removed.  In addition  to
    [S]'s medical condition, the obstacles are said  to  be  that  she  has
    family members in the UK and works as a mental health support worker.

4.   The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had lived with his  partner
    since 2015.  The Judge recognised that the Appellant  had  married  [S]
    but did not  accept  that  this  of  itself  indicated  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.   He  found  that  the  relationship  was  not
    genuine.  In any event, the Judge concluded that [S]  could  remain  in
    the UK with family support if she did not wish to leave  the  UK.   If,
    contrary to his primary  finding,  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting it was open to the Appellant  to  make  an  application  for
    entry clearance based on his marriage once back in Albania.

5.   The Appellant appeals on five grounds as follows:

    Ground one:   The  Judge  erred  in  his  finding  that  there  was  no
    suggestion that [S] should leave the UK if she did not wish to  do  so.
    It is said that this is contrary to the Respondent's decision letter.

    Ground two:   The Judge has failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that the relationship is not genuine and subsisting.

    Ground three: The Judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  giving
    little weight to the evidence of [S] and the Appellant's sister.

    Ground four:  The Judge failed to explain  why  the  evidence  was  not
    capable  of  demonstrating  that  the  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting as at date of hearing.

    Ground five:  The Judge has erred by suggesting that the Appellant  can
    make an application for  entry  clearance  which  is  contrary  to  his
    finding that the relationship is not genuine  and  subsisting.   It  is
    said that "Devaseelan" would apply  in  relation  to  any  such  future
    application.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gumsley
    in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  I am satisfied that it is arguable that the judge  made  a
         material error of law in failing to provide adequate reasons as  to
         why he rejected  the  Appellant's  explanation  on  why  there  was
         limited documentation to prove any cohabitation prior to  2018,  or
         why he attached little weight  to  the  other  evidence  called  or
         presented on behalf of the Appellant.

         4.   In the circumstances permission to appeal on  all  grounds  as
         pleaded is granted."

7.   By a Note and Directions dated 23 April 2020 and sent on 11  May  2020,
    having reviewed the file, I reached the provisional view that it  would
    be appropriate to determine without a hearing (pursuant to Rule  34  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  -  "the  Procedure
    Rules") the following questions:

         (a)  whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
         involved the making of an error of law and, if so

         (b)  whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

8.   No initial submissions were made by the Appellant.   On  2  June  2020,
    the Respondent filed and served  submissions,  seeking  to  uphold  the
    Decision.  No submissions were made as to  the  appropriate  method  of
    determination of the error of  law  issue.   The  Appellant  filed  and
    served a reply to those submissions on 5 June 2020.  He took issue with
    the Respondent's submissions, particularly as regards whether [S] could
    be expected to leave the UK.  No submissions were made objecting to the
    determination of the error of law issue on the papers.

9.   Both parties have set out their position in relation to  the  error  of
    law issue in writing.  The Appellant's grounds, whilst concise, provide
    full argument on the issues raised.  The Appellant  has  also  had  the
    opportunity to respond to the Respondent's submissions  which,  in  any
    event, for reasons which follow, seem to me  to  have  only  tangential
    relevance to the issues which I have to consider.   Neither  party  has
    objected to the determination of the  error  of  law  decision  on  the
    papers.  I consider that the Appellant's case is adequately pleaded  to
    allow me to determine that issue fairly when taken  together  with  the
    evidence on the file.  I have  therefore  reached  the  view  that  the
    issues can fairly be determined on  the  basis  of  the  pleadings  put
    forward.  I proceed to determine the error of law issue on the  papers.



10.  At this stage, the issue for me is whether  the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law.  If I so conclude, I will  need  to  either  re-make  the
    decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11.  The crux of the appeal against the  Decision  is  the  finding  of  the
      Judge as to the genuineness of the relationship.   If  the  Judge  was
      entitled  to  make  the  primary  finding  which  he  did   that   the
      relationship is not genuine and subsisting, it matters  not  what  the
      effect of that would be on his secondary finding  that  the  Appellant
      could make an application for entry clearance.  Nor  does  ground  one
      make any difference.  Whatever the position  of  the  Respondent,  the
      Judge's finding was such that [S] would  not  need  to  leave  the  UK
      unless she wished to do  so  because,  on  his  primary  finding,  the
      relationship was not genuine and subsisting.

12.  I can in any event dispose very shortly of ground one  as  the  passage
      cited from  the  Respondent's  decision  letter  ignores  the  passage
      immediately preceding it  which  makes  clear  that  the  Respondent's
      primary position also was that the relationship was  not  accepted  as
      genuine  and  therefore  that  [S]  would  not  leave  the  UK.    The
      Respondent's  primary  position  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  the
      paragraphs preceding the passage cited in ground one  begin  with  the
      words "[e]ven it is were to be accepted that  your  relationship  with
      your sponsor was genuine and subsisting".

13.  In relation to the genuineness  of  the  relationship,  the  Judge  was
      bound to  consider  the  evidence  in  the  round.   As  such,  it  is
      appropriate to  take  grounds  two  to  four  together  as  those  all
      challenge different aspects of the Judge's findings in this regard.

14.  I begin my consideration by setting out the Judge's findings about  the
      relationship.  The Judge did not  place  weight  on  the  Respondent's
      reliance on what had been said by the Appellant at interview in  2018.
      He noted the absence of evidence about this interview.   He then  went
      on to look at the documentary and oral evidence which he had  received
      and made the following findings:

         "37. It is said that the Appellant has cohabited with  his  partner
         since 2015.  He stated 2016 in his application form.  Yet, there is
         little or no evidence of this cohabitation until after  making  the
         present application in July 2018.

         38.  The Tribunal does not  regard  the  Appellant  as  a  reliable
         witness and places little weight upon his  assertion  that  he  has
         cohabited with his partner since 2015.

         39.  The fact that he has been able to  register  his  marriage  in
         2018 (after his arrest) and obtain joint documents from the  period
         2018-2019  does  not,  of  themselves,  indicate  a   genuine   and
         subsisting relationship.

         40.  The Appellant made no attempt to regularise his status in  the
         UK until after his arrest and having  lived  here  illegally  since
         2011.

         41.  The Tribunal has noted the  evidence  of  the  Appellant,  his
         partner and his sister.  It places little weight upon this evidence
         because each is hardly independent and all of them wish for him  to
         remain in the UK despite his lack of basis to be here."

15.  I accept that those findings are relatively brief.  However, the  issue
      is whether they are sustainable in the context of the  evidence  which
      was before the Judge.  In this regard, the Appellant has helpfully set
      out in his grounds the matters which he says  are  relevant  and  what
      evidence was before the Judge.  Aside the witness statements and  oral
      evidence of the witnesses which I  come  to  below,  and  some  cards,
      receipts and photos which do not and cannot prove that a  relationship
      is  genuine  and  subsisting,  the  only   documentary   evidence   of
      cohabitation is said to be as follows:

       . Letter from [S]'s  housing  association  dated  9  May  2019  which
         confirms that the Appellant had "been listed as a household  member
         at [her address] since 30/04/2018" ([AB/81-83]).

       . Rent proof statement [AB/81]

       . Proof of cohabitation [AB/84-113]

16.  Unfortunately, with the  exception  of  the  letter  from  the  housing
    association which appears also in the Respondent's bundle  at  [D1],  I
    have been  unable  to  consider  those  documents  for  myself  as  the
    Appellant's bundle on file, albeit including  those  documents  in  the
    index ends at [AB/80].  Nonetheless, the Decision shows that the  Judge
    had those documents (see [39] cited above).  There is no  challenge  to
    the Judge's understanding of what  those  documents  show;  simply  the
    impact of his consideration of them coupled with  other  evidence.   As
    such, there was evidence both that the couple are now married and  that
    they have lived at the same address since 2018.  As the Judge observed,
    though, the fact of a marriage and even living at the same address does
    not mean necessarily that a relationship is genuine and subsisting.

17.  The Appellant says though that the Judge ignored the reasons given  for
    the lack  of  documentary  evidence  prior  to  that  date.   Both  the
    Appellant and [S] said that the reason was that they  did  not  realise
    that he could add his name to the utility bills even though in  the  UK
    illegally.  The Appellant accepts however that the Judge did note  that
    explanation at [22] of the Decision.  Even if that reason  were  to  be
    believed, the fact remains that there was no evidence  pre-dating  2018
    showing the couple living at the same address on which the Judge  could
    place any weight.  I  observe  that,  even  accepting  the  Appellant's
    explanation, there might be other probative evidence if,  for  example,
    [S] was paying council tax and  was  not  claiming  a  single  person's
    discount.

18.  Moving on then to the  witness  evidence,  the  Judge  heard  from  the
    Appellant, his sister and [S]. None of them was cross-examined  as  the
    Respondent was unrepresented.  Importantly, both the Appellant and  [S]
    said that their relationship was genuine and subsisting.  That  had  of
    course been put at issue by the Respondent in her decision letter as  I
    have already noted and that was  the  issue  which  the  Judge  had  to
    determine.

19.  [S]'s statement contains detail of how and when she met the  Appellant,
    albeit brief.  The Appellant's statement contains very similar details,
    slightly expanded.  The  Appellant's  sister  also  confirms  that  the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting.

20.  As I have already noted, the Judge did consider the witness'  evidence.
     In  essence,  the  reason  he  discounted  it  was  that  it  was  not
    independent because "all of them wish [the Appellant] to remain in  the
    UK".  It is on this point that I consider the Judge  fell  into  error.
    The Appellant himself obviously wishes to remain  in  the  UK  and  the
    Judge was entitled to place little if any weight on his  evidence.  The
    same might be said of the evidence of his sister, irrespective  of  the
    genuineness  of  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and   [S].
    However, the same cannot be said of the evidence of [S]  herself.   If,
    as  is  the  Judge's  primary  finding,  [S]  is  not  in   a   genuine
    relationship, then she would have little if any interest in whether the
    Appellant remains in the UK or returns to Albania. There  is  therefore
    an inconsistency between what is said at [41] of the Decision  and  the
    Judge's finding that the relationship is not genuine.

21.  On a broader point, the Judge  has  also  fallen  into  error  both  in
    failing to provide adequate reasons and in his focus only on the  issue
    of cohabitation.  A relationship can be genuine and subsisting even  if
    the parties do not live together.  Conversely, the fact of cohabitation
    on its own does not prove the  genuineness  of  a  relationship  (as  I
    accept is the substance of the Judge's conclusion).  The  Judge  failed
    to consider the broader issue and/or failed to give sufficient  reasons
    for finding that the relationship was not genuine and subsisting.  That
    is the essence of the Appellant's ground four.

22.  The Respondent invites me to uphold the Decision  on  the  basis  that,
    whether or not  the  relationship  is  genuine,  the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed if paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("paragraph EX.1") is applied to the circumstances of this case as  she
    asserts that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
    continuing family life in Albania.  It  is  also  said  that,  applying
    Section  117B  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,   the
    Appellant would be bound to lose given  his  illegal  status  when  the
    relationship was  formed  -  little  weight  could  be  given  to  that
    relationship in those circumstances.

23.   The  difficulty  with  those  submissions  is  that   there   was   no
    consideration given to those provisions by  the  Judge.   Although  the
    Judge did go on at [42] and  [43]  of  the  Decision  to  consider  the
    position, apparently on the premise of a genuine relationship,  he  did
    so only on the basis that [S] would not be obliged to  leave  and  that
    the Appellant could seek entry clearance to return as a spouse.  As  to
    the first, that is not  the  relevant  question  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph EX.1.  Clearly, as a British citizen, [S] cannot  be  obliged
    to leave the UK but the issue is whether she could do so.   As  to  the
    second, the issue to be determined in relation  to  paragraph  EX.1  is
    whether family life can be continued in the Appellant's  home  country.
    Whether entry clearance could be obtained to  enable  an  Appellant  to
    return to the UK arises only after consideration of that issue.

24.  Whilst I can see the potential merit in  the  Respondent's  submissions
    as to the outcome of this appeal if paragraph EX.1  is  applied,  I  am
    unable to conclude that  the  appeal  would  be  resolved  against  the
    Appellant if that issue is considered.  Whilst most  of  the  obstacles
    said to exist are ones which typically arise in  a  situation  such  as
    this, [S] has mental health issues which would also need  to  be  taken
    into consideration.  For that reason, I am unable to conclude that  the
    error which I have identified is immaterial.

25.  Having found an error of law in the Decision,  I  set  that  aside.   I
    have considered whether it is appropriate to re-make  the  decision  in
    this Tribunal or to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    have concluded that the appropriate course is to remit the appeal.  The
    error I have identified is one which concerns the credibility   of  the
    Appellant's relationship with [S].  Credibility findings will therefore
    need to be made afresh.  Partly depending on  the  conclusion  in  that
    regard, it will or may also be necessary  for  the  Judge  hearing  the
    appeal to consider paragraph EX.1 and Article 8 more widely.  As I have
    already noted, no findings were made previously in relation to EX.1  so
    that issue will be determined for the first time.  Due to the extent of
    the issues to be determined for the first  time  and  that  the  appeal
    involves credibility  which  will  need  to  be  determined  afresh,  I
    consider it appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a new decision to be made.



DECISION

The Decision involves the making of a material error on a point  of  law.  I
therefore  set  aside  the  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas
promulgated on 6 November 2019.   I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Lucas.


Signed            L K Smith                           Dated: 25 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

