
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09461/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2020                      |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                AZHARUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by Londinium solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


               DECISION BY CONSENT PURSUANT TO RULES 39 AND 40

1    It is agreed that there was a material error of law in the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fenoughty dated 23 September 2019 in light of
    the Consent Order agreed in the Court of Appeal on 8 January 2019.

2.   In light of the finding of fact at paragraph 61 that the appellant  had
    not obtained his ETS certificate by deception the Judge erred in law by
    failing to give effect to the Consent Order which stated:

         "AND UPON the Respondent agreeing that in the event that the First-
         Tier Tribunal finds in an appeal from the refusal of such  a  human
         rights claim that the Appellant did not cheat, the Respondent  will
         take reasonable steps to put the Appellant  into  the  position  he
         would have been in had the ETS Deception  allegation  the  decision
         was based upon it, not been made."

3.   The Judge, having found that the appellant did not cheat,  should  have
    allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  there  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights so that the  Consent
    Order could have been given effect to.

4.   Accordingly, it is ordered that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fenoughty contains a material error of law and is set aside.  The
    decision will be  remade  and  the  appeal  is  allowed  following  the
    agreement of the parties that there is a disproportionate  interference
    with the appellant's Article 8 rights and it will be for the Respondent
    to decide how to take reasonable steps to  put  the  appellant  in  the
    position he would have been  in  had  his  leave  to  remain  not  been
    curtailed on the basis of an ETS deception allegation.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside.

 2. The appeal is remade by allowing it by consent on human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date 9 March 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
