
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09127/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  mr M n h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Mustafa, Solicitor of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, applied for  leave  to  remain
    on 22 January 2016, which was refused on 27  March  2016.   His  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Black whose decision [D],  on
    27 June 2017, dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   Permission  to
    appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth, on 24
    January 2018, and the Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 2 May 2018.



2.   Mr Mustafa carefully confined his principal  challenges  to  grounds  1
    and 2 upon which permission had been granted.

3.   In respect of the Ground 1, the principal  complaint  as  expressed  in
    the grounds which did not appear to have been drafted  by  Mr  Mustafa,
    was that the Judge erred in failing to properly address a report of Dr,
    Mirza, dated 16 June 2017, which had set out much  of  the  Appellant's
    wife's (Mrs M B) medical history.

4.   In fact, before the Judge there was an earlier  report  of  Dr.  Mirza,
    dated 23 December  2015,  but  the  16  June  2017  report  essentially
    repeated or re-referred  to  events  in  the  medical  history  of  the
    Appellant's wife, Mrs M B, date of birth 1 October 1957.  Issue was not
    taken in the grounds with any failure to refer to the first  report  It
    did not seem to me, in the light of the arguments being addressed, that
    a failure to make reference to it materially  affected  the  assessment
    likely to be made of the issue raised in relation to  the  difficulties
    Mrs M B might face on a return to Bangladesh.

5.   Rather, the complaint was that the Judge  diminished  the  weight  that
    might be given to the report by Dr Mirza. The Judge set out [ D19] why,
    for a variety of reasons  why  she  could  give  '...  some  evidential
    weight...' to the report of  Dr  Mirza  concerning  the  wellbeing  and
    health of Mrs M B, but said '...I do not find it wholly independent and
    impartial". The fact was that the Judge had not  simply  dismissed  it,
    but had given it less weight than was evidently being  relied  upon  by
    the Appellant.

6.   In  these  circumstances  it  seemed  to  me  that  Ground  1  somewhat
    understated the assessment that the  judge  had  fairly  given  to  the
    report and the reasons why.  I did not conclude, even if  I  might  not
    have reached the same  decision  on  the  evidence,  that  the  Judge's
    reasoning for the weight given to Dr  Mirza's  report,  demonstrated  a
    material error of law. Therefore, I did  not  find  Ground  1  has  any
    material substance.

7.   As to Ground 2, Mr Mustafa emphasised the scope of  the  evidence  that
    was before the Judge on the ill-health of Mrs M B,  but  ultimately  it
    seemed to me that those,  in  two  respects,  were  of  limited  value.
    First, the evidence did not show her removal from  the  UK  would  give
    rise to a real risk to her health, or that once  return  to  Bangladesh
    and living there, such would be her personal and  health  circumstances
    that it would impact  on  her  mentally  and/or  physically  so  as  to
    demonstrate the kind of conditions expected and emphasised in the cases
    of D v UK (1997) EHRR 423, N v UK {2005]  UKHL  31  and  Paposhvili4173
    8/013 and AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  Rather, the  argument  had
    been run before the Judge on the basis of  Mrs  M  B  health  and  that
    conditions demonstrated that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  for
    the purposes of return to Bangladesh so as to engage paragraph EX.1. or
    EX.2. of Appendix FM (family members) of the Immigration Rules.

8.   It was said that the Judge was setting a threshold  for  insurmountable
    obstacles that was far higher than  ever  intended  by  the  case  law,
    particularly Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, because the Judge  made  reference
    to the fact that the evidence of her health and conditions (D25, 26 and
    29) were not life  threatening.   The  fact  was  the  Judge  on  three
    occasions did refer to that as a consideration, but she went on to  say
    [D29]:-

         "There is no medical evidence to suggest  her  physical  or  mental
         condition would deteriorate on return to Bangladesh.   I  recognise
         Mrs B has lived in the UK for more than forty years and is  British
         but she  embarked  on  her  marriage  with  the  appellant  in  the
         knowledge that he did not have immigration status;  she  must  have
         appreciated that he may be removed at any time.  I appreciate Mrs B
         does not wish to return to Bangladesh.  However,  she  is  familiar
         with the culture, language and society in that country.  It is  not
         alien to her, particularly as she  has  lived  within  the  Bengali
         diaspora in the UK."

9.   The Judge did not lose sight of Mrs M B's nationality, or that  of  the
    Appellant, and noted, in terms of impact on Mrs M B if her husband  was
    to return to Bangladesh, she would still have support within the UK and
    could reasonably  continue  her  life  here.   The  judge  referred  to
    Jeunesse (12738/10 of the European Court decision) and  it  was  clear,
    with reference to the other case law that the  Judge  cited,  that  the
    Judge did not fail to consider the impact on  others  affected  by  the
    Appellant's removal or the interruption of family life and its  impact.
    Accordingly, I concluded that Ground  2,  namely  that  the  Judge  had
    applied the wrong  standard  to  the  consideration  of  insurmountable
    obstacles, did not disclose any material error of  law  was  wrong  and
    that the Judge in a range of paragraphs  respectively  dealt  with  the
    issue of obstacles on a return to Bangladesh.

10.  I concluded in the light of the submissions made by  the  parties  that
    the Judge's decision, whilst it might  not  have  been  mine,  did  not
    demonstrate a failure to properly consider  the  merits  of  the  case:
    Rather, this was an appeal where, on the face of it, the  grounds  were
    semi-attractive arguments that ultimately on  a  careful  consideration
    simply did not demonstrate a material error of law.

11.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

12.  The appeal is dismissed.

13.  The anonymity direction made by the Judge is continued.



DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 5 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 5 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

