
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09649/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated:    |
|hearing                              |On 28 September 2020                 |
|on 23 September 2020                 |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between
                          Mr Rezaul Hoque Al-Mahmud
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

    This is a decision on the  papers  without  a  hearing.  The  appellant
    consented  to  the  decision  being  made  on  the  basis  of   written
    submissions. The respondent did not advance any submissions  whether  a
    decision could appropriately be  made  on  the  papers.  The  documents
    described at para 5 below were submitted. A face-to-face hearing  or  a
    remote hearing was not held for the reasons given at paras 7-19  below.
    The order made is set out at para 97 below. (Administrative Instruction
    No. 2 from the Senior President of Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Zahra & Co Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer.


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh born on 31 July  1984,  appeals
    against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bannerman
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated  on  18  October
    2019 following a hearing on 19 September 2019, dismissed his appeal  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8) against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 17 May 2019 to refuse his application of 4 December 2018  for  leave
    to remain on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8).  The  appellant  had
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  right  to  his  family
    life with his wife, Ms Hasina Khanom, a British Citizen (hereafter  the
    "sponsor").

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "permission judge") in a decision signed on 6 February 2020.

 3. On 21 April 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan. Para 1  of  the
    "Note and Directions" stated  that,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions against the  spread  of  Covid-19,  Judge  O'Callaghan  had
    reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in  this  case,
    that it would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out
    at para 1 of his "Note & Directions", reproduced at my para 5(i)(a) and
    (b) below, without a hearing.  Judge  O'Callaghan  gave  the  following
    directions:

         (i)  Para 3 of the "Note and Directions"  issued  directions  which
         provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
         submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
         the question  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ("FtT") should be set aside if error of law is found, no later than
         14 days after the "Note and Directions" was sent  to  the  parties;
         for any other party to file and serve submissions in  response,  no
         later than 21 days after the "Note and Directions" was sent to  the
         parties; and, if such submissions in response were  made,  for  the
         party who sought permission to file a reply no later than  28  days
         after the "Note and Directions" was sent to the parties.

         (ii) Para 4 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any party  who
         considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
         necessary to consider questions (a) and (b) may submit reasons  for
         that view no later than 21 days after the "Note and Directions" was
         sent to the parties.

 4. Judge O'Callaghan issued further directions dated 28 May 2020 (sent  on
    20 June 2020) and 8 July 2020 (sent on 16 July 2020).

 5. In response to Judge O'Callaghan's directions, the Upper  Tribunal  has
    received the following:

         (i)  On the Secretary  of  State's  behalf,  a  document  entitled:
         "Respondent's Written Submissions/Rule 24 Reply" dated 1  May  2020
         from Mr Melvin, submitted to the Upper Tribunal under cover  of  an
         email dated 2 May 2020 timed at 15:55 hours.

         (ii) On the appellant's behalf, the following:

             (a)  A letter dated 5 May 2020 from  Zahra  &  Co  Solicitors,
             submitted to the Upper Tribunal under cover of an email of the
             same date timed at 15:29 hours.

             (b)  A letter dated 24 June 2020 from Zahra &  Co  Solicitors,
             submitted to the Upper Tribunal under cover of an email of the
             same date timed at 19:59 hours.

             (c)  A letter dated 23 July 2020 from Zahra & Co Solicitors.



THE ISSUES

 6. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.



         (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against
         the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
         or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

WHETHER IT IS APPROPRIATE TO PROCEED WITHOUT A HEARING

 7. In their letter dated 5 May 2020, Zahra & Co Solicitors state that they
    understand the  approach  taken  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  inviting
    submissions. In their letter dated 24 June 2020,  they  confirmed  that
    the appellant consents to the  "error  of  law  proceeding  by  written
    submissions". In their letter dated 23 July 2020, they  confirmed  that
    the appellant consents to the "error of law" being  considered  on  the
    submissions already made.

 8. The respondent has not made any submissions on the question whether  it
    is appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to decide  the  Issues
    without a hearing.

 9. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the appellant  has  consented  to
    the Upper Tribunal proceeding to decide the Issues without a hearing or
    the mere fact that the respondent  has  not  made  any  submissions  as
    factors that, in themselves, justify proceeding without  a  hearing.  I
    have considered the circumstances for myself.

10. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia, that "oral argument is perhaps
    the most powerful force there is, in our legal process,  to  promote  a
    change of mind by a judge"; Keene LJ at para 47 of  Sengupta  v  Holmes
    concerning the impact that oral submissions may have on  the  decision-
    making process; paras 35 and 48 respectively of the judgments  of  Lord
    Bingham and of Lord Slynn in Smith v Parole Board [2005]  UKHL  1;  the
    dicta at para 17(3) of Wasif v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 82  concerning  the
    power of oral argument; the  dicta  in  the  decision  in  R  v  Sussex
    Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB 256 to the effect that  justice
    must be done and be seen to be done; and the  dicta  at  para  8  of  R
    (Siddiqui) v Lord Chancellor and others [2019] EWCA  Civ  1040  to  the
    effect that it is an "undeniable fact that the oral  hearing  procedure
    lies at the heart of English civil procedure", to mention just a few of
    the cases in which we have received guidance from judges in the  higher
    courts concerning the importance of an oral hearing.

11. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

12. The appeal in the instant case is  not  complicated,  albeit  that  the
    grounds are discursive. Given  that  my  decision  is  limited  to  the
    Issues, there is no question of my making findings of fact  or  hearing
    oral evidence or considering any evidence at this stage.

13. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the appellant. He has applied for leave to remain on
    the basis of his family life  with  his  wife.  Article  8  claims  are
    matters of some importance, albeit not of the same level of seriousness
    as, for example, protection claims.

14. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

15. Taking a preliminary view at the initial stage of deciding  whether  it
    is appropriate and just to decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions before
    me. I was of the view, taken provisionally  at  this  stage,  that  the
    assessment of the  Issues  in  the  instant  case  is  not  complicated
    notwithstanding the  number  of  grounds  I  have  extracted  from  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal. The Judge's decision is straightforward.
    I kept the matter under review throughout my deliberations. However, at
    the conclusion of my deliberations, I was affirmed in the  view  I  had
    taken on a preliminary basis.

16. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal is now listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so, the fact is  that  it  is
    not possible to accommodate all cases in  one  of  these  ways  without
    undue delay to all cases.

17. Of course, it is impermissible, in my view, to proceed to decide a case
    without a hearing if that course of  action  would  be  unfair  in  the
    particular case. If it would be unfair to proceed to decide  an  appeal
    without a hearing, it would be unfair to do so even if there would be a
    lengthy delay in order to hold a hearing face-to-face  or  remotely  or
    even if there is a consequent delay on other  cases  being  heard.  The
    need to be fair cannot be sacrificed.

18.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

19. In all of the circumstances, having considered the matter with  anxious
    scrutiny  and  having  considered  the  overriding  objective  and  the
    guidance in the relevant  cases  including  in  particular  Osborn  and
    others v Parole Board, I concluded that it  is  appropriate,  fair  and
    just for me to exercise my discretion and proceed to decide the  Issues
    without a hearing, for the reasons given in this decision.

QUESTIONS (A) AND (B) - WHETHER THE JUDGE ERRED IN LAW

The appellant's Article 8 claim

20. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  13  June  2009  as  a
    student. He had leave to remain as a student until 30  September  2014.
    He has remained unlafwully since then.

21. The appellant met the sponsor in  March  2017.  They  were  married  in
    August 2017.

22. The sponsor lived in Bangladesh from birth until 2010.  She  is  now  a
    British citizen. As at the date of the hearing before  the  Judge,  she
    was pregnant with a due date in February 2020.

23. On  the  evidence  before  the  Judge,  the  appellant  had  family  in
    Bangladesh. His mother, brother and sister were  living  in  Bangladesh
    (para 23 of the Judge's decision). The sponsor has a  brother  and  two
    sisters in the United Kingdom. Her parents and another brother live  in
    Bangladesh (para 40 of the Judge's decision).  She  visited  Bangladesh
    twice in 2013 and once in 2015 for 3 or 4 weeks staying with family  on
    each occasion (para 41 of the Judge's decision). The appellant returned
    to Bangladesh for 4 weeks in 2012 (para 25).

24. Besides relying upon his right to his family life with  his  wife,  the
    appellant also relied upon his private life said to have been developed
    in the UK since his arrival.

25. The appellant's Article 8 claim was also based on difficulties that  it
    is said he will experience on reintegrating  in  Bangladesh,  including
    difficulties in relation to treatment for his mental health  condition.
    At the  hearing  before  the  Judge,  the  respondent's  representative
    accepted that the problems relating  to  the  appellant's  health  were
    "well-documented" (para 51 of the Judge's decision).

The respondent's decision

26. The respondent refused the appellant's application  for  reasons  which
    may be summarised as follows:

         (i)  As the appellant had not paid a litigation debt  of  �320,  he
         did not meet the eligibility suitability requirement under  Section
         S-LTR.

         (ii) He did not meet the eligibility relationship requirement under
         paras E-LTRP.1.1-1.12.

         (iii)     He  did  not  meet  the  eligibility  immigration  status
         requirement because his leave as a student expired on 30  September
         2014 and he has therefore been living in the United Kingdom without
         valid leave for 4 years 2 months.

         (iv) There were no very significant obstacles to his  reintegration
         in Bangladesh and therefore he did not  meet  the  requirements  of
         para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. Paras  276ADE(1)(iii)-
         (v) did not apply.

         (v)  He did not qualify under the 10-year partner route or the  10-
         year private life route.

         (vi) There were no exceptional circumstances and therefore  he  did
         not meet the requirements of para GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.

The Judge's decision

27. By the date of the hearing before the Judge, the appellant had paid his
    litigation debt.

28. At the hearing before the Judge,  the  respondent's  representative  no
    longer disputed the appellant's relationship with his wife (para 42  of
    the Judge's decision). However, he maintained that  the  appellant  did
    not satisfy the immigration status requirement.

29. Before the Judge, the appellant's  representative  submitted  that  the
    appellant met all of  the  requirements  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    except for his immigration status, that he could only get out  of  that
    difficulty if he meets the requirements of EX.1 but he was not able  to
    do so. He therefore submitted "... so the  appeal  was  not  proceeding
    under EX.1 and therefore this should be a procedure outside the  Rules"
    (paras 60 and 83 of the Judge's decision).

30. The appellant's representative referred the Judge to the  judgments  in
    Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008] UKHL 40 and R (Agyarko) v SSHD  [2017] UKSC 11
    (paras 72-73 of the Judge's  decision).  The  Judge  was  referred,  in
    particular, to paras 49-53 of Agyarko.

31. It was submitted on the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  appellant  now
    satisfied the suitability requirements. With regard to the  eligibility
    relationship requirements, his wife is a British  citizen.  Her  income
    was above the threshold of �18,600, as evidenced by the letter on  page
    48, the payslips at pages 40-47 and the bank statements  at  49-80.  He
    meets the English language requirement because he has a UK  degree,  as
    evidenced by the document at page 130 of the appellant's bundle  (paras
    69-70 of Judge's decision).

32. It was therefore submitted on the appellant's behalf that "there was no
    interest in the enforcement of immigration control to require him to go
    back to apply for entry clearance" (para 74).

33. The Judge found that the respondent's decision  was  proportionate.  He
    gave his reasons at paras 76-94 of his decision, stating,  inter  alia,
    that he had considered all of the evidence and the cases  of  Chikwamba
    and Agyarko as well as other cases that he mentioned at para 78.

34. At para 79, the Judge referred to the appellant having "somewhat  of  a
    cavalier attitude to  matters of immigration control ...". He said that
    he took from the appellant's evidence that "he felt that  he  had  some
    form of 'trump card' in having the relationship with his partner who is
    pregnant".

35. In view of the grounds, it is necessary to quote  paras  76-94  of  the
    Judge's decision where he gave his  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    respondent's decision is proportionate.

         "My Findings

         76.  I have given very careful consideration to all of the evidence
             put before me in this case, both written and oral.

         77.  In this case parties were agreed, at least in part, that  this
             was  a  matter  that  should  be  dealt   with   by   way   of
             proportionality.

         78.  Having examined the authorities and rules I  agree  with  both
             parties that this is a matter that has to be looked at outside
             the rules as the Appellant did not qualify under  Appendix  FM
             276ADE and having been referred by parties  to  the  cases  of
             Chikwamba, Agyarko, MM Lebanon UKSC 2017, Section 117A of  the
             Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 and to the case  of
             Rhuppiah 2018 UKSC58,  as  well  as  Section  117B  and  other
             aspects of the Rules, I considered them all.

         79.  I have to say that the Appellant had somewhat  of  a  cavalier
             attitude to matters of  immigration  control  stating  on  two
             occasions that he would (1) be wasting his time going back  to
             Bangladesh and (2) that the British law would not separate  he
             and his wife. I took from his evidence that he  felt  that  he
             had some form of 'trump card' in having the relationship  with
             his partner who is pregnant. However, there is no  trump  card
             to be played in any particular case and an unborn child  or  a
             pregnant  partner  should  never  be  treated  as  such.   His
             character as well was somewhat undermined by a period of  time
             when he remained in the United Kingdom with no  legitimate  or
             lawful immigration status, and that he patently did not advise
             his now partner of his lack of immigration status in the first
             few several meetings between them, even though he has now told
             her of the situation.

         80.  There is of course no dispute as to the  relationship  between
             he and his partner or the fact that she is  now  pregnant  and
             due to give birth next year.

         81.  There seems to be  no  argument  that  he  had  not  paid  his
             immigration fees and that is the reason  why  the  Respondents
             had considered that he had failed to meet suitability under S-
             EC.3.1. although those have now been paid and were  apparently
             paid before today's hearing.

         82.  Of course I'm looking at the situation as it pertains now  and
             find that he remains in his  relationship,  that  he  has  his
             roots in Bangladesh having lived there most of his life as did
             his wife before she came to the United Kingdom but she now has
             citizenship here, albeit that her parents and  a  sibling  are
             still in Bangladesh where she lived  and  integrated  for  the
             majority of her life.

         83.  I consider Mr Hussain to be correct to argue that  this  is  a
             matter that must be considered outside the rules and that  the
             issue of proportionality applies.




         84.  Of course Agyarko provides us with considerable assistance  in
             looking at the weight to be applied to individual factors  and
             to the proportionality argument that I am considering.

         85.  The Appellant and his partner speak English, the Appellant  is
             reliant on his partner's income but she is in  employment  and
             is a UK citizen. He has some mental health problems which  are
             confirmed.

         86.  He could be treated in Bangladesh, he has provided no evidence
             at all to state that cannot be the case and Bangladesh  has  a
             healthy health system which he could access.

         87.  The Appellant commenced this family life with his partner when
             his immigration status was precarious. There is family, indeed
             his wife's family, in Bangladesh who could support him and his
             wife  will  not  be  forced  to  go  to   Bangladesh,   though
             conceivably she could should she  choose  to  do  so.  She  is
             pregnant but  the  baby  is  not  due  for  some  months.  The
             Applicant could make an application from abroad.

         88.  I have no  difficulty  in  concluding  that  Article  8(1)  is
             engaged and in this case there is a family life  gateway  with
             family life in both countries. I use a balance sheet  approach
             looking at whether he should have been  granted  discretionary
             leave to remain, or should be returned to Bangladesh.

         89.  I look to balance the evidence and the relevant factors on  an
             accumulative basis and ask how  the  fair  balance  should  be
             struck between competing individuals interests and the  public
             interest, applying the proportionality test and  reference  to
             Agyarko of course therein. There are facts  to  weigh  in  the
             other cases I was referred to and I consider them and how they
             play in these particular circumstances.

         90.  In this case exceptional circumstances does not, as  the  case
             is disclosed, mean unusual or unique and of course his  wife's
             health is a little precarious  because  she  is  pregnant  and
             there is an unborn baby's life to consider as well.

         91.  As a country the United Kingdom is entitled to control of  its
             borders and of course  in  this  case  family  life  has  been
             attained and  then  continued  and  established  in  the  full
             knowledge  that  continuing  it  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
             precarious.

         92.  The Appellant's wife  has  supportive  family  in  the  United
             Kingdom, not just the support of the Appellant and  I  balance
             the strength of public interests in the  removal  against  the
             impact on his family life.

         93.  I do not find that exceptional  circumstances  apply  in  this
             case. I acknowledge that the lady is pregnant and will  go  on
             to give birth to what everyone would hope would be  a  healthy
             baby, but at this time and in the circumstances of  this  case
             that I find taking account of the sections,  rules  and  cases
             referred to, I find that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  not
             incompatible with Article 8, the  Appellant  can  relocate  to
             Bangladesh, will have wider family support there and  is  well
             aware of the culture there, he will have healthcare there  and
             his case is neither very strong or compelling. It is certainly
             not exceptional. I do take account of course of  Section  117A
             and Section 117B (even  taking  account  of  the  letter  from
             Zahra & Co Solicitors where they take responsibility  for  not
             advising the Appellant of the consequence of  not  paying  the
             fees) but the fact is of course that he didn't pay  the  fees.
             His medical records are brief.

         94.  Naturally I have taken into account the letters in support  of
             his wife  and  the  factor  of  her  abusive  relationship  in
             Bangladesh but Bangladesh is a populous country and she  would
             have the support of her husband if she chooses  to  go  there,
             though I am not suggesting she requires to consider that.  The
             disturbance  to  she  and  her  husband's   family   life   is
             proportionate and the decision justified in the  circumstances
             of this case. Taking  account  of  the  Razgar  questions  the
             Appellant is similarly unsuccessful in my consideration of the
             evidence and  the  weighing  of  proportionality  against  the
             factors  in  this  case,  there  is  interference  but  it  is
             proportionate."

The grounds

36. The permission judge considered that the grounds hint at, but do not in
    terms allege, bias. I do not agree.  They plainly do allege bias, in my
    view, given the final sentence of para 6 of the grounds (quoted at para
    38(ii) below).

37. The appellant's "error of law" submissions rely  upon  para  5  of  the
    decision of the permission judge.  At  para  5  of  his  decision,  the
    permission judge said that it was arguable that the Judge had erred  in
    law by failing to make findings on whether the appellant met or  would,
    in a future application for entry clearance, meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules; and in turn whether the public interest required
    the appellant's removal in light of the  circumstances  illustrated  in
    Chikwamba.

38. The grounds are written in a somewhat unhelpful and discursive  way.  I
    have extracted from them the grounds as set out below (the numbering of
    the grounds is mine). I make no apology for any overlap in  paras  (i)-
    (viii) below.

         (i)  Ground 1: The Judge's finding that "the appellant had somewhat
         of a cavalier attitude  to  matters  of  immigration  control"  was
         irrational. I take this ground from para 5  of  the  grounds  which
         contends that the appellant's belief that "British  law  would  not
         separate  him  from  his  wife"  cannot  in  any  sensible  way  be
         interpreted as "cavalier".

         (ii) Ground 2: Para 4 of the  grounds  contends  that  the  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality was "coloured  by  his  negative  and
         unfounded assumption of the appellant's  attitude"  to  immigration
         control as "cavalier". Para 5 of  the  grounds  contends  that  the
         Judge "pejoratively described the appellant using such language ...
         only goes to illustrate that  he  was  determined  to  dismiss  the
         appeal without a proper and objective examination of its merit". As
         this latter allegation is linked to the Judge's assessment  of  the
         appellant having a "somewhat cavalier attitude towards  matters  of
         immigration control", I treat it as part of ground 2 as opposed  to
         ground 3. Paras 4 and 5 of the grounds read:

             "4.  It is most unfortunate that the  judge  should  begin  by
             characterising the appellant's attitude to immigration control
             as "cavalier": see para 79 of the determination.  Reading  the
             entirely of this paragraph, it seems that this was  done  with
             the intent to portray the  appellant as someone who has abused
             this country's immigration law, yet the only law that he broke
             was to remain here beyond his leave. Whilst the seriousness of
             this breach is not to be diminished, it  is  not  on  its  own
             sufficient to exclude the appellant from  this  country.  This
             was not the respondent's view either.  The  appellant  submits
             that the judge's assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  his
             exclusion has been coloured  by  his  negative  and  unfounded
             assumption about the appellant's attitude.

             5.   It is assumed that the judge's  charactarisation  of  the
             appellant's attitude  as  cavalier  stems  from  his  evidence
             recorded  at  paragraph  27  of  the  determination.   It   is
             respectfully  submitted  that  the  appellant's  belief   that
             British law would not separate him from his wife cannot in any
             sensible way  be  interpreted  as  cavalier.  That  the  judge
             pejoratively described the appellant using such  language,  it
             is respectfully submitted, only goes to illustrate that he was
             determined  to  dismiss  the  appeal  without  a  proper   and
             objective examination of its merit."

                                                               (my emphasis)

         (iii)    Ground 3:  In view of the final sentence of para 6 of  the
         grounds, I  characterise  ground  3  as  follows:  "The  Judge  was
         biased". Para 6 of the grounds reads:

             6.   The judge's highly emotive description of  the  appellant
             seeing his pregnant  wife  as  a  "trump  card"  is  not  only
             irrational, but is  unfair  treatment  of  his  evidence.  The
             appellant was asked whether, when  he  decided  to  marry  his
             wife, he was aware of the consequence of being here illegally,
             to which he replied that he was thinking that British law will
             not separate him from his wife. To leap from  the  appellant's
             expression of his state of mind, pre-marriage, to  a  view  by
             the judge that the appellant saw his unborn child as a  "trump
             card", is extra ordinary. Any reasonable person reading  these
             comments is likely to think that the judge was predisposed  to
             finding reasons to dismiss the appellant's appeal."

                                                               (my emphasis)

         (iv) Ground 4: The Judge misapprehended the evidence  at  para  93,
         where he said he had taken into account a letter from  Zahra  &  Co
         Solicitors in which they took responsibility for not  advising  the
         appellant of the consequence of not  paying  the  litigation  debt.
         This was said to be "truly alarming"  because  there  was  no  such
         letter from Zahra & Co Solicitors who have only been acting for the
         appellant since July 2019 whereas  the  litigation  debt  arose  in
         September 2015. The letter in question came  from  the  appellant's
         former solicitors.

         (v)  Ground 5: The Judge failed to consider  and  apply  Chikwamba,
         Agyarko, R (MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10 and Rhuppiah v SSHD
         [2018] UKSC 58. The  Judge  failed  to  explain  what  these  cases
         decided and their relevance to the issues that he had to decide. He
         said at para 84 that Agyarko provided  considerable  assistance  in
         looking at the weight to be  applied  to  individual  factors,  but
         failed to say what those factors were, nor did  he  deal  with  the
         appellant's submission that the interests  of  immigration  control
         would not be served by his removal when on return he is  likely  to
         be successful in obtaining a spouse entry clearance (para  8(i)  of
         the grounds).

         (vi) Ground 6: The  Judge's  "evaluation  of  the  submissions  and
         caselaw... does  not  show  any  clarity  in  thinking  or  serious
         engagement with the submissions (para 3 of the grounds).

         Referring to the mistake that is the  subject  of  ground  4,  para
         8(ii) of the grounds contends that the fact  that  the  Judge  made
         "such  a  mistake  on  an  issue  of  such  fundamental  importance
         exemplifies his treatment of all of the issues and the evidence  in
         the case generally. He touches of  [sic]  everything  to  give  the
         impressions [sic] that he has them in mind, but  does  not  examine
         them with any seriousness" (para 8(ii) of the grounds).  The  Judge
         "merely paid lip service to  the  submissions  before  him  without
         properly engaging with the submissions and evaluating the  evidence
         to assess whether the appellant is able to make a case outside  the
         Immigration Rules" (para 9 of the grounds).

         (vii)    Ground 7: The Judge failed to  resolve  material  matters,
         that  is,  whether  the   appellant   satisfies   the   suitability
         requirement,   the   relationship   requirement,   the    financial
         requirement and the  English  language  requirement.  A  reasonable
         reader would not  be  able  to  establish  whether  the  Judge  had
         resolved  the  question  whether  the   appellant   satisfied   the
         eligibility suitability requirement in S-LTR 4.4 of Appendix FM  in
         his favour (paras 8(i) and 8(iv) of the grounds). In view  of  para
         51 of Agyarko, the question whether or not the appellant is  likely
         to obtain entry clearance from abroad is "decisive to  the  success
         or failure of his appeal" (para 8(iv) of the grounds).

         (viii)   Ground 8: A reasonable  appellant  will  not  be  able  to
         comprehend why he lost his appeal and how the judge dealt with  the
         submissions made (para 3 of the grounds).



Submissions

39. In their submissions, Zahra & Co Solicitors helpfully  state  that  the
    ground that the appellant really wishes to emphasise is para 5  of  the
    grant of permission (see my para  37  above).  Although  the  appellant
    relies on the remainder  of  the  grounds,  para  5  of  the  grant  of
    permission represented his main challenge.

40. No further substantive submissions were made on the appellant's  behalf
    in the letters dated 5 May 2020, 24 June 2020  and  2  July  2020  from
    Zahra & Co Solicitors.

41. I shall refer to the submissions of Mr Melvin in my assessment, to  the
    extent that I consider it necessary to do so.

Assessment

Ground 1

42. Ground 1  can  be  disposed  of  briefly.  I  have  labelled  it  as  a
    rationality challenge because it is  contended  that  "the  appellant's
    belief that British law would not separate him from his wife cannot  in
    any sensible way be interpreted as cavalier"". However, given that  the
    Judge said that the appellant had said on two occasions in his evidence
    that he would be wasting his time going back  to  Bangladesh  and  that
    "British law" would not separate him from his wife notwithstanding that
    he had entered into his relationship with his wife knowing that he  was
    present in the United Kingdom unlawfully, I simply cannot  see  how  it
    can be said that it was  irrational  for  the  Judge  to  describe  the
    appellant's attitude towards the United Kingdom's  legitimate  interest
    in immigration control as "cavalier".

43. In reality,  ground  1  is  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    assessment of the appellant's evidence. I therefore reject ground 1.

Ground 2

44.  Ground  2  concerns  the  terms  in  which  the  Judge  described  the
    appellant's attitude at para 79 of his decision. Although quoted at  my
    para 35 above,  I  quote  again  the  relevant  part  of  para  79  for
    convenience:

         "I have to say that  the  Appellant  had  somewhat  of  a  cavalier
         attitude to matters of immigration control stating on two occasions
         that he would (1) be wasting his time going back to Bangladesh  and
         (2) that the British law would not separate he and his wife."

45. Para 4 of the grounds contends that the Judge used the phrase "cavalier
    attitude to  immigration  control"  with  the  intent  to  portray  the
    appellant "as someone who has abused this  country's  immigration  law,
    yet the only law that he broke was to remain here beyond his leave".

46. The implication in para 4 of the grounds is that the appellant has only
    breached the immigration laws of the United Kingdom  in  a  minor  way.
    However, the fact is that a person  who  has  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave has indeed breached immigration law.  As  at  the
    date of the hearing before the Judge, the appellant had remained in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully for a period of  just  under  5  years.  This
    period of  unlawful  residence  cannot,  on  any  reasonable  view,  be
    described as a minor infringement  of  the  immigration  laws  of  this
    country, albeit I accept that the transgression is not as  serious  as,
    for example, in the case of a person who takes on a false  identity  in
    order to obtain leave to remain.

47. More importantly, whilst para 4 of the grounds looks backwards  towards
    the appellant's past  and  contends  that  his  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's immigration law was minor, it is clear that the Judge was  in
    fact referring to something else, i.e. that the appellant believed that
    the law would not separate him from his wife, with the implication that
    he believed that he would be allowed to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    notwithstanding  that  he  and  the  sponsor  had  entered  into  their
    relationship at a time when he and the sponsor both knew that he had no
    right to be in the United Kingdom and therefore could not have had  any
    legitimate expectation of being permitted to enjoy their family life in
    the United Kingdom.

48. Judges are charged with the responsibility of assessing the individuals
    who give evidence before them. Given that the Judge saw and  heard  the
    appellant give oral evidence and that he said that  the  appellant  had
    said twice that he would be wasting his time  returning  to  Bangladesh
    and that "British law" would not separate him from his wife,  I  simply
    cannot see how it can be  said  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's attitude towards  immigration  control  was  unfounded,  as
    contended at para 4 of the grounds.

49. On any reasonable view, the Judge was right to think that an  inference
    could legitimately be drawn from the appellant's evidence that  he  was
    confident that the state's interest in  immigration  control  would  be
    accorded  little  weight  compared  with  his  own  circumstances.   In
    describing the appellant's  attitude  towards  immigration  control  as
    "cavalier", he was merely giving his assessment of the appellant  as  a
    witness.

50. For all of the above reasons, I reject the contention  that  the  Judge
    "pejoratively described the appellant using such language". There is no
    basis whatsoever for the suggestion that the Judge chose the  words  he
    used to describe the appellant's attitude towards  immigration  control
    pejoratively.

51. In summary, therefore, para 4 of the grounds is, in part,  misconceived
    (see para 47 above) whilst the remainder of para 4  and  the  whole  of
    para 5 of the grounds amount to no more than mere disagreement with the
    Judge's assessment of the appellant as a witness.

52. I therefore reject ground 2.

Ground 3

53. This is the ground that, in effect, alleges bias. This ground  concerns
    the following sentences in para 79 of the Judge's decision:

         "I took from his evidence that he felt that he  had  some  form  of
         'trump card' in having the relationship with  his  partner  who  is
         pregnant. However, there is no trump  card  to  be  played  in  any
         particular case and an unborn child or a  pregnant  partner  should
         never be treated as such..."

54. I stress that there is no allegation that the  Judge  did  anything  or
    said anything at the hearing that suggested a predisposition to dismiss
    the appeal. Nor is there anything in the grounds  that  suggests  that,
    apart the two sentences quoted at my para 53 above from para 79 of  the
    Judge's decision and perhaps the Judge's assessment of the  appellant's
    attitude towards immigration control which I have dealt with as part of
    ground 2, there is anything else in the Judge's decision from  which  a
    predisposition to dismiss the appeal can or should be drawn.

55. No objection can reasonably be taken to the use of  the  phrase  "trump
    card", given that it has been used  by  the  courts,  including  higher
    courts, on  many  occasions  in  saying,  for  example  that  the  best
    interests of a child are not a trump card.

56. Therefore the only question is whether the Judge's use  of  the  phrase
    "trump card" to describe his assessment of the appellant's  view  about
    the weight that his relationship with his wife should carry as  against
    the state's interest in immigration control shows that  the  Judge  was
    biased and predisposed to dismiss the appeal.

57. I simply cannot see how it can be said that the Judge  was  predisposed
    to dismiss the appeal simply because he used the phrase "trump card" to
    describe his assessment of the  appellant's  view  about  the  relative
    weight that should be given to his relationship with his wife and  that
    they  are  expecting  a  child  as  against  the  state's  interest  in
    immigration control.

58. In my judgment, it is clear that, in reality, para  6  of  the  grounds
    amounts to no more than a disagreement with the Judge's  assessment  of
    the appellant's evidence.

59. Taken as a whole, the Judge's reasoning  at  paras  76-94  as  a  whole
    demonstrates a fair and balanced assessment of the case.

60. For all of the reasons given above, there is not a  shred  of  evidence
    that supports the serious allegation that the Judge was predisposed  to
    dismissing the appeal, i.e. that he was biased.

61. I therefore reject ground 3.

Ground 4

62. It is wholly immaterial that the Judge misunderstood the  evidence  and
    mistakenly considered that the solicitors who had taken  responsibility
    for not advising the appellant of the consequence  of  not  paying  his
    litigation debt were the appellant's previous representatives  and  not
    Zahra & Co Solicitors. Whilst regrettable, it does  not  warrant  being
    described as a mistake that was "truly alarming" nor  does  it  warrant
    being  described  as  a  "mistake  on  an  issue  of  such  fundamental
    importance", given  that  the  purpose  of  grounds  of  appeal  in  an
    application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to
    establish that the judge materially erred in law in reaching his or her
    decision on the appeal. It is obvious  that  the  Judge's  mistake  was
    immaterial to his decision on the appellant's appeal.

63. I therefore reject ground 4. As for any concern that the Judge may have
    cast doubt on the competence of Zahra & Co Solicitors, both Zahra &  Co
    Solicitors and the appellant would have been  aware  that  Zahra  &  Co
    Solicitors were not acting for the appellant at the relevant  time  and
    that the Judge therefore made a mistake.

64. In view of the fact that the issue in this appeal is whether the  Judge
    had materially erred in law, ground 4  is  devoid  of  merit,  for  the
    reasons given above.

65. Before dealing with grounds 5 and 6, I shall deal with certain  aspects
    of ground 7.

Ground 7:  The Chikwamba 'principle'

66. Ground 7 contends, inter alia, that, if  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements for entry clearance as a spouse, this is determinative  of
    his appeal.  This  ground  is  based  on  Chikwamba  and  para  51,  in
    particular, of the Supreme Court's judgment in Agyarko where Lord  Reed
    said:

         "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled  to
         remain in the UK only temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an  applicant-even  if
         residing in the UK unlawfully-was otherwise certain to  be  granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision  in  Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."

         (My emphasis).

67. In Agyarko, it was only said that there "might" be no  public  interest
    in the removal of a person who would be certain to succeed in an  entry
    clearance application. If the Supreme Court had  decided  in  Chikwamba
    that the mere fact that an individual is certain to succeed in an entry
    clearance application is  determinative  of  an  in-country  Article  8
    claim, it is difficult to see why Lord Brown referred to the individual
    circumstances of the appellant in Chikwamba at para 46 where he said:

         "Is it  really  to  be  said  that  effective  immigration  control
         requires that the claimant and her child  must  first  travel  back
         (perhaps at the taxpayers' expense) to Zimbabwe, a country to which
         the enforced return of failed asylum seekers remained suspended for
         more than  two  years  after  the  claimant's  marriage  and  where
         conditions are 'harsh and unpalatable', and remain there  for  some
         months obtaining entry clearance, before finally she can return (at
         her own expense) to the United Kingdom to resume  her  family  life
         which meantime will have been gravely  disrupted?  Surely  one  has
         only to ask the question to recognise the right answer."

68. It has been said by the higher courts and the Tribunal more  than  once
    that Chikwamba does not establish that the mere fact that an individual
    would qualify for entry clearance is determinative;  for  example,  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in R (Chen) v  SSHD  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00189
    (IAC) and, more importantly, the Court of Appeal's judgment in R (Kaur)
    v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1423. At para 45 of Kaur, Holroyde LJ said:

         "I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which Lord Reed
         (at paragraph 51 of his judgment in Agyarko) referred to Chikwamba.
         It is relevant to note that he there spoke of an applicant who  was
         "certain to be granted leave to enter" if an application were  made
         from outside the UK, and said that in such a case there might be no
         public interest in removing the applicant. That, in my view,  is  a
         clear indication that the Chikwamba principle will require a  fact-
         specific assessment in each case, will only apply in a  very  clear
         case, and even then will not necessarily result in a grant of leave
         to remain."

69.  Yet,  Chikwamba  is  still  being  cited  as  having   authoritatively
    established that, if an  appellant  can  establish  that  he  would  be
    certain to be granted entry clearance, this is determinative of his in-
    country Article 8 claim, in that, it means that there is then no public
    interest in removing the individual concerned or expecting him to leave
    the United Kingdom merely in order to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.

70. The submission that Chikwamba and Agyarko  authoritatively  established
    this 'principle' was advanced to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  recent
    decision in Younas (section  117B(b)(b);  Chikwamba;  Zambrano)  [2020]
    UKUT 00129 (IAC), published on 17 April 2020. The Upper Tribunal  (Lane
    J, President and UTJJ Hanson and Sheridan) rejected  the  argument  for
    reasons that it gave at paras 78-88.

71. Furthermore, and as the Upper Tribunal  said  in  Younas  at  para  90,
    Chikwamba was decided before the coming into force of part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"). Pursuant
    to s.117A(2), a court or  tribunal  considering  "the  public  interest
    question"  in  a  non-deportation  case  must  have   regard   to   the
    considerations listed in section 117B. The "public  interest  question"
    is defined as "the question of whether an interference with a  person's
    right to respect for private and family life is justified under article
    8(2)". Whilst Part 5A created  certain  exceptions,  for  example,  the
    exception in s.117B(6), Parliament chose not  to  create  an  exception
    that would apply in cases in which the individual is certain to succeed
    in an application for entry clearance from abroad.

72. Accordingly, I reject the submission that if  the  appellant  satisfied
    the requirements for entry clearance, this  was  decisive  of  his  in-
    country  Article  8  claim  or  appeal,  in  that,  it  would  then  be
    disproportionate to remove him or to expect him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and make an entry clearance application.

73. The correct approach is to conduct a fact-specific assessment  in  each
    case, having regard to the public interest considerations in Part 5A of
    the 2002 Act. In this regard, I  consider  whether  the  Judge  made  a
    material  error  of  law  in  his  assessment  of  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise at para 87 below.

Ground 7: The eligibility suitability requirement

74. Ground 7 also contends  that  the  Judge  failed  to  resolve  material
    matters, as set out in the grounds and summarised at  my  para  38(vii)
    above. Firstly, it is said, inter alia, in ground 7 that no  reasonable
    reader would be able to establish whether the appellant  satisfied  the
    eligibility suitability requirement. I do not agree. It was clear  from
    the Judge's summary of the submissions of  the  representatives  before
    him that the only eligibility requirement under the  Immigration  Rules
    that  the  respondent's  representative  took  issue   with   was   the
    immigration status eligibility requirement  (see  paras  42-43  of  the
    Judge's decision). At para 81 of his decision, the  Judge  specifically
    said that "There seems to be no argument  that  he  had  not  paid  his
    immigration fees ..... those have now been  paid  and  were  apparently
    paid before today's hearing" and  at  para  82  that:  "Of  course  I'm
    looking at the situation as it pertains now".

75. Nowhere in his reasoning at paras 76-94 did  the  Judge  say  that  the
    appellant does not meet the  eligibility  suitability  requirement.  In
    looking  at  the  factors  for  and  against  the  appellant   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise, the Judge said he would follow  the
    balance sheet approach and, again, did not go on say that the appellant
    did not meet the eligibility suitability requirement.

76. Considering the Judge's reasoning as a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  he
    implicitly  found  and  accepted  that  the  appellant  satisfied   the
    eligibility suitability requirement and, further, that he took it  into
    account  in  conducting  the  balancing   exercise   in   relation   to
    proportionality.

Ground 7: The eligibility relationship requirement

77. The submission in ground 7 that the Judge failed to resolve whether the
    appellant met the eligibility relationship requirement ignores the fact
    that the respondent's representative accepted that  the  appellant  met
    the eligibility relationship requirement (see para 42  of  the  Judge's
    decision) and that the Judge specifically referred  to  the  fact  that
    there is no dispute as to the relationship between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor (see para 80 of his decision).

Ground 7: The English language requirement

78. The Judge considered proportionality outside the Immigration Rules,  as
    he was requested to do by the appellant's representative  (paras  55-56
    and para 83 of the Judge's decision). It follows that s.117B(2) of  the
    2002 Act applied and there was no need for the Judge to make a specific
    finding as to whether  or  not  the  appellant  satisfied  the  English
    language requirement under the Immigration Rules for a grant  of  leave
    to remain as spouse or a grant of entry clearance as a spouse.

79. Furthermore, the submission that the Judge did not make a finding as to
    whether or not the appellant satisfies the English language requirement
    ignores the fact that he took into account in  the  appellant's  favour
    that the appellant and the sponsor speak English, notwithstanding  that
    this is a neutral factor as was held in  Rhuppiah.  Any  error  by  the
    Judge in taking into account what he should in fact have treated  as  a
    neutral factor is not material to the outcome as he  still  found  that
    the decision was proportionate.

80. There is therefore no substance in this ground.

Ground 7: The minimum income threshold

81. I accept that the Judge did not, in terms, make a finding as to whether
    or not the sponsor's income met the minimum income threshold.  However,
    as  I  have  said  above,  the  fact  is  that   he   was   considering
    proportionality outside the Immigration Rules, as he was  requested  to
    do on the appellant's behalf (paras 55-56 and para 83  of  the  Judge's
    decision). Accordingly, Part 5A applied of the  2002  Act  applied.  It
    follows that the caselaw in relation to s.117B(3), to the  effect  that
    financial independence is a neutral factor (Rhuppiah), applied  in  the
    Judge's  assessment  of  the  balancing   exercise   in   relation   to
    proportionality. If financial independence is a neutral factor, so  too
    must be that the minimum income threshold is  satisfied  for  leave  to
    remain or entry clearance to be granted under the Immigration Rules.

82. Even if I am wrong to say that the legal position is that the fact that
    the minimum income threshold is  satisfied  for  the  appellant  to  be
    granted leave to remain or entry clearance is a neutral factor when one
    is carrying out the balancing exercise in relation  to  proportionality
    outside the Immigration  Rules,  the  fact  is  that  the  Judge  heard
    submissions from the appellant's representative (see  para  69  of  his
    decision) that  the  sponsor's  income  satisfied  the  minimum  income
    threshold. There is no reason to think that he did not factor this into
    the balancing exercise, given that he specifically referred at para  85
    of his decision to the sponsor being in employment. In  conducting  the
    balancing exercise, he did not count as a factor against the  appellant
    that he was not financially independent.

83. There is therefore no substance in this ground.

Grounds 5, 6 and the remainder of ground 7

84. The main thrust of grounds 5, 6 and the remainder of ground 7  is  that
    the Judge failed to engage properly with, or that he paid  lip  service
    to, the submissions made before him. It is clear that the allegation in
    ground 6, that the Judge had erred by failing to engage with the  legal
    submissions, that he "merely paid lip service to the  submissions"  and
    that there was "a lack of any clarity of thinking or serious engagement
    with the submissions" concerns the legal  submissions  advanced  before
    the Judge in relation to the judgments in Chikwamba, Hayat and Agyarko.



85. Of course, I would have preferred it if the Judge had in fact  directly
    engaged with the legal submissions. However, the fact that he  did  not
    do so does not mean that he materially erred in law. I  have  given  my
    reasons for rejecting the submission that, if the appellant is  certain
    to succeed in an entry clearance application, this is determinative  of
    the balancing exercise in relation to proportionality. Accordingly, any
    failure by the Judge to deal  with  the  submissions  advanced  is  not
    material.

86. What  matters  is  whether  the  Judge  conducted  a  legally  adequate
    balancing exercise in relation to proportionality. I am satisfied  that
    the Judge did conduct a legally adequate balancing exercise in relation
    to proportionality. As I have said above, if it was  relevant  to  take
    into account that the sponsor's income met the minimum income threshold
    in the proportionality balancing exercise, then there is no  reason  to
    think that the Judge did not factor this into the  balancing  exercise.
    He specifically referred to the fact that the appellant speaks  English
    (para 85) and also various other factors, including that the  appellant
    had now paid his litigation debt (para 81); that the appellant and  the
    sponsor had their roots in Bangladesh although the sponsor  was  now  a
    British citizen (para 82); that the appellant and the sponsor both have
    family members in Bangladesh and in the United Kingdom  (paras  82  and
    87); that the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
    commenced when the appellant's immigration status was precarious  (para
    87); the health of the appellant (para 85) and the sponsor  (para  90);
    and that the United Kingdom is entitled to control  its  borders  (para
    91).

87. In my judgment, having regard to the Judge's assessment of the case, it
    simply cannot be said that he conducted a legally inadequate or  flawed
    assessment of the balancing exercise in relation to proportionality.

88. I therefore reject the submissions in grounds 5, 6 and 7 that the Judge
    materially erred in law by failing  to  engage  specifically  with  the
    legal submissions advanced before him.

Ground 8

89. For the reasons given at para 87 above, I am satisfied that ground 8 is
    simply not established. If the  Judge's  reasoning  at  para  76-94  is
    considered  as  a  whole,  a  reasonable  appellant  will  be  able  to
    comprehend why he lost his appeal. Put simply, the Judge found that the
    public interest considerations outweighed his individual circumstances.



90. The grounds therefore fail to establish that the Judge  had  materially
    erred in law.

91. I am compelled to say two further things.

92. Firstly, this is a case  in  which  permission  should  not  have  been
    granted.  To  the  extent  that  permission  was  granted  because  the
    permission judge considered it arguable that the Judge may  have  erred
    in failing to make findings on whether or the appellant met  or  would,
    in a future application, meet the requirements  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, I have explained that what was required of the Judge was a fact-
    sensitive  assessment  of  the  balancing  exercise  in   relation   to
    proportionality, which the  Judge  did  conduct.  To  the  extent  that
    permission was granted due to the possibility that the grounds  alleged
    bias, there was not a shred of evidence of bias. Despite the hyperbolic
    and emotive terms in which the grounds were couched, at least in  part,
    it is plain the allegation of bias in fact amounted to no more  than  a
    disagreement with the Judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant  and  the
    evidence.

93. Secondly, I was struck by how weak  an  Article  8  case  this  was  as
    presented to the Judge. Once it is appreciated that Chikwamba does  not
    establish that it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to
    leave the United Kingdom to make an entry  clearance  application  just
    because he would be certain to be granted entry clearance and that,  to
    the contrary,  a  fact-specific  assessment  is  required  taking  into
    account the public interest considerations in part 5A of the 2002  Act,
    the weakness of this case as presented to the Judge becomes evident. He
    was faced with a couple whose roots were in Bangladesh,  a  couple  who
    still had family in Bangladesh, a couple with no children  albeit  that
    one  was  on  the  way.  The  relationship  was  developed  whilst  the
    immigration status of  the  appellant  was  unlawful,  so  s.117B(4)(b)
    applied. The appellant's private life was  established  whilst  he  had
    leave that was precarious until September 2014, and subsequently whilst
    he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  so  that  s.117B(5)  and
    s.117B(4)(a)  applied.  Section  117B(1),  that  the   maintenance   of
    immigration control is  in  the  public  interest,  applied.  That  the
    appellant could speak English and was financially  independent  (as  he
    was reliant on the sponsor) were neutral factors. It  was  accepted  on
    the appellant's behalf that medical treatment would be available to him
    in Bangladesh albeit that it was said that this would  not  be  to  the
    same standard as he would receive in the United Kingdom (para 65).  The
    Judge took into account that the sponsor  had  experienced  an  abusive
    relationship in Bangladesh but found that she would have the support of
    the appellant, her husband, if she chose to go to Bangladesh.

94. In these circumstances, it is difficult to see how any judge  directing
    himself properly on the applicable  principles  could  reasonably  have
    found that the factors in favour of the appellant's side of the  scales
    outweighed the state's interest in immigration control.

95. Nothing I have said in this decision should be  taken  as  confirmation
    that I have reached the view  that  the  appellant  is  certain  to  be
    granted entry clearance. I  have  merely  dealt  with  the  submissions
    advanced on the appellant's behalf.

96. I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

97. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law such that it fell  to  be  set  aside.  The
    appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.




Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 23 September 2020

____________________________________________________________________________
                            ____________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
  Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
  letter or covering email

