
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09728/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2019                     |On 10 April 2019                     |
|Judgment given orally                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              saritha ramancha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Y Din, counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated on 19 July 2018.  The
    Honourable Lady Rae, sitting as a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  a
    panel on 2 October 2018 gave her reasons why the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal was not sustainable, having regard to the issues at stake
    which are fully set out in that decision annexed to this.

 2. The re-making of the  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  deferred
    pending the outcome  of  the  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department UKSC  2016/0107.



 3. The respondent relies on an expert report by a Mr  Puri  who  describes
    himself as an Advocate in the Indian  Judicial  System  at  Chandigarh.
    The report  addresses  the  difficulties  which  it  is  contended  the
    respondent's husband would face were he to accompany her to India.  The
    production of that report however is predicated on  this  case  falling
    for consideration under paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    reference to the relationship. Para 399 provides:

         '399 (b) The person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                   i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.'

                (My emphasis)

 4. The difficulty arises in that it is accepted the respondent married  in
    India after she  returned  there  in  November  2011.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge observed at paragraph 6 of his decision, and I quote:

         "The Appellant returned to India in November 2011 with some fifteen
         months left on the visa  which  she  had  gained  improperly.   Her
         marriage to the husband Mr Srinath Reddy Bejjenki, was an  arranged
         one.  As will be plain from what occurred subsequently, the  couple
         have an extremely strong and loving relationship."

 5. The question therefore is the  location  where  that  relationship  was
    formed.  That enquiry had not been raised previously and  will  require
    evidence.  In the light of Mr Bejjenki's evidence that he has  been  in
    the United Kingdom since 2004 this may be an important  matter  because
    if the respondent is unable to come within the exception  in  paragraph
    399, the closing provision of paragraph 338 will apply which is in  the
    following terms:

         'The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does not the public
         interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

 6. This will require consideration not only  of  the  conclusions  of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) as to the test  for  "unduly  harsh"  but
    also consideration of the approach to the elevated threshold  described
    in NA (Pakistan).

 7. As the nature of the case has changed the parties are in agreement that
    in the light of the substantial further fact-finding that is  required,
    in accordance  with  the  combined  Practice  Statement  this  case  is
    remitted with the consent of the parties to the First-tier Tribunal for
    its further consideration by a differently constituted panel.


Signed   Dated: 8 April 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
