
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09908/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4th May 2017                       |On 24th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                         the Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs fatma Ahmed patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance  Officer  appeals,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Obhi)   who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 18th October 2016 allowed  the  appeal  of
    the Respondent on human rights grounds.  Whilst the Appellant in  these
    proceedings is the Entry Clearance Officer, for the sake of convenience
    I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. No anonymity direction was made by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal
    and no application has been made on behalf of the appellant by Counsel.



 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India.  She made an application for entry
    clearance as a dependent relative under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The application was refused in a decision made on 11th  October
    2015.  The Appellant had sought entry clearance  as  an  elderly  adult
    dependent relative as the widowed mother of the Sponsor, Mr Patel.  The
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Obhi)  on  7th
    October 2016.  It is common ground that as a result of the  new  appeal
    provisions that the only right of appeal against that decision  was  on
    human rights grounds.  In a determination promulgated on  18th  October
    2016, Judge Obhi allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds,  having
    considered that issue in the light of the Appellant's  compliance  with
    the Immigration Rule in question.

 3. The Respondent appeals against that decision on two grounds,  first  of
    all that the judge made a material misdirection of law at paragraph  27
    whereby the judge found that the Appellant  lacked  family  support  in
    India.  It was submitted that the judge had failed to consider that the
    Appellant would be able to live in her own home with personal care paid
    for by the Sponsor.  The grounds challenge the  Sponsor's  evidence  at
    [16] and that the judge  erred  in  law  by  relying  on  such  a  bare
    assertion.  Ground 2 related to the judge's failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons.  This related to the finding at [27] that the Sponsor and  his
    family were unable to  relocate  to  India  in  order  to  provide  the
    necessary care for the Appellant there.

 4. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 21st March 2007.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence  from  both  the
    Sponsor and his wife.  Their oral evidence was recorded  at  paragraphs
    13 to 18 of the determination.  It is plain from reading  the  findings
    of fact made by the judge set out at paragraphs 22 to 27 that the judge
    found both the Sponsor and his wife to be entirely  credible  witnesses
    (see paragraph 22 of the determination).  In addition,  the  judge  had
    been provided  with  a  comprehensive  bundle  of  documentation  which
    included detailed witness statements from the family members in the  UK
    but also and importantly, evidence from family  members  in  India  and
    also medical evidence in the form of medical reports, medical  receipts
    and also evidence relating to the costs and  availability  of  care  in
    India.  There does not appear to be any  dispute  between  the  parties
    relating to  the  Sponsor's  financial  circumstances  and  there  were
    substantial documents relating to that at  pages  217  to  310  of  the
    bundle.  The financial support provided for the Appellant is set out at
    pages 311 onwards.

 6. The  judge  correctly  identified  that  the  starting  point  for  the
    consideration of the appeal was a previous decision made at the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  in  July  2009.   This  is  a  decision  of  Designated
    Immigration Judge Garratt who considered an appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse an application for the Appellant to
    remain in the UK on the basis of her dependency as an  elderly  parent.
    Those  were  in  the  earlier  provisions  of  paragraph  317  of   the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  set  out  at   paragraph   [21]   the
    circumstances at that time namely that she had come  to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor, shortly before the expiry of that had applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as an elderly relative.  The  application  was  refused
    and at that time the Appellant was 74 years of age.   The  judge  noted
    that the Appellant's husband had died in 2008 and that she had  no  one
    to support her in India.  The judge recorded the evidence at that stage
    that her son, the Sponsor, had supported her from that date onwards and
    had gone back to care for and support his mother in September 2008.  He
    then brought her to the UK for a visit and it was when  she  was  there
    that he decided she could not return.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated that she met  the
    Rules and made reference to inconsistencies in the evidence.

 7. Judge Obhi properly had regard to that decision  as  a  starting  point
    however, the judge found at [22] that that was a decision that was made
    seven years earlier and that the Appellant, to her credit, had returned
    to India.  He therefore considered the fresh evidence that  dealt  with
    the period since the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. It is important to set out the judge's observations at [22].  Whilst  I
    have already set out that it was plain from the determination that  the
    judge accepted the evidence of the Sponsor and his wife finding them to
    be wholly credible witnesses, the judge also recorded that it had  been
    accepted on behalf of the Respondent that  the  cultural  attitudes  of
    Indian society did present difficulties for married women in caring for
    their elderly parents.  The judge set out that that was  not  an  issue
    challenged by the Respondent at the hearing and further  observed  that
    that did form part of the Secretary of State's IDIs at  one  time.   He
    further recorded that the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  had  shown  that
    attitudes had not changed and importantly,  the  evidence  before  this
    Tribunal differed from that of the earlier Tribunal and that now  there
    was further evidence  concerning  the  accommodation  occupied  by  the
    Appellant's daughter in India and in the light  of  that  evidence  the
    judge also noted that the Respondent did not challenge the  claim  that
    the Appellant is financially dependent on the Sponsor.

 9. At paragraph 23 the judge properly set out the amendments introduced by
    the 2014 Immigration Act  observing  that  the  Appellant's  rights  of
    appeal were limited to human rights grounds.  The judge's findings then
    are set out at paragraphs 24 to 27.  The judge noted that the  question
    in the present case regarded entry clearance and that he was  satisfied
    that the refusal did amount to an interference of  the  rights  of  the
    Appellant and her son and that there had been  family  life,  that  the
    interference was a grave one given the Appellant's  age  and  her  poor
    health and the judge found that he was satisfied on the  evidence  that
    she was living alone, dependent on her neighbours for support  for  her
    very basic needs.  The judge also noted that he had to consider whether
    the decision was in accordance with the law and if so, whether  it  was
    necessary in a democratic society for the  reasons  given.   The  judge
    noted that the ECO's assessment of the circumstances  at  the  date  of
    decision was such that he was justified in  refusing  the  application.
    This was on the basis that he was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    other relatives in India could not care for her.   However,  the  judge
    found that in the light of the evidence before him  and  in  particular
    having seen the photographs which the judge found  demonstrated  "quite
    clearly" that they did not have the  accommodation  to  care  for  her.
    Furthermore, the judge found that the Sponsor's claim that his  sisters
    could not look after their mother because of the cultural  expectations
    of Indian society in the area and the social class in which his  mother
    lives, were findings that were plain from  the  evidence.   As  to  the
    cultural attitudes, as set out in paragraph 22, that was not challenged
    by the Respondent in any event.   The  judge  further  noted  that  the
    photographic evidence to which he had referred  simply  confirmed  what
    had been said before the previous Tribunal and in the  application  are
    that the photographs were simply proof of that claim and thus could  be
    taken into account in reaching the decision.

10. Further findings made by the judge were set out at paragraph  25.   The
    judge set out that he had considered the statement of the  Sponsor  and
    the evidence in relation to his sisters, the Appellant's  daughters  in
    India.  In addition he had considered their affidavit  evidence  and  a
    further witness statement at page 35 of the Appellant's bundle  from  a
    previous carer.  The evidence relating to the two  daughters  was  that
    they were not in a position to care for  their  mother.   At  [26]  the
    judge  summarised  the  Appellant's  medical  health  and  her  current
    physical situation.  That  made  reference  to  the  extensive  medical
    evidence that was set out in the bundle to which I  have  referred  and
    the medical conditions to which the Appellant was suffering from.   The
    documentation also confirmed that she had had a fall on 17th March 2016
    which had resulted in a wound.  It is right to observe that there is no
    challenge made by the Respondent to that medical evidence either before
    the First-tier Tribunal or to this Tribunal.

11. Having considered the evidence referred to at paragraphs 25 and 26  the
    judge made a finding that he was satisfied that there was no person  in
    India who could reasonably be expected to care for the Appellant.   The
    judge went  on  to  consider  the  Sponsor's  evidence  concerning  the
    availability of alternative care  noting  that  the  Sponsor  had  made
    enquiries in India of the availability of care homes but found that  he
    would not be able to afford to send  his  mother  to  live  in  such  a
    facility.  The judge set out the Sponsor's circumstances, including his
    financial circumstances and also the fact  that  he  was  married  with
    three children and a fourth child to be born.  The judge considered the
    trips that he had made to India and found that they were indicative  of
    the level of responsibility that is assumed for  his  mother  and  that
    this was all at a cost for him.  Importantly, the judge at paragraph 26
    noted that the point made also in the Sponsor's evidence was that there
    was no one who could care for his mother 24 hours a day.

12. At paragraph 27 the judge undertook the proportionality balance in  the
    light of the findings of  fact  that  he  had  made.   The  judge  gave
    consideration to the public interest considerations set out at  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act (as amended by the Immigration Act 2004) which the
    judge referred to as "important factors which cannot be ignored".   The
    judge noted that the Section 117 factor related to  the  precariousness
    of a private life did not apply but noted that it was relevant that the
    Appellant had respected a previous decision of the Respondent  and  had
    returned to India despite her difficulties.  The judge found that there
    would be little impact on the UK's economy, if she came  to  live  with
    her son who would provide for her and  whilst  she  might  need  health
    care, in a humane society the impact of that for a woman of her age was
    minimal when everything was taken into  account.   The  judge  reminded
    himself that there was no evidence of her breaching any  permission  to
    enter and remain.  Having balanced the public interest factors  against
    the findings of fact that he had made including her age,  her  lack  of
    real family support in India, her dependence on her son, whose  limited
    income and inability to provide residential care for her in India,  the
    complete inability of the Sponsor and his family  to  return  to  India
    without massive disruption to their lives, he found that the  interests
    of the Appellant outweighed those  of  the  public  and  therefore  the
    proportionality balance was in favour of allowing the appeal.

13. Thus the appeal came before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Ms  Akinbolu,  who
    appeared on behalf of the Appellant provided a Rule  24  response.   Mr
    Tufan was given time to consider it.  Thereafter he made the  following
    submissions.  He referred to the two Grounds of Appeal in the light  of
    the Rule 24 response that had been provided and the guidance  that  was
    attached to it that dealt with Ground 2  of  the  matters  advanced  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer.   Ground  2,  referred  to  the
    judge's findings at [27] that the Sponsor and his family are unable  to
    relocate to India to provide the necessary care for the Appellant.  The
    grounds submitted in that respect that there was no evidence  that  the
    Sponsor would not be able  to  find  employment  and  that  whilst  the
    children did not want to return to India that was open to  the  family.
    However given the guidance that had been produced by  Ms  Akinbolu  and
    the  factual  elements  namely  that  the  children  were  all  British
    citizens, Mr Tufan submitted that he was not going to press this ground
    of appeal and that the Secretary of State could not require the British
    citizen children to leave the UK.  Thus he did not  seek  to  elaborate
    further on that ground.  Dealing with the first  ground,  he  submitted
    that this ground turned on the issue of the provisions of care in India
    and that at paragraph 16 of the determination the  judge  recorded  the
    Sponsor's evidence of renting a flat for his mother near to  where  his
    sisters lived would be too costly and that they would have to employ  a
    nurse.  He submitted it was not clear what evidence there had  been  to
    make such a finding  and  that  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  find
    accommodation near  to  a  grownup  daughter  and  that  that  was  not
    considered in the necessary detail by  the  judge.   Thus  the  judge's
    consideration of this issue was not satisfactory.

14. Ms Akinbolu relied upon the Rule 24 response that she  had  filed.   In
    relation to the submissions made by Mr Tufan,  she  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 19 of the determination the judge noted that  the  Presenting
    Officer had accepted the evidence as to why others could not  care  for
    the Appellant in  India  and  whilst  that  this  was  not  an  express
    concession, that was not a point that was relied upon before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  She set out that the Presenting Officer at the  hearing
    had taken the view that the questions of qualification under the  Rules
    had arguably been addressed and that this position was taken  following
    the cross-examination of the witnesses in court and that  no  challenge
    was made to the credibility of the evidence produced (see paragraph  19
    and paragraph 22).  Thus she submitted the  Respondent  now  sought  to
    argue matters that were not in issue before the judge.

15. As to Ground 1 and the finding at [26] that  there  was  no  person  in
    India who can reasonably be expected to care for the Appellant,  was  a
    finding that was fully open to the judge to make and who had given full
    reasons in the preceding paragraphs.  In  particular,  that  the  judge
    accepted the evidence of the Sponsor and his wife as entirely  credible
    and further, took into account the evidence  of  Mr  Goddard,  and  the
    doctor at pages 55 to 60 and the evidence confirming the  affordability
    of care homes in India set out in the bundles at pages 173 - 216.  None
    of  that  had  been  challenged  by  the  Respondent  at  the   hearing
    consequently the finding that  the  judge  made  in  that  respect  was
    entirely open to the judge to make.  As to Ground 2,  whilst  Mr  Tufan
    did not press that ground, she submitted that the judge's determination
    did not make it clear that he found the Appellant to have met the Rules
    because this had been a human rights appeal.  However the  findings  of
    the judge when taken together make it clear that the Appellant did meet
    the Rules and thus the question of relocation of the family to India in
    those circumstances did not apply, in any event, as set out in the Rule
    24 response such a claim would be unreasonable  in  the  light  of  the
    policy guidance appended to the Rule 24 response and  confirmed  by  Mr
    Tufan and the decision of SF and Others (Guidance - post  -  2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).

Discussion:

16. Dealing with Ground 1, as Ms Akinbolu submits it  was  not  in  dispute
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant could meet  the
    requirements of EC-DR to  Appendix  FM  save  for  paragraph  E-ECDR2.5
    dealing with the availability of care in India.

17. Under ECDR2.5 (a) there are two elements which need  to  be  satisfied.
    First it must be established  that  the  care  is  not  available,  and
    secondly, that there is no person in the  country  who  can  reasonably
    provide it.  If the Appellant is able to establish  that  the  required
    level of care is not available and secondly  that  there  is  no  other
    person in India who can reasonably provide it, the Appellant would have
    satisfied the requirements of the Rule.

18. In terms of the decision, it was a careful reasoned decision  in  which
    the judge plainly had regard to the evidence and found both the Sponsor
    and his wife, both of whom gave evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to  be
    entirely  credible  and  upon  whose  evidence  he  placed  weight  and
    acceptance.  The judge was entitled to reach that  particular  view  of
    the credibility of the evidence and thus it was open to him  to  accept
    the factual matters that formed the basis of that evidence.  The  judge
    found that there was no  one  who  could  reasonably  provide  for  the
    applicant's care.  This finding which was made  at  paragraph  26,  was
    based on the earlier finding at  paragraph  25  that  he  accepted  the
    evidence of the Sponsor and that relating to the Appellant's daughters'
    evidence that they were unable to provide  the  care  required  due  to
    their own circumstances (see paragraph 24) and further in the light  of
    the medical condition supported by the medical  reports  at  [26].   In
    conjunction with this, the judge accepted the Sponsor's  evidence  that
    she required 24 hour care.  Also the judge was entitled  to  rely  upon
    the point accepted by the Presenting Officer that there  were  cultural
    difficulties in the married sisters providing  support  (see  paragraph
    22). Thus it was one to the judge to reach the  conclusion  that  there
    was no close family member in India who could  reasonably  provide  the
    required care. Part of the sponsor's  evidence  was  that  she  require
    assistance for intimate tasks and that it was not appropriate for  this
    type of care to be carried out by strangers and  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to take into account such cultural factors (see paragraphs 24 and
    26).

19. Whilst the grounds at paragraph 1 refer to the judge being in error  in
    relying on what was  described  as  a  "bare  assertion"  made  in  the
    Sponsor's evidence at paragraph 16, that he could not employ  a  nurse,
    this submission fails to take into account that the judge was  entitled
    to accept the Sponsor's evidence as credible which would  include  this
    point raised in his evidence.  Furthermore,  it  failed  to  take  into
    account the evidence given by the Sponsor relating to the provision  of
    care homes that was set out in the bundle at  pages  172  onwards  upon
    which the judge was entitled to rely.  In view of the  judge  accepting
    the evidence of the Sponsor that the applicant required  24  hour  care
    the alternative suggestion made in the grounds that a  nurse  could  be
    provided, is contrary to that finding.  The Sponsor and his  wife  both
    gave evidence in accordance with their witness  statements  that  there
    was no care home available in the applicant's home town  and  in  other
    locations, the evidence, which the judge accepted, was  that  the  care
    homes were not obtainable due to cost.  (See paragraph 24 and paragraph
    18 of their respective witness statements). This being  an  alternative
    ground (see paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 (b)).

20.  I am therefore satisfied that Ground 1  is  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge which were open to him to make  on  the  evidence
    before him and does not demonstrate any arguable error of law.

21. Dealing with Ground 2, as set out above, it is not a  ground  that  has
    been advanced  by Mr Tufan on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer for
    the reasons set out earlier and by reference to the  Rule  24  response
    and in particular the guidance that was annexed to that  document.   Mr
    Tufan observed that it would not be reasonable to expect the  children,
    all of whom were British citizens to be required to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  As Ms Akinbolu submitted, the judge had not clearly  set  out
    in the findings of fact that on his  analysis  the  Appellant  met  the
    Rules as this was a case which fell under the  new  appeal  provisions.
    In those circumstances, I consider  that  the  submission  made  by  Ms
    Akinbolu is right and therefore the  question  of  relocation  was  not
    relevant.  Even if it were, the fact that the applicant could meet  the
    Rules would be a weighty consideration in the  proportionality  balance
    as it would on the facts of the case necessarily  outweigh  the  public
    interest.

22. Whilst Mr Tufan did not press this ground, I do not find there  is  any
    error in the judge's reasoning.  The judge properly took  into  account
    all the evidence relating to the  family  circumstances;  that  he  was
    married with three children and a fourth child  to  be  born  in  March
    2007.  He had not resided in India since he was 26  years  of  age  and
    there was no evidence that there were any links  upon  which  he  could
    rely upon to  obtain  housing  or  employment.  That  was  the  factual
    background upon which the judge found  that  there  would  be  "massive
    disruption".  Thus contrary to the  grounds,  the  judge  did  properly
    consider this aspect within the determination.  Consequently it has not
    been established that the judge made any error of law  in  his  overall
    decision and therefore the decision shall  stand.  No  application  has
    been made for an anonymity direction to be made or grounds advanced  on
    behalf of the applicant.


    Decision:


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve an error  on  a
    point of law. The decision to allow the appeal therefore stands.






Signed                              Date: 22/5/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.







Signed                              Date 22/5/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

