

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/09449/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On 12 December 2017                        |  On 19 December 2017          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer, sheffield
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 waqas rafiq
                          (no anonymity order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, Syed Law Office Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent was born on 22  September  1985  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  On 1 July 2015, he applied to join his wife in the UK.   His
    application was refused on 13 October 2015 because  the  appellant  was
    not  satisfied  the  respondent  satisfied  the   relationship   and/or
    financial requirements of appendix FM to the immigration rules.

 2. The appellant deems a refusal to grant entry clearance  under  appendix
    FM to be a refusal of a human rights claim.  It is against this  deemed
    decision that the respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, as he
    was entitled to do under s.82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).  The  grounds
    of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  limited  to  whether  the
    appellant's decision was unlawful under s.6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

 3. On 6 January 2017, the Tribunal promulgated the  decision  and  reasons
    statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada.  Judge Borsada  decided
    the respondent  met  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM  in  full  and
    therefore his appeal should be allowed.

 4. I have set out this  background  because  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal argue that  Judge  Borsada  erred  by  not
    carrying  out  the  necessary  proportionality  exercise  to  determine
    whether article 8 ECHR had been violated.

 5. Mr Mills admitted that he  had  difficulty  defending  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Although there may be  an  error  in  the  way  Judge  Borsada
    conducted the Razgar assessment, it was difficult to see how  any  such
    error might be material.  The appellant's position  in  cases  such  as
    these is that the provisions of appendix FM are compliant with  article
    8 and  therefore  if  someone  meets  those  provisions  then  refusing
    admission would be contrary to s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Judge
    Borsada found the appellant met the requirements of appendix FM.

 6. Mr Mills reminded me that the author of the grounds (which was not him)
    had not challenged the findings made by  Judge  Borsada  regarding  the
    relationship and financial requirements.   Mr  Mills  suggested  as  an
    aside that there may have been some bases on  which  to  challenge  the
    financial requirements but the author of the grounds had  not  done  so
    and it was too late to introduce any such concerns at the hearing.

 7. Once Judge Borsada had made those findings that the respondent met  the
    provisions of appendix FM, the only logical outcome open to  him  would
    be to allow the appeal because the public interest was not  to  exclude
    the respondent from the UK.  I am aware this was, in fact, the focus of
    the remainder of paragraph 8 of the decision and reasons statement,  as
    Mr Hussain identified in the rule 24 response.  I  am  satisfied  Judge
    Borsada reached a conclusion that was open to him on the facts that  he
    found.

 8. In light of the above, as I indicated at the end of the hearing,  there
    was no need for me to hear submissions from Mr Hussain  because  I  was
    satisfied there was no legal error  in  Judge  Borsada's  decision  and
    reasons statement.

Decision

There is no legal error in Judge Borsada's  decision  and  his  decision  is
upheld.

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date         12 December 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
