
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2017                                 |On 10 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   WEI LIN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H. Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Lisa's Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of China born
      on 23 December 1983. This appeal arises from a decision of the
      appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") made on 20 October
      2015 to refuse the claimant leave to remain in the UK and the
      claimant's subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (heard by
      Judge Hembrough) where the appeal was allowed. The Secretary of State
      is now appealing against the decision of Judge Hembrough, which was
      promulgated on 4 January 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant entered the UK in September 2009 with leave as a Tier 4
    (General) Student, which was subsequently extended on several
    occasions.

 3. On 22 January 2014 he married a Chinese citizen with indefinite leave
    to remain in the UK and on 4 June 2014 he was granted leave to remain
    as a spouse until 4 December 2016.

 4. The claimant and his wife have a son, born on 24 September 2014, who is
    a British citizen.

 5. On 29 April 2015 the claimant was notified that his continuing leave
    was cancelled on the basis that he had made false representations in an
    application to extend his leave made on 4 May 2012 where it was alleged
    he had obtained an Educational Testing Service ("ETS") certificate
    fraudulently.

 6. On 1 June 2015 the claimant made an application for leave to remain as
    a partner under Appendix FM.

 7. On 20 October 2015 the application was refused. In the refusal letter,
    the Secretary of State stated that the claimant's application was
    unable to succeed under the Immigration Rules because the deception
    used in taking the ETS test rendered him unsuitable under the
    Suitability requirement in Section S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM. It was
    also considered that there were not exceptional circumstances that
    would warrant allowing the application under Article 8 ECHR outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge first considered whether the claimant had used deception to
    obtain an English language certificate. At paragraph [46] the judge
    concluded:

         "I have been satisfied to the required standard that the [claimant]
         submitted a fraudulent TOEIC test certificate in connection with
         his Tier 4 application resulting in the grant of leave of 4 May
         2012. This I find to be conduct such as to justify the refusal of
         his application for a visa on suitability grounds with reference to
         paragraph S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM."

10. The judge then turned to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules.

11. He found that as the claimant has a wife with settled status and a
    child with British citizenship in the UK, his removal would interfere
    with his family and private life and engage Article 8. The judge also
    found that removal of the claimant would be lawful under Article 8.

12. The judge then assessed the proportionality of removing the claimant.
    The judge directed himself to apply Section 117B of the Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and to have regard to
    the claimant's child's best interests.

13. At paragraphs [58] - [60] the judge stated:

         "The reality is that if the [claimant] is removed he will be
         separated from his British child at a crucial time when the child
         will be starting to look beyond his relationship with his
         mother.....


         It is clearly in the best interests of the child that the integrity
         of the family unit is maintained. The mother has settled status and
         is employed here. The child is a British citizen with an
         entitlement to all of the rights appurtenant to such
         citizenship.......


         Whilst it is often said that a British child is not a "trump card"
         I am aware of no reported case where it has been held reasonable
         for a British child to leave the UK and I do not consider it
         reasonable to expect this child to leave the UK."


14. At paragraph [62] the judge concluded:

         "The [claimant] is not subject to deportation. The requirements of
         Section 117B(6)(a) and (b) of the 2002 Act are met and the public
         interest does not require his removal."

Grounds of appeal and submissions

15. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge, in carrying out the
    proportionality assessment, has failed to give adequate weight to the
    claimant's deception or adequate reasons for finding that the child's
    best interest's outweigh the public interest. It is contended that the
    judge has treated the fact of there being a British child as a "trump
    card".

16. Mr Melvin made succinct submissions that reiterated the points made in
    the grounds of appeal, highlighting that, in his view, the judge had
    assessed proportionality without factoring in that the claimant had
    used deception.

17. Mr Jannangara argued that the judge had applied, and had had in mind,
    the relevant case law and statutory provisions. He also argued that the
    claimant had never been an overstayer and there was only one factor
    (the deception) weighing against him rather than multiple factors. Mr
    Jannangara maintained that looking at the overall proportionality
    assessment, it is clear the judge arrived at a proper conclusion.


Consideration

18. Section 117B of the 2002 Act sets out a number of considerations to
    which a judge carrying out a proportionality assessment must have
    regard. These include the consideration at Section 117B(6), which
    states that:
           In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.
19. The affect of Section 117B(6) on an Article 8 proportionality
    assessment was explained by Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
    705 as follows:


         17..[T]here can be no doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as a
         self-contained provision in the sense that Parliament has
         stipulated that where the conditions specified in the sub-section
         are satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal. It is
         not legitimate to have regard to public interest considerations
         unless that is permitted, either explicitly or implicitly, by the
         subsection itself.
         ...
         19 In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
         tribunals need to ask when applying section 117B(6) are the
         following:
         (1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section 117B is
         inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually be found in
         section 117C.
         (2) Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with the child?
         (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?
         (4) Is it unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United
         Kingdom?
         20.If the answer to the first question is no, and to the other
         three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article 8 is
         infringed.
20. In this appeal, it was common ground that the answer to the first
    question under Section 117B(6) was no and the answers to the second and
    third questions were yes. Accordingly, the only issue in contention in
    respect of Section 117B(6) was the reasonableness of expecting the
    claimant's son to leave the UK.


21. In MA(Pakistan) it was explained that the concept of reasonableness is
    not limited to a focus on the child and that it brings back into play
    all potentially relevant public interest considerations, including the
    conduct of a child's parents. See MA (Pakistan) at [88]: "the conduct
    of the parents is relevant to their own situation which bears upon the
    wider public interest and does not amount to blaming the children even
    if they may be prejudiced as a result".


22. Accordingly, the fact that the claimant used deception in a previous
    immigration application is relevant to the question of whether it would
    be unreasonable to expect the claimant's son to leave the UK.  I agree
    with Mr Melvin that the judge appears to have left out of his
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR (and his consideration
    of reasonableness under 117B(6)) that the claimant used deception in an
    earlier immigration application (the judge has only considered this
    point in assessing whether the claimant can prevail under the
    Immigration Rules). However, I do not agree with Mr Melvin on the
    materiality of failing to consider the deception.

23. Regardless of how egregious the conduct of the claimant was, the issue
    for the judge was whether it was unreasonable to expect his son, who is
    a British citizen, to leave the UK. The Secretary of State has Guidance
    on the reasonableness of removing British citizen children. See
    paragraph 11.2.3 Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family Migration
    - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and
    Private Life, 10 year Routes" dated August 2015 (which is referred to
    in the recent Upper Tribunal decision SF and others [2017] UKUT 120
    (IAC)). This guidance makes clear that it would ordinarily be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK.  It
    states that a decision to refuse to grant leave is only likely to be
    appropriate where the child would be able to remain in the UK and the
    conduct of the parent gives rise to consideration of such weight as to
    justify separation. The examples given are criminality and a very poor
    immigration history such as where there have been repeated and
    deliberate breaches of the Immigration Rules. Although an argument
    could be made that the deception of the claimant is sufficiently
    serious to justify separation under the terms of the Guidance, it is
    plain that the judge's conclusion on the reasonableness of the child
    being removed is not inconsistent with the principles set out in the
    Guidance about British children. I am satisfied, therefore, that
    although the judge erred by not taking into account the claimant's
    earlier deception when assessing reasonableness under Section 117B(6),
    given that the Secretary of State's own guidance is that it is rarely
    reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK, the error
    was not material.


24. Once the judge found that it was unreasonable for the claimant's son to
    be expected to leave the UK it inextricably followed that Article 8
    would be infringed by the claimant being removed as Section 117B(6)
    stipulates that where the elements therein are satisfied there is no
    public interest in a person's removal. Adopting the formulation of
    Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) at [20], because the answer to the first
    question under 117B(6) (is the claimant liable to deportation?)  is no,
    and the answers to the other three questions (is the relationship
    genuine? Is the child qualifying? Is it unreasonable to expect the
    child to leave the UK?) are yes, the conclusion must be that Article 8
    is infringed.


 Decision


25. The appeal is dismissed. The judge has not made a material error of law
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 9 May 2017                    |


