
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09885/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 1 March 2018                   |On 22 March 2018                         |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                Mr Frank [H]
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, counsel (instructed by Primar
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on [ ] 1993. He  appeals
      with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      V A Cox promulgated on 6 July 2017, dismissing his appeal against  the
      decision of the respondent to refuse his  application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK.


   2. The appellant applied on  13  August  2015  for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain. This was refused under paragraph 322(12)  of  the  Rules.  The
      respondent also considered his application on the basis of his claimed
      family and private life in the UK. The application was refused by  the
      respondent in a decision dated 25 March 2016.


   3. It was contended before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant's
      daughter was born in the UK on [ ] 2016.


   4. It was contended on his behalf  that  they  had  lived  together  from
      August 2015 and that they were a couple.  They  met  the  requirements
      under Appendix FM and EX.1. There were insurmountable obstacles to the
      proposed removal to Zimbabwe despite having resided  there  since  the
      age of 10 and on a full time university course.


   5. The Judge  found  that  there  were  various  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence before her. The respondent had not accepted that there was  a
      genuine relationship between the appellant and his  asserted  partner.
      He claimed to have resided with his partner since 30 August 2015.


   6. The birth certificate in  respect  of  the  child  did  not  show  the
      appellant's name  and  his  partner.  The  only  evidence  before  the
      Registrar would have been the presence of the couple,  who  must  have
      informed him of paternity  following  which  there  was  an  automatic
      registration. There was no evidence that the appellant played any part
      during the course of the pregnancy  or  attended  scans  or  was  even
      mentioned in the booking in interview records or by medical staff. The
      birth certificate stood alone as evidence of paternity.  She  did  not
      find '...in the comprehensive  picture  in  this  matter  that  it  is
      satisfactory to establish paternity' [46].


   7. She therefore found  that  the  couple  were  not  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting  relationship.  Furthermore,  there  was  not  satisfactory
      evidence before him that the child, a British citizen, is the child of
      the appellant [47].


   8. She stated that even if wrong in that respect, she had considered  the
      submissions made on his behalf. It was contended that the  appellant's
      partner is a full time student at the Wolverhampton University and was
      able to meet the necessary income requirements. A number of sources of
      income had been referred to. She indicated  to  counsel  that  student
      loan entitlements could not be included in such calculations.  A  loan
      is repayable and whilst the appellant's partner is also in receipt  of
      a grant, she agreed with the Judge that the loan must  be  repaid  and
      the grant would not be counted as income [48].


   9. She found that there was no evidence that his partner  has  an  income
      equivalent to the minimum financial threshold required  by  the  Rules
      [51]. Nor could the appellant succeed on the basis of his relationship
      with his daughter, a British citizen,  as  there  is  no  satisfactory
      evidence before him that she is his daughter [53].


  10. She  considered  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances.  The
      appellant has resided for the majority of his life  in  Zimbabwe,  has
      family there including another child. There was nothing to prevent him
      making an application outside the UK when his sponsor is able to  meet
      the income requirements under the rules [57].


  11. On 30 December 2017 Designated  Judge  Shaerf  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. It had been asserted in the  grounds  of  appeal
      that the Judge did not properly address the provisions of s.117B(6) of
      the 2002 Act, nor  the  best  interests  of  the  child.  The  grounds
      included documentary evidence which  was  not  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge in the form of a DNA test  confirming  the  appellant's
      paternity. The test report was subsequent to the promulgation  of  the
      decision.


  12. Judge Shaerf noted that a photocopy of the birth certificate in  which
      the appellant is stated to be the father was before  the  Tribunal  at
      the date of hearing. On that basis he considered the finding  at  [47]
      based on apparent discrepancies about  where  the  appellant  and  his
      partner were living at various times without addressing the claims  of
      affection and cohabitation and the statements made  by  the  appellant
      and his partner amounted to an arguable error of law.  That  may  have
      infected her finding regarding the lack of  relationship  between  the
      appellant and the child.


  13. Mr Hussain, who did not represent the appellant before the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge misconstrued the start  of  the  relationship  and
      failed to consider  that  it  was  not  formed  at  a  time  when  the
      appellant's immigration status was precarious. At  that  time  he  was
      looking forward to submitting an application for indefinite  leave  to
      remain  here.  The  Judge  allowed  herself  to  be  swayed   by   the
      respondent's refusal letter.


  14. It is also contended that it is "extraordinary" as to  how  the  Judge
      arrived at his decision despite the facts  and  overwhelming  evidence
      contrary to LD (Zimbabwe) [2010] UKUT 00278 and ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
      UKSC 4.


  15. It is contended that the Judge failed to  give  guidance  as  to  what
      should happen should the DNA prove that the appellant is  the  father.
      That is a critical question which the Judge ought to have contemplated
      and which "he (sic) did not." The Judge as well as  the  secretary  of
      state have "more (sic) motu powers to subpoena and or to order  a  DNA
      test which they could have done and they did not".


  16. At page 3 of the grounds it is noted that the appellant now wishes  to
      apply for a DNA test to prove paternity which has been made an issue.


  17. It is also contended that the Judge erred in failing to  consider  the
      "rule" in Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40.  The  principle  is  not
      confined to cases where children are involved or where the person with
      whom the appellant is seeking to remain has settled status in the  UK.
      The Judge failed to show how the decision was in the best interests of
      the child.


  18. Nor did the Judge consider the extreme hardship that would  be  caused
      to the appellant's family if he were forcefully removed from the UK or
      if his family were forced to relocate. The child is  British  and  the
      partner is gainfully employed here.


  19. Mr Hussain contended that the  Judge  did  not  properly  address  the
      provisions of s.117B (6) of the 2002  Act  and  did  not  undertake  a
      proper assessment with regard to the best interests of the child.


  20. Mr Bramble  submitted  that  it  is  not  a  failing  of  the  Judge's
      determination that she failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
      birth of the child to the appellant and his claimed partner.


  21. The Judge noted at [32] that the birth post-dated the decision and was
      a factor that she needed to consider. There was a clear explanation as
      to why, given the substantial credibility issues, she was not prepared
      to accept the birth certificate at face value.


  22. Mr Bramble referred to [39] of the decision, where she noted that  the
      appellant's sister wrote a letter that  her  brother,  the  appellant,
      lives with her and identified the close relationship he has  with  her
      family and the part he plays in the community, but does not  refer  to
      the appellant living with his partner  and  child  at  all.  They  are
      referred to as 'extended family'.


  23. Moreover the Judge  was  informed  that  the  appellant's  sister  was
      present but did not give evidence as to why she might have referred to
      the partner and child as extended family.


  24. At [44] the Judge referred to the fact that the appellant's partner is
      a full-time student. There was a complete absence of any evidence from
      third parties who might have come into contact  with  the  father  and
      daughter. That was also striking.


  25. At [45] the Judge also had regard to inconsistencies in the  evidence.
      The appellant did  not  mention  his  grandmother  being  in  Zimbabwe
      whereas his partner did. He told the Judge that his partner  had  been
      to Zimbabwe in the summer of  2015  which  should  have  been  shortly
      before or just after  the  time  they  began  to  live  together.  The
      appellant thought it was the year before and described this as  simply
      a visit. His partner  however  was  clear  that  it  was  because  her
      grandmother was ill and that she  had  stayed  in  Zimbabwe  for  five
      weeks. She did not find that this was information that  the  appellant
      would not have readily been able to provide, had he been in a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his father [45].


  26. The Judge noted at [46] that the birth certificate did  not  show  the
      appellant's name and his partner. Both of  them  gave  an  address  in
      Cheshire. The evidence was not satisfactory. The only evidence  before
      the registrar would have been the presence of the couple who must have
      given information to the  registrar  of  paternity  which  would  have
      resulted in an automatic registration. There was no evidence that  the
      appellant played any part during  the  pregnancy  or  attended  scans.
      There are no records kept by the medical staff. The birth  certificate
      stood alone as evidence of paternity. In the circumstances  the  Judge
      did not find this to be a comprehensive picture in the matter which is
      satisfactory to establish paternity.


  27. Mr Bramble thus submitted that that the Judge had not  made  an  error
      and properly considered the circumstances.


  28. In reply Mr Hussain maintained that there was a lack of evidence.  The
      appellant and his partner are still cohabiting. There  would  also  be
      insurmountable obstacles for his partner's return to Zimbabwe.


      Assessment


  29. The Judge noted that the respondent's decision pre-dated the birth  of
      the child,  (who  was  born  on  17  October  2016).  The  appellant's
      application for indefinite leave to remain  was  refused  on  16  July
      2015. Thereafter he applied on 13 August 2015 for indefinite leave  to
      remain pursuant to his family and private life in the UK.


  30. In the reasons for refusal dated 25 March 2016, It was stated that the
      parent route under Appendix FM did not apply in his case as he did not
      have  any  children  in  the  UK  and  therefore  there  would  be  no
      insurmountable obstacles to be overcome on his removal.


  31. The Judge properly directed herself at [32]  that  consideration  must
      now be given to the situation in respect of  the  child,  requiring  a
      s.55 assessment.


  32. She found that the appellant's explanations that he  returned  to  his
      sister when things were tight or when he could  not  work  was  wholly
      unsatisfactory. This was completely at odds with  his  claim  to  have
      lived with his partner in Wolverhampton. She had regard at [42] of the
      documentary evidence relating to the address at 37 Carter  Road  where
      his partner claimed to have moved on 15 December 2016. The  letter  in
      the bundle at page 16 was  given  little  weight  as  it  is  undated,
      unsigned and said to be from a  friend  of  the  appellant's  partner.
      There was no identity information that accompanied the  production  of
      that letter. Nor was the witness made available, nor did it  make  any
      mention of any address,  current  events  or  indeed  the  appellant's
      partner is a student [42].


  33. The Judge did not find it credible that the appellant continued to use
      an address in Cheshire  as  a  postal  address.  The  absence  of  any
      documentary evidence from him to discharge  the  burden  of  proof  in
      respect of that relationship was striking [43].


  34. The Judge found the  birth  certificate  relating  to  the  child  was
      insufficient as it did not show the name  of  the  appellant  and  his
      partner. Balanced against  the  remainder  of  the  evidence  and  the
      inconsistencies before  her,  this  was  not  satisfactory.  The  only
      evidence before the registrar would have  been  the  presence  of  the
      couple who provided information following which there would have  been
      an automatic registration. Further, there was  no  evidence  that  the
      appellant played any part during the pregnancy. She  thus  found  that
      the birth certificate stood alone as evidence of paternity and was not
      in the circumstances satisfactory to establish paternity.


  35. The Judge has given a detailed and careful decision  setting  out  the
      significant inconsistencies with regard to the asserted  relationship.
      In the result she found that the appellant was unable to succeed under
      the partner route as he was not in a  genuine  relationship  with  his
      claimed partner. Nor could he succeed on the basis of  a  relationship
      with the child as there was no satisfactory evidence that she  is  his
      daughter [52-53].


  36. The Judge has given sustainable reasons for her findings. At the  date
      of hearing there was no DNA evidence produced. The DNA test report was
      subsequent to the promulgation of the decision.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 20 March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









