
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09890/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 November 2018                     |On 08 January 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                              Mr Jahangir Alam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  who  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Respondent refusing him leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom. The  principle  issue  in  the  appeal  was  the  Respondent's
    conclusion that the Appellant  participated  in  a  fraudulent  English
    language test in 2012.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Goodman,  who,
    in a decision promulgated on 9 July 2018, dismissed it.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. This was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Birrell on 1 October 2018. Her reasons  for  so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, (in time), against a
         Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Goodman)  who,  in  a
         Decision and Reasons promulgated on 4 September 2018  dismissed  an
         appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
         human rights claim.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in that she  erred  in
         her assessment of the evidence by  reference  to  SM  and  Qadir  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167  in
         that there was a three-stage test; failed to give adequate  reasons
         for rejecting the Appellant's explanation and failed to  take  into
         account all matters relevant to that  decision;  failed  to  engage
         with the significance of the  test  scores  being  inconclusive  as
         opposed to invalid.

         3.   In what is otherwise a detailed decision the  Judge  makes  no
         reference to the three stages of  the  decision-making  process  in
         respect of the allegation of dishonesty or the significance of  the
         test results being  inconclusive.  The  grounds  disclose  arguable
         error of law."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Karim submitted that the Judge materially erred in failing to  apply
    the 3-stage test as outlined in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS -  Evidence  -
    Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC). He argued that  the  Judge  had
    failed to have regard to the fact that the evidential threshold on  the
    Appellant was a low one and not the  usual  balance  of  probabilities.
    Albeit the Judge has set out  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  at
    paragraph 27 of her decision she had  not  set  out  the  correct  one.
    Further the Judge had failed to give properly  reasoned  findings  with
    regards to the Appellant's evidence in relation to  the  test  and  his
    innocent explanation which  can  be  gleaned  from  his  first  witness
    statement. The fact that the Appellant has not displaced the allegation
    "on balance" demonstrates that the Judge  has  erred  in  applying  the
    correct standard. Thirdly the  Judge's  decision  refers  to  test  and
    scores from both  test  centres  being  "inconclusive"  as  opposed  to
    clearly "invalid" accordingly the Judge has failed to  have  regard  to
    the fact that in those circumstances the Respondent could not discharge
    the  evidential  burden  and  would  in  any  event  have   significant
    difficulties in discharging the legal burden. Beyond that the Judge has
    failed to make findings as to the factors identified in  SM  and  Qadir
    and having adopted an erroneous approach to the ETS issue  has  allowed
    it to infect the article 8 assessment which is in adequate.

 6. Mr Lindsay contended that the Judge had not erred as asserted.  The  3-
    stage test is not always applicable where dishonesty prevails  and  the
    Judge has rejected the innocent explanation, as here,  put  forward  by
    the Appellant. At paragraph 27 of  the  decision  the  Judge  correctly
    reminds herself of the burden and standard of  proof  and  goes  on  at
    paragraph 28 to set out the guidance provided by SM and Qadir. None  of
    the grounds disclose an error of law. Finally, he relied upon the  rule
    24 response dated 6 November 2018.

 7. The nub of Mr Karim's submissions is the suggestion that the Judge  has
    failed to apply the 3-stage test drawn from  SM  and  Qadir.  What  the
    Upper Tribunal said was that the correct approach was to consider first
    whether the Secretary of State's evidence - at  that  stage  consisting
    essentially of the evidence of Ms Collings and Mr  Millington  together
    with the  look-up  tool,  established  a  prima  facie  case  that  the
    Appellant had cheated; and then, if it did, to decide whether that case
    was sufficiently answered by his or her evidence. Albeit criticised the
    evidence of Ms Collings and Mr Millington was found to be sufficient to
    transfer the evidential burden to the Appellants to show that they  had
    not cheated. It goes without saying that  every  TOEIC  case  is  fact-
    sensitive and that each case turns on its own facts and that success or
    failure depends on what evidence the Respondent produces.

 8. At paragraph 4 of her decision the  Judge  sets  out  the  Respondent's
    evidence which was contained within her supplementary bundle  including
    witness statements from his officials including  Reema  Bassi,  Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington and an expert report of April  2016  from
    Professor French together with two statements of facts  about  criminal
    investigations of Elizabeth College and Colwell College. The Judge  has
    then gone on from paragraph 6 onward in her decision to  make  findings
    of fact before setting out relevant law at paragraph 22 onward  of  her
    decision. There she sets out the burden of proof, the standard of proof
    and the relevant guidance from SM and Qadir. It is plain that  she  had
    this in mind when dealing  with  this  appeal.  The  Judge  finds  that
    dishonesty has been practiced by the Appellant  and,  contrary  to  the
    grounds, has not failed to have regard to the fact that the  evidential
    threshold on the Appellant was  a  low  one.  She  has  recognised  the
    relevant shifting burden and standard of proof. She has done so  taking
    into account the totality of the evidence including the Appellant's own
    witness statement. She was entitled, knowing that the Appellant's  test
    result was deemed "questionable" as opposed to "invalid"  to  set  this
    into the context of the totality of the evidence that was  before  her.
    The evidential burden having then  shifted,  the  Appellant  failed  to
    provide an "innocent explanation". It was open to  the  Judge  to  make
    that finding. She was  entitled  on  the  evidence  to  find  that  the
    Respondent had then established on the balance  of  probabilities  that
    the Appellant's prima facie innocent explanation should be rejected.

 9. Contrary to the grounds there is no erroneous approach by the Judge  to
    the ETS issue and this has not 'infected'  her  article  8  assessment.
    Whilst that assessment at paragraphs 37- 39 of the Judge's decision may
    be brief it is none the less a sufficient balancing  exercise  and  any
    complaint made by the Appellant in relation to it is  no  more  than  a
    disagreement.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                Date 17 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
