
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09201/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2021                      |On 19 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     NZN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male  citizen  of  Jamaica.  He  appeals  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  1  May  2020.  The
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 7  February  2017  refusing  his  human
    rights claim following the making of a deportation order. The appellant
    had been convicted in May 2016 of supplying Class A drugs and sentenced
    to 12 months' imprisonment.

 2. At the initial hearing on 7 April 2021, Mr Diwnycz,  who  appeared  for
    the respondent, acknowledged that the judge had erred in law.  I  shall
    therefore be brief.

 3. The appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  determined  before  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  The
    parties agree that the judge was wrong to find at [61] that 'the effect
    [of deportation] on his children will be no different to  that  of  any
    other child separated from a parent as a consequence  of  deportation'.
    That finding was not consistent with the Court of Appeal in HA at [35].
    The finding made by the judge at [61] in determining 'undue  harshness'
    under Exception 2 as opposed to 'very compelling  circumstances'  under
    section 177C(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended) should not have  attracted
    the weight attributed to it by the judge in her  assessment.  Following
    HA, we now know that comparing the circumstances of a particular  child
    in a deportation appeal with the  generality  of  children  in  similar
    circumstances leads the decision  maker  away  from  the  child-focused
    assessment required. Given that Tribunals at both  levels  have  fallen
    into similar error until corrected by the Court of  Appeal,  it  is  no
    criticism of the judge in this case that she  did  not  anticipate  the
    clarification of the law set out in HA. However, the  judge's  analysis
    is vitiated by her error and her decision cannot stand. The  appeal  is
    allowed on Ground 1. I make no finding on Ground 2 although I note that
    that ground also arises out of the judgment in HA. The argument may  be
    advanced as one element of the total circumstances which  the  Tribunal
    will need to consider when it remakes the decision.

 4. The circumstances of the appellant have moved on since the  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. I understand that he is now the father of  ten
    rather than nine children. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-finding
    exercise which is better conducted by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. Both parties may rely on new evidence provided copies  of  any
    documentary evidence (including witness statements)  are  sent  to  the
    other party and the Tribunal no less  than  10  days  before  the  next
    hearing

     Listing Directions: Taylor House; First-tier Tribunal to  determine  if
    remote or face to face; Not Judge Welsh; first available date; 2 hours;
    No interpreter.



Signed                              Date 7 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






































