
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09301/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 9 April 2018                           |On: 12th April 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, International Immigration Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because the appellant has a child ('S'),
    in relation to whom extensive references are made in this decision.   S
    was born in 2006 and shall be 12 in a few days' time.

Background facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He  came  to  the  UK  in
    February 2010 as a student.  His wife and S, who are also  citizens  of
    Bangladesh, joined him as his dependents on 5 August 2010 (when  S  was
    4). On 27 April 2011, shortly before the expiry of  his  student  visa,
    the appellant applied to remain in the UK on the basis of Article 8  of
    the  ECHR.   This   application   was   refused   and   the   appellant
    unsuccessfully  appealed.   He  became  appeals  rights  exhausted   in
    November  2012,  when  he  was  served  with  notice  that  he  was  an
    overstayer.  That same day he made an  asylum  application.   This  was
    unsuccessful, as were numerous further attempts to  remain  in  the  UK
    between 2014 and 2016.

Appeal proceedings

 3. The appellant appealed a decision dated 15 August 2017 refusing a human
    rights claim, to the First-tier Tribunal.  At the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, S had been resident in the  UK  for  seven  years.
    The First-tier Tribunal made adverse credibility findings  against  the
    appellant and found that it would be reasonable to expect S  to  return
    to Bangladesh with his parents.  The appeal was therefore dismissed  on
    human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision, arguing inter alia,  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  S's  lengthy
    residence during formative years of his life (3 to 13) when  addressing
    the reasonableness test.

 5. In a decision dated 28 December 2017, the First-tier  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal but on the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    arguably  failed  to  conduct  a  proportionality  assessment  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  The First-tier Tribunal did not consider  there
    to be an arguable error of law in the approach  to  the  reasonableness
    test.

 6. In a rule 24 notice the respondent submitted  that  the  reasonableness
    test should be treated as the same test to be applied  when  addressing
    proportionality, i.e. the fifth stage as set out in Razgar, and as such
    there was no material error of law in failing to conduct a Razgar-based
    assessment.  The respondent also submitted that the reasonableness test
    included a consideration of the best interests  of  the  child  and  as
    such, the best interests of S must have been considered.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Bates accepted that the First-tier Tribunal
    failed to attach significant weight to S's seven  years  residence  and
    failed to properly determine whether his best interests lay in going to
    Bangladesh  with  his  parents  or   remaining   in   the   UK.    Both
    representatives agreed that the decision contains an error of  law  and
    must be set aside but that the decision can be remade  by  me.   Having
    had regard to para 7.2 of  the  relevant  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement and the nature and extent of the factual  agreement  in  this
    case, I decided that it was appropriate to remake the decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 8. Both representatives also  agreed  it  was  unnecessary  to  hear  oral
    evidence.  Mr Moksud submitted S's school reports,  which  demonstrated
    he continues to do very well in school and is in year 7.  After hearing
    brief submissions from both representatives, I reserved my decision.

Error of law discussion

 9. As Mr Bates accepted, and contrary to the observations  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal when granting permission to appeal on another point,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's approach to  S's  length  of  residence  and  the
    applicable reasonableness test contains an error of law.

10. I acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal was well-aware of S's length
    of residence and  links  to  the  UK.   However,  as  explained  in  MA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49] and  MT  and  ET  v  SSHD
    (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT  88  at
    [28] to [34], the  decision-maker  is  obliged  to  attach  significant
    weight to residence of at least  seven  years  explain  what  "powerful
    reasons" support removal of such a child.

Remaking the decision

Best interests

11. I turn firstly to S's  best  interests,  viewed  through  the  lens  of
    Article 8 private life.

12. I have applied the general principles when considering the interests of
    a child in the context of an Article 8 evaluation.  These have recently
    been summarised by Kitchin LJ in TA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ
    260 at [22] as follows:

         "In particular, the respondent has an overriding obligation to have
         regard to the welfare of a child in the  exercise  of  her  various
         statutory functions. The best interests of a child are therefore an
         integral part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8. In
         carrying out that assessment it is important to have a  clear  idea
         of a child's circumstances  and  of  what  is  in  a  child's  best
         interests before determining whether those interests are outweighed
         by  the  force  of  other  considerations.  In  carrying  out  that
         evaluation, the best interests of  the  child  must  be  a  primary
         consideration   although   not   necessarily   the   only   primary
         consideration. It necessarily follows that the best interests of  a
         child  can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of   other
         considerations; but no consideration can be treated  as  inherently
         more significant than the child's best  interests.  Ultimately  the
         decision maker must carry out a careful examination and  evaluation
         of all relevant factors with these principles in mind. The question
         is whether, having regard to the foregoing,  there  are  compelling
         circumstances which justify the grant of leave  to  remain  outside
         the immigration rules."


13. Having considered all the relevant circumstances, I find that R's  best
    interests are served by remaining in the UK, by a narrow margin.  There
    are five factors:

          i) He has spent over seven years in the UK.


         ii) He came to the UK as a young child aged 4 and has  spent  some
             of his most formative years (4 to 11) and most of his life  in
             the UK.  He is a few days away from his 12th birthday.


        iii) He has had a very short experience of education in  Bangladesh
             a long time ago and has been involved in education in  the  UK
             over a lengthy period.  He has transitioned  from  primary  to
             secondary education in the UK.


         iv) S has an identity based  on  British  multi-cultural  society,
             albeit he clearly has a mixed Bangladeshi and British cultural
             identity.


          v) S will find it challenging to return  to  Bangladesh  at  this
             particular stage of his education and childhood, but will have
             the assistance of two loving parents if required to do so.


14. I am mindful that the best interests assessment is  not  determinative.
    As Elias LJ noted in MA (Pakistan) at [47] even where the child's  best
    interests are to stay, for the  purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'),  it  may
    still be not unreasonable to require the child  to  leave.   That  will
    depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in
    the  UK  and  Bangladesh,  as  well  as  any   other   relevant   wider
    considerations - see [45] of MA (Pakistan) and EV (Philippines) v  SSHD
    at [34-37].

Section 117B considerations

15. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act apply the  public  interest  considerations  at
    section 117B of the.  These are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.


         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)      Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.


         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."


16. By section 117A(2) I am obliged to have regard  to  the  considerations
    listed in section 117B, and do so below.

17. The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is engaged. The appellant and his dependents are long standing
    unlawful overstayers.  All their applications to remain in the UK after
    the expiry of the appellant's student visa  in  April  2011  have  been
    unsuccessful.  I also bear in mind that as at the date  of  application
    on 18 August 2016, S did not have seven-year  residence,  and  as  such
    276ADE cannot be met.

18. There is an infringement of the "English speaking" public  interest  as
    the  appellant  and  his  wife  required  an  interpreter  in  previous
    proceedings.  S speaks fluent English.

19. The economic interest must be engaged because  S  has  been,  and  will
    continue to be, educated at public expense and will have  the  capacity
    to access other publicly funded services and benefits.  However, he  is
    doing well at school and is ambitious.  He has already integrated fully
    into UK society and there is every reason to believe that in the medium
    to long term he will not be a burden on taxpayers.

20. I have also had regard to the considerations at  sections  117B(4)  and
    (5) that little weight should be given to the appellant's private  life
    at a time when his immigration status and those of his  dependents  was
    either precarious or unlawful.

Proportionality / balancing exercise

21. In my  consideration  of  S's  best  interests  above  I  have  already
    highlighted the salient facts and factors.  On the one hand, removal to
    Bangladesh would  be  distressing  and  disruptive  for  S,  and  would
    decimate the friendships, relationships and activities  that  form  the
    core of his  private  life.  It  would  also  obstruct  his  education.
    Emotionally, it would undoubtedly be stressful and damaging.

22. In addition, significant weight must be given to R's residence of  over
    seven years.  In MA (Pakistan) Elias LJ said this:

         "46.     Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
         that  a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
         significant weight when carrying out the proportionality  exercise.
         Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in
         the form of Immigration Directorate Instructions  entitled  "Family
         Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes"  in
         which it is expressly stated that once the seven  years'  residence
         requirement is satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for
         refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force
         when the cases now subject to appeal were  determined,  but  in  my
         view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a  policy  of
         this nature. After such a period of time the child  will  have  put
         down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in
         the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child
         is required to leave the UK. That may be less so when the  children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will  be  on  their
         families, but the disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get
         older. Moreover, in  these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         ...


         49.      ... However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."


23. This policy guidance was updated on 22 February  2018,  but  the  terms
    remain similar for children who have resided in the UK for seven  years
    (pg 75):

         "Significant weight must be given to such a  period  of  continuous
         residence. The longer the child has resided  in  the  UK,  and  the
         older the age at which they have done so, the more the balance will
         begin to shift towards it being unreasonable to expect the child to
         leave the UK, and strong reasons  will  be  required  in  order  to
         refuse a case where the outcome will be removal  of  a  child  with
         continuous UK residence of seven years or more."


24. On the other hand, the observations of the First-tier Tribunal Judge at
    [30] and [31] remain pertinent.  In particular, taking into account S's
    age and the support of a stable family unit in  Bangladesh,  he  would,
    foreseeably, adapt over time.   In addition,  there  is  no  suggestion
    that his health would be  detrimentally  affected  and  he  can  attend
    school in  Bangladesh.      The  requirements  of  immigration  control
    support his removal.  The main  countervailing  factors  are  therefore
    that S and his family members have no legal right to remain in  the  UK
    and S has a stable family unit he can return with to Bangladesh.

25. I do not consider  that  there  are  any  strong  or  powerful  factors
    supporting the conclusion that it would be reasonable to  expect  S  to
    leave the UK.  It is undeniable that S would  have  the  benefit  of  a
    loving and stable family unit in Bangladesh and that his  parents  have
    sought to flout immigration control.  However, these parents  might  be
    described as more "run of the mill" immigration offenders (see [34]  of
    MT and ET), and there are no  strong  reasons  that  would  render  his
    removal to Bangladesh reasonable, given the significant  weight  to  be
    attached to his nearly eight years residence in the UK at  a  formative
    stage of his life.

26. Having considered all the relevant matters in the round, including  the
    public interest considerations set out above, I am satisfied  that  the
    preponderance of factors in support of S remaining in the  UK  are  not
    outweighed by the countervailing considerations, as outlined above.

27. I conclude that S's removal would be unreasonable for the  purposes  of
    section 117B(6) and also a disproportionate breach  of  Article  8.   S
    cannot be expected to remain without his parents and similar Article  8
    considerations  therefore  support  them  not  being  removed   either.
    Accordingly, the appeal of the appellant and  his  dependents,  succeed
    under Article 8.

Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

29. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    grounds.

Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 9 April 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
