
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09233/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2019                       |On 07 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURRAY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Orhan [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Amy Childs of counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    ("the Secretary of State") against the decision of First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Onoufriou promulgated on 22 February 2019 allowing the appeal of
    Mr Orhan [D] against the Secretary of State's  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order made  against  Mr  [D]  on  18 November  2016  ("the
    Deportation Order") and his refusal on the same date of Mr [D]'s human
    rights claim.

 2. Mr [D] is a citizen of Turkey, born on 30 March 1974. He has been in a
    relationship with his now wife, who is a British citizen, since October
    2013, and they have been married since 3 February 2016.

 3. Mr [D] entered the United Kingdom on 12 May 2016 with a  valid  spouse
    visa with permission to enter from 9 May 2016 to 9 February 2019. Upon
    entry his passport was endorsed with a valid visa for 30 days only, and
    he was recommended to collect his Biometric Residence Permit within  10
    days of arriving in the United Kingdom.

 4. Shortly after his arrival in the United Kingdom, on 9 July 2016 Mr [D]
    assaulted Mrs [D] causing her actual bodily harm. He pleaded Guilty  to
    Assault Occasioning Actual Bodily Harm and was sentenced at Blackfriars
    Crown Court on 8 August 2016 to 8 months' immediate custody  and  made
    subject to a statutory surcharge of �140.

 5. On 6 October 2016 the Secretary of State served Mr [D] with  a  letter
    dated 24 August 2016 notifying him of the Secretary of State's decision
    to deport him. He did not respond to that letter, but Mrs [D]  sent  an
    undated letter to HMP Thameside where  Mr  [D]  was  then  serving  his
    sentence, asking that Mr [D]'s immigration status  be  reassessed.  The
    Secretary of State decided to treat this as a claim by Mr [D]  that  to
    remove him from the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the Council of Europe Convention for  the  Protection  of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950 ("the ECHR").
    He made further representations on 2 November 2016 in support of  that
    claim, which were received by the Secretary  of  State  on  7 November
    2016.

 6. On 21 November 2016 Mr [D]  was  served  with  the  Deportation  Order
    together with a letter of the same date setting out  the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for refusing Mr [D]'s human rights claim and certifying
    that claim under section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), with the effect that Mr [D]  would  only  be
    permitted to appeal against the decision after he had left  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. Upon Mr [D]'s release from custody, he was detained pending the  making
    of a  deportation  order  under  paragraph  2  of  schedule  3  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971. After some months in  immigration  detention,  he
    was released on immigration bail on 20 March 2017.

 8. On 3 June 2017 Mr [D] voluntarily left the United Kingdom for  Turkey.
    His stated motivation for doing so was to help his son in  Turkey  with
    certain difficulties his son was then experiencing.  The  Secretary  of
    State  considered  this  to  be  his  voluntary  compliance  with   the
    Deportation Order.

 9. On 21 January 2017 Mr  [D]  had  issued  a  judicial  review  claim  to
    challenge the decision of the Secretary of State to certify  his  human
    rights claim under  section 94B  of  the  2002  Act.  He  was  refused
    permission to proceed with the judicial review claim on 15 May 2017. He
    successfully appealed this refusal, and he was  granted  permission  to
    proceed with the judicial review on 18 August 2017.

10. On 10 November 2017 Mr [D] filed an out-of-country appeal against  the
    Deportation Order, but this was struck out  on  17 November  2017.  Mr
    [D]'s challenge to the striking out was rejected on 18 December  2017.
    On 3 January 2018 a consent order was agreed withdrawing his  judicial
    review claim against the section 94B certification if  he  was  granted
    permission to appeal against the Deportation Order. The judicial review
    claim was treated as withdrawn.

11. On 3 March 2018  Mr  [D]  submitted  a  second  judicial  review  claim
    challenging the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal that his appeal was
    invalid.

12. On 18 April 2018 Mr [D] filed a further appeal against the  Deportation
    Order and the refusal of his  human  rights  claim,  together  with  an
    application to extend time  to  file  his  out-of-country  appeal.  His
    application to extend time was  granted.  The  second  judicial  review
    claim was withdrawn pursuant to a consent  order  concluded  on  3 May
    2018. On 8 May 2018 the Secretary of  State  received  notice  of  his
    appeal.

13. The appeal was heard by Judge Onoufriou on 14 February 2019, on  which
    occasion he was represented by Ms Childs, who also represented  him  at
    the hearing of this appeal. Before the judge Ms N Bell represented  the
    Secretary of State.

14. The judge allowed the appeal as he was satisfied, after considering the
    evidence presented at the hearing, that:

        a. Mr [D]'s offence had not caused "serious harm". The Secretary of
           State provided inadequate reasons  for  his  conclusion  to  the
           contrary. The judge also found that  the  Secretary  of  State's
           conclusion was inaccurate based on the judge's own review of the
           evidence. In the absence of serious  harm,  Mr  [D]  was  not  a
           "foreign  criminal"  within  the  meaning  given  that  term  in
           section 117D(2) of the  2002  Act.  The  Secretary  of  State's
           reasons for concluding under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration
           Act 1971 that Mr [D]'s deportation was conducive to  the  common
           good being inadequate, the  appeal  "succeed[ed]  at  the  first
           hurdle".

        b. Even if Mr [D]'s offence had caused serious harm, the  exception
           to deportation under paragraph 399(b) and section 117C(5) of the
           2002 Act applies, for the following reasons:

              i. Mr [D] has "a genuine and subsisting relationship" with Mrs
                 [D], who is a British citizen;

             ii. their relationship was formed at a time when Mr [D] was  in
                 the  UK  lawfully  and  his  immigration  status  was   not
                 precarious;

            iii. it would "unduly harsh" for  Mrs  [D]  to  live  in  Turkey
                 because of compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
                 described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

             iv. it would be unduly harsh for  Mrs  [D]  to  remain  in  the
                 United Kingdom without Mr [D].

15. The judge noted that the Secretary of State had taken into account that
    Mrs [D] was a fluent speaker of Turkish who had  travelled  extensively
    in Turkey and was familiar with its customs and culture in reaching his
    conclusion that it would not be unduly harsh for Mrs  [D]  to  live  in
    Turkey. However, in reaching his conclusion to the contrary, the  judge
    relied on evidence relating to Mrs [D]'s various  mental  and  physical
    health problems, set out in two  reports  dated  22 May  2017  and  20
    September  2018  prepared   by   Ms Gail   Lewis,   a   psychodynamic
    psychotherapist with the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation, and in a
    letter from Dr Alexander Todd dated 7 December 2016.

16. The judge considered section 117C of the  2002  Act  in  light  of  the
    Article 8 claim raised by Mr [D], deciding that section 117C(5) applied
    as an exception to Section 117C(3), so that the latter  provision  did
    not apply. It was therefore not necessary for the judge  to  go  on  to
    consider whether there were "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and
    above those in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  that
    would outweigh the public interest in Mr [D]'s  deportation  to  Turkey
    under paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.

17. Mr [D]'s appeal therefore succeeded.

18. The Secretary of State was  given  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    judge's decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 25 March 2019 on the
    basis that there were arguable errors of law in the judge's approach to
    the gravity of the offending, the time  Mr  [D]  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom and whether it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  Mrs  [D]  to  be
    required to live in Turkey with Mr [D] or for Mrs [D] to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom without Mr [D].

19. The Secretary of State appealed  on  1 March  2019  on  the  following
    grounds:

        a. The judge's approach to whether  Mr  [D]'s  offence  represented
           serious harm was irrational.

        b. The judge failed to making  findings  on  whether  it  would  be
           unduly harsh for Mrs [D] to remain in the United Kingdom without
           Mr [D], which is a material error of law.

        c. The judge's conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for Mrs [D]
           to accompany Mr [D] to Turkey is based on his determination that
           she would not be able to access the medical treatment she  needs
           in Turkey. That  determination  is  not  supported  by  adequate
           reasons and is therefore irrational.

20. Before making his principal submissions, Secretary  of  State  made  an
    application for permission to amend his Grounds of Appeal to include  a
    point raised at paragraph 5 of his skeleton, namely, that the judge had
    failed to take into account that paragraph 399(b)(i) of the Immigration
    Rules requires that the relationship  between  the  person  seeking  to
    resist deportation must  have  formed  their  relationship  with  their
    partner who is a British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom "at a
    time when the person (deportee)  was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
    immigration status was not precarious". Mr Kotas  frankly  acknowledged
    that the Secretary of State had not raised  this  in  his  reasons  for
    making the Deportation Order, nor had he raised it in  his  Grounds  of
    Appeal. The point  was  not  canvassed  at  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Onoufriou. He urged that we nonetheless allow it as it was a  point  of
    law, was "almost a jurisdiction point" and was pleaded in the Secretary
    of State's skeleton, so Mr [D] was not prejudiced and  had  forewarning
    so that his counsel could deal with it.

21. In relation to this, Ms Childs for Mr [D] said that it was  raised  too
    late and did cause prejudice, although in response to a  question  from
    the Panel as to why she would not be in a position to deal with it, she
    then proceeded to do so. She noted that the "settled status" point does
    not arise in relation to section 117C of the 2002 Act, so that even  if
    we find that Mr [D]  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399(b)(i), he could meet the requirements of  section  117C(5)  of  the
    2002 Act. The judge clearly had both provisions  in  mind,  having  set
    them out at paragraphs 29 and 30 of his judgment.

22. We reserved our position on the application to amend  and  proposed  to
    proceed de bene esse.

23. Mr Kotas then made the following submissions for the Secretary of State
    on the question of whether Mr [D]'s offence had caused serious harm:

        a. First, he reminded us of the Secretary of  State's  guidance  on
           this point (extracted from Home Office  Guidance,  "Criminality:
           Article 8 ECHR Cases" (version 7.0)):

                  "It is at the discretion of the Secretary of State whether
                  he considers an offence to have caused serious harm.

                  An offence that has caused 'serious harm' means an offence
                  that has caused serious physical or psychological harm  to
                  a  victim  or  victims,  or  that  has  contributed  to  a
                  widespread problem that causes serious harm to a community
                  or to society in general.

                  The foreign criminal does not have to have been  convicted
                  in relation to any serious harm which followed from  their
                  offence. For example, they may fit within  this  provision
                  if they are convicted  of  a  lesser  offence  because  it
                  cannot be proved beyond reasonable doubt  that  they  were
                  guilty of a separate offence in relation  to  the  serious
                  harm which resulted from their actions.

                  Where a person has been convicted of one or more  violent,
                  drugs or sex offences, they will usually be considered  to
                  have been convicted of an offence that has caused  serious
                  harm."

        b. Mr Kotas acknowledged that the  Secretary  of  State's  view  on
           serious harm did not, however, bind the tribunal below  or  this
           Tribunal, which was required to form its own view.

        c. In the Decision the Secretary of State had quoted a  substantial
           portion of  the  sentencing  judge's  remarks  and  was  clearly
           relying on them for  the  conclusion  that  the  offence  caused
           serious harm  to  the  victim,  Mrs  [D].  Judge  Onoufriou  was
           therefore wrong in paragraph 35 of his judgment to  characterise
           the  Secretary  of  State's  position  as  he  did,  as   simply
           concluding that serious harm was made out by virtue of the  fact
           that there was a conviction "of a  very  serious  crime"  and  a
           custodial sentence, "but  no  other  reason  for  reaching  this
           conclusion".

        d. There was no recognition in  the  judgment  below  of  the  more
           salient aspects of the judge's sentencing remarks, and the judge
           was quite selective in what he took from them.

        e. The sentencing judge noted in her sentencing remarks that Mr [D]
           had no prior convictions in the United Kingdom or in Turkey  and
           took that into  account.  The  sentencing  judge  described  the
           circumstances of Mr [D]'s assault on his  wife,  which  included
           threatening her with a knife and putting his  hands  around  her
           neck, trying to choke her and  pushing  his  knuckles  into  her
           throat, leaving her very distressed, having difficulty breathing
           and, later at hospital, complaining of difficulty swallowing and
           pain in the neck and jaw. The medical evidence showed  that  Mrs
           [D] had generalised swelling of the  upper  neck,  some  redness
           around the throat and  a  faint  bruise  by  the  chin.  In  her
           sentencing remarks, the sentencing judge said:

                  "I have been told of the impact on [the  victim]  of  your
                  behaviour that day. It has been described as profound. She
                  has difficulty sleeping, needs extra bolts on the door and
                  her confidence is affected, making  her  scared  of  going
                  out."

        f. These aspects of the sentencing remarks  were  not  given  their
           proper weight by  the  judge.  The  distinct  "flavour"  of  the
           judge's analysis is that he was seeking  to  mitigate  Mr  [D]'s
           offending and doing so selectively in relation to the effect  on
           Mrs [D] as the victim of the offence. In this case there was  an
           immediate  custodial  sentence  for  someone  with  no  previous
           convictions, which underlines the seriousness  of  the  original
           offence. It was committed  shortly  after  his  arrival  in  the
           United Kingdom. Having proper regard to the  sentencing  judge's
           sentencing remarks as well as  the  sentence  imposed,  we  were
           invited to conclude that the judge's  approach  was  flawed  and
           therefore irrational.

24. In submissions on the question of the "unduly harsh" criteria, Mr Kotas
    noted that the judge had only performed half of the necessary exercise,
    failing to consider or give reasons why it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    Mrs [D] to remain in the United Kingdom without her  husband.  Had  the
    judge done so he would have needed to take into account that Mr [D] had
    spent less than three months at liberty in the United Kingdom from  his
    initial entry on 12 May 2016 to his departure  for  Turkey  on  3  June
    2017, after deducting the periods of time he spent in  custody  and  in
    immigration detention before being  released  on  immigration  bail  on
    20 March 2017. The judge had failed, therefore, properly  to  consider
    the question of whether Mrs [D] was able to cope without Mr  [D]  while
    he was detained or abroad. That was a material error of law.

25. Mr Kotas also submitted that the judge's conclusion that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for Mrs [D] to live with her husband in Turkey in light of
    her health problems was irrational, given that she  had  been  able  to
    access medical treatment in  the  United  Kingdom  without  significant
    assistance from her husband. Her fluency in the  Turkish  language  and
    familiarity with Turkish culture and customs  show  that  there  is  no
    reason why she could not access the necessary treatment in Turkey.  The
    judge's reasons were  inadequate,  and  therefore  his  conclusion  was
    irrational.

26. Ms Childs made the following submissions on behalf of  Mr  [D]  on  the
    question of serious harm:

        a. She noted, first of all, that if we  found  that  there  was  no
           "serious harm", then the Secretary of State could not  establish
           that it was conducive to the public good that Mr [D]  should  be
           deported, and therefore  we  would  not  need  to  consider  the
           "unduly harsh" criteria.

        b. As to the judge's treatment of the sentencing remarks, he  would
           have read them in their entirety and borne them in mind. He  was
           not required, however, to quote them in full. He was entitled to
           select what he considered relevant. As  the  sentencing  remarks
           referred to the psychological impact of the offence on Mrs  [D],
           it was appropriate for the judge  to  have  regard  to  the  two
           reports prepared by Ms Lewis.  It  was  clear  from  Ms  Lewis's
           report dated 20 September  2018  that  she  was  aware  of  the
           incident and that, in her view,  the  incident  had  not  had  a
           lasting psychological impact on Mrs  [D],  as  submitted  by  Mr
           [D]'s  counsel  at  the  hearing  below  (paragraph  20  of  the
           judgment).

        c. It is clear from all  the  evidence,  including  Mrs  [D]'s  own
           evidence, that the offence did not  cause  serious  physical  or
           psychological harm to Mrs [D]. Therefore, in accordance with the
           Secretary of State's own guidance on criminality in the  context
           of deportation and Article  8  claims,  Mr  [D]  did  not  cause
           "serious harm".

        d. The judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  sentencing  judge's
           assessment that the offence did not  constitute  "greater  harm"
           under the relevant Sentencing Council Definitive  Guideline  for
           Assault. The emphasis in the sentencing judge's remarks  was  on
           his comparative greater culpability, but that does not mean that
           "serious harm" was inflicted. Culpability is a different issue.

        e. The judge was entitled also to have regard to  the  evidence  at
           the hearing before him,  including  Mrs  [D]'s  evidence  as  to
           points that had been relied upon  by  the  sentencing  judge  as
           indicating the level of  harm,  for  example,  Mrs  [D]  needing
           "extra bolts" on her door. Mrs [D] explained  that  this  was  a
           misunderstanding. She was fearful because Mr [D]  was  not  with
           her and wanted the extra security of the extra bolts.

        f. The Secretary of State had relied on the fact that Mr [D] got an
           immediate  custodial  sentence  despite  it  being  a  "one-off"
           incident and his being of previous good character as  indicative
           of  "serious  harm".  But  those  factors  are  irrelevant.   If
           anything, a history of domestic violence is likely  to  indicate
           that there is higher harm. In this case Mr [D] was acting out of
           character. Also, the  Secretary  of  State's  emphasis  on  this
           incident occurring shortly  after  his  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom is misplaced. That factor does not go to serious harm.

        g. It cannot be that a  custodial  sentence  necessarily  indicates
           serious harm requiring deportation  on  the  basis  that  it  is
           conducive to the common good. That would obviate the need for  a
           distinction between shorter sentences and sentences of 12 months
           or over, which is reflected in the  legislation  and  rules,  in
           effect eliding paragraphs 398(b)  and  (c)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules. The judge took into account, and weighed in the  balance,
           his perception that Mrs [D] has "tried to minimise what actually
           occurred on the evening the assault took place" (paragraph 34 of
           the judgment). The judge was  required  to  carry  out  his  own
           assessment, and it cannot be said it was irrational.

27. If we conclude, despite those submissions that  Mr  [D]'s  offence  had
    caused "serious harm", Ms Childs  made  the  following  submissions  in
    relation to the judge's assessment of whether it would be unduly  harsh
    for Mrs [D] to be required to live with her husband in Turkey:

        a. Contrary to the Secretary of State's submission that  the  judge
           failed to address whether it would be unduly harsh for  Mrs  [D]
           to live in the United Kingdom without her husband, it is  clear,
           considering the judgment as a  whole,  that  he  considered  and
           reached a view on this. The judge found that the success  of  Mr
           [D]'s therapy was dependent on the presence of her husband. This
           reason clearly applies to the question of whether  it  would  be
           unduly harsh for Mrs [D] to have to live in the  United  Kingdom
           without her (see the first of the two paragraphs numbered 38  in
           the judgment). The judge relied on the evidence of Ms Lewis  and
           was entitled to do so.

        b. It cannot be said that the judge's conclusion that it  would  be
           unduly harsh for Mrs [D] to live in Turkey was irrational. It is
           a high test. The Secretary of State is simply seeking to reargue
           his case on the  proper  assessment  of  unduly  harsh  in  this
           context. No error of approach by the judge  has,  however,  been
           identified. Once again, the judge relies on the evidence  of  Ms
           Lewis and concludes that she would be unlikely to establish  the
           same  trust  and  bond   that   she   has   with   her   current
           psychotherapist with a new therapist in Turkey. This is  not  an
           irrational conclusion.

28. In our view, on the question of serious harm,  although  we  have  some
    reservations about the judge's analysis of the sentencing  remarks,  we
    do not consider that his reasons are inadequate so as to amount  to  an
    irrational conclusion. We  note,  first,  that  the  offence  was  very
    serious. Mr [D] received an immediate custodial  sentence  despite  his
    previous good character. The sentencing judge assessed the  offence  as
    falling at the top of category 2 in the Assault guideline on  the  cusp
    of category 1. This was due to high culpability and "lesser harm",  but
    the latter term should not be taken as indicating necessarily that  the
    harm was not serious. The term is used for a specific  purpose  in  the
    Assault guideline to  indicate  where  within  a  range  of  sentencing
    possibilities an offence might fall. The circumstances  of  an  offence
    could indicate "lesser harm" within the  Assault  guideline  and  still
    constitute "serious harm" for purposes of the deportation analysis.

29. The judge said at paragraph 34  of  his  judgment  that  the  fact  the
    defendant received an immediate custodial sentence of 8 months  against
    a statutory maximum of 5 years, such that the sentence was "clearly  at
    the lower end of the sentencing scale  and  reflects  the  [sentencing]
    Judge's view concerning the seriousness of the offence".  There  are  a
    couple of difficulties with this. First, the 8-month sentence was after
    discount for guilty plea, so the starting point for the sentence was 12
    months. The normal range of sentences for the offence of which  Mr  [D]
    was convicted runs from a fine to  3  years'  custody,  notwithstanding
    that 5 years is the statutory maximum. The sentence imposed on  Mr  [D]
    fell at the lower end of the range appropriate for category  1  in  the
    Assault guideline and therefore was  not  "at  the  lower  end  of  the
    sentencing scale" given the nature of the offence. The judge also noted
    that the sentencing  judge  had  commented  that  the  assault  was  an
    "isolated incident and not likely to be repeated", but those factors go
    to culpability rather than harm.

30. In our view, it is important not confuse  culpability  with  harm  when
    assessing whether a person has caused serious harm so as to engage  the
    deportation provisions. Mr [D]'s assault on Mrs [D] was  undoubtedly  a
    serious offence, particularly as it was committed against  her  in  her
    home in a domestic context, she was threatened with a knife and for the
    other reasons highlighted by the sentencing judge. Nonetheless, whether
    the offence caused "serious  harm"  for  purposes  of  the  deportation
    provisions is a fact-specific enquiry, and it is  not  necessarily  the
    case that the imposition of a custodial sentence of less than 12 months
    means that serious harm in the necessary sense was caused.  Whilst  the
    view of the Secretary of State  or  the  sentencing  judge  may  be  of
    assistance to a tribunal in deciding  whether  an  offence  has  caused
    serious harm, the statutory wording in section 117D (C) does not compel
    any particular weight to be given to the Secretary of State's view  (SC
    (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 929). In our view  the  judge  clearly  must
    have had the whole of the sentencing remarks in mind. He  was  entitled
    to highlight what he considered to be relevant from them. He  was  also
    entitled to have regard to Mrs [D]'s evidence and the  evidence  of  Ms
    Lewis in assessing whether serious harm was caused. Although the  judge
    may not have done full justice to the Secretary of State's case in  his
    summary of it in paragraph 35 of his judgment, he  does  summarise  the
    submissions on serious harm that were made for the Secretary  of  State
    at paragraphs 14 to 15, and we have no reason to consider that  he  did
    not have regard to all of the submissions made, even where he does  not
    summarise them in full detail.

31. We find that the Secretary of State has failed to persuade us that  the
    judge's conclusion that the offence did not constitute  "serious  harm"
    for  purposes  of  the  deportation  provisions  was  irrational.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal therefore  fails  on  this  point.  As  the
    Secretary of State's view that Mr [D]'s deportation is conducive to the
    public good is solely predicated upon his contention that  Mr  [D]  was
    convicted of an offence which has caused serious harm,  and  given  the
    sustainability of the judge's finding to the contrary, the  refusal  of
    the human rights claim constitutes a disproportionate interference with
    Mr [D]'s Article 8 rights.

32. In light of our conclusion on the question of serious harm, it  is  not
    necessary for us to determine whether the "unduly harsh" aspect of  the
    judge's decision contains any legal error.


Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]             3 June 2019

Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Murray and Upper Tribunal Judge Blum sitting  as  Upper  Tribunal
    Judges.
