

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/09385/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 9 October 2017                      |          On 18 October 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     B R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience, I refer to the parties as they were in the
    First-tier Tribunal, namely with the Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    respondent.

 2.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Nepal  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to  refuse  her  entry  clearance  as  the  adult
    dependent of the widow of a retired Gurkha soldier. The appeal  against
    that decision was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Robison
    ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 19 January 2017.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal but given my
    references to the appellant's and her mother's  personal  circumstances
    they are entitled to anonymity in these proceedings. I make a direction
    accordingly.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin in  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 27 July 2017 in the following terms:

         "In an otherwise thorough and detailed Decision and Reasons  it  is
         arguable that the Judge fell into error in finding that  there  was
         dependency between the 29 year old Appellant and her mother on  the
         basis of financial support and regular  telephone  calls  when  the
         mother had chosen to leave her daughter in Nepal in 2015.

         It is also arguable that the Judge misapplied the "historic  wrong"
         principles."

      Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 5. For the respondent, Ms Pal  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal. It was not clear how the FTTJ had found family  life  between
    the adult appellant and her mother on the evidence. The  tribunal  made
    no finding on the undisputed fact that the appellant's mother had  left
    the appellant in Nepal to live in the UK with no immediate prospect  of
    the appellant  being  able  to  join  her.  The  evidence  of  historic
    injustice suffered by the appellant's father was only produced  at  the
    hearing; historic injustice was only  one  of  several  factors  to  be
    considered in the proportionality  assessment.  If  the  late  father's
    application had been made as soon as legally  possible,  the  appellant
    would still have been an adult, being aged 21. No application was  made
    by the father. The application by the appellant and her mother was  not
    made as soon as it could have been and it was not clear why  not.   The
    proportionality assessment was not based on a  balanced  assessment  of
    all relevant factors. The respondent did not challenge the  finding  of
    the FTTJ as regards local cultural traditions in  Nepal  at  [43].  The
    respondent's position was that if  there  had  been  family  life,  the
    mother would have given up her right to enter the UK in order  to  stay
    with her daughter.

 6. For the appellant, Mr Wilford adopted his speaking note.  It  had  been
    conceded before  the  FTTJ  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules for entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative.
    There was no challenge to the FTTJ's  decision  that  the  respondent's
    policy did not apply to the  appellant  because  the  sponsor  was  the
    appellant's mother, rather than the former Gurkha soldier.  Mr  Wilford
    submitted that the  appellant's  mother's  decision  to  enter  the  UK
    leaving the appellant in Nepal could not be taken to demonstrate a lack
    of family life (Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320).  The  right
    for the appellant to come to the UK did not arise until  January  2015.
    The respondent had inaccurately characterised the basis for the  FTTJ's
    finding of family life. The FTTJ  had  not  misapplied  the  historical
    wrong principles in Ghising & Ors  (Gurkhas/BOCs  -  historic  wrong  -
    weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC). If the appellant's mother had not  taken
    up her right to settle in the UK, she would have lost it. He  submitted
    there was no error of law in the decision.



Discussion

 7. As regards the assessment of whether  or  not  there  was  family  life
    between the appellant and her mother, the FTTJ took into  account  they
    had lived together until the mother was granted entry clearance. Ms Pal
    conceded before me that the mother would have lost her right to  settle
    in the UK (on that occasion at least) if she had not settled in the  UK
    pursuant to the grant of leave to enter.  The suggestion in the grounds
    to this tribunal that the mother chose to leave the appellant in  Nepal
    to emigrate to the UK is undermined by this  concession.  My  attention
    has also been drawn to paragraphs 38 and 39 of Rai which makes it clear
    that concentrating on that appellant's parents' decision to leave Nepal
    and settle in the UK, without focusing on the practical  and  financial
    realities entailed in that decision was  "a  mistaken  approach".   The
    FTTJ focused instead, and rightly, on the nature  and  quality  of  the
    appellant's life with her mother at the time of the latter's  departure
    to settle in the UK and whether it had endured beyond it, as  advocated
    at paragraph 39 of Rai.

 8. The FTTJ found [43] that in Nepalese culture a daughter remains part of
    the family until she is married, a finding which is not  challenged  by
    the respondent before me. The FTTJ also  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had not established another family  nor  was  she  living  an
    independent life [43]. She had found earlier at [41] that the appellant
    was wholly dependent on her mother for financial support. Finally,  the
    FTTJ considered the extent to which family  ties  had  been  maintained
    after the mother's departure for the UK and found that they had:  there
    was full financial dependence and documentary evidence of "very regular
    telephone calls from the appellant to the UK": the  FTTJ  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that she had continuous and frequent contact  with
    her mother over the years since their separation.  The  FTTJ's  finding
    that family  life  existed,  both  before  and  after  the  appellant's
    mother's departure from Nepal, was, therefore, carefully  reasoned  and
    based on the  evidence.   In  the  circumstances,  and  given  the  low
    threshold for engagement (AG (Eritrea v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801),  the
    FTTJ was entitled to find that Article 8 was engaged.

 9. Insofar as the proportionality assessment is concerned, the  respondent
    submits there was no evidence of historic injustice until the  hearing.
    The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal refer  to  this  issue
    and give reasons why the appellant's  late  father  could  not  make  a
    settlement application under the 2009  discretionary  arrangements  and
    why no applications were made by the appellant  and  her  mother  until
    later. Whilst this was not evidence, the respondent was  on  notice  of
    the issue. He could have expected the appellant  and  sponsor  to  give
    evidence on the issue at the hearing.  The Entry Clearance Manager  did
    not address the historic injustice issue in his review of the decision.
      It is not clear what point is  being  made  by  the  respondent  with
    regard in this submission  but,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  I  am
    satisfied there is no procedural irregularity such as to amount  to  an
    error of law.  The appellant was entitled to  adduce  evidence  on  the
    issue at the hearing.

10. The appellant and her mother gave oral evidence that it  had  been  the
    intention of the appellant's father to settle in the UK but that he had
    been prevented from  so  doing  by  illness.  The  FTTJ  accepted  that
    evidence [45] as she was entitled to  do.  Having  accepted  that  "the
    family would have settled in the UK but for the historic injustice, and
    therefore that the family would have been living in the UK long  before
    now", the FTTJ then summarised the guidance in Ghising  &  Ors  to  the
    effect that "where it is found that Article 8 is engaged, and  but  for
    the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
    long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment in the appellant's favour, where the matters
    relied upon by the Secretary of Sate/ECO consist solely of  the  public
    interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy".  There  was  no
    suggestion that the ECO  relied  on  any  other  facet  of  the  public
    interest in the appeal before the FTTJ  (such  as  a  poor  immigration
    history or criminal record).

11. It is not submitted specifically by the respondent that the appellant's
    father's illness was a causative factor in his having failed to make  a
    timely application to settle, only that

       "the historic injustice argument is simply  one  of  several  factors
       that should have been considered in the  proportionality  assessment.
       If the late father's application had been made  as  soon  as  legally
       possible the appellant would still have been an adult, being aged 21.
       However, an  application  was  not  made  by  the  late  father.  The
       application by the sponsor and appellant was also not made as soon as
       it could have been and it is unclear  exactly  why  the  applications
       were made at the time that they were."

    However, the FTTJ accepted the  evidence  of  the  appellant  that  the
    appellant's father  was  too  ill  to  make  the  application  and  the
    appellant's and her mother's circumstances prevented applications being
    made after his death [45]. Thus  applications  were  made  as  soon  as
    practically possible.  This finding is sustainable on the evidence.

12. In any event, in AP (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 89 it was held that,
    when considering whether the historic injustice was  the  cause  of  an
    appellant's inability to gain entry sooner, "the courts should  not  in
    this context be unduly rigorous in the  application  of  the  causation
    test,  given  that  its  significance  is  to  redress  this   historic
    injustice".  The evidence before the FTTJ was sufficient to demonstrate
    that, but for the historic injustice, the appellant's father would have
    applied to settle in the UK.  By analogy, as was said by the  Court  of
    Appeal in AP (India), if the sponsor in that  case  had  given  express
    evidence to the effect that he would have come to the UK earlier if  he
    had been  entitled  to  do  so  then  it  would  have  been  enough  to
    demonstrate that the causal link had been established. The  appellant's
    mother gave such evidence at the hearing  before  the  FTTJ.   She  was
    entitled to rely on it to find there was a historic injustice and  that
    this rendered disproportionate the  degree  of  interference  with  the
    appellant's protected rights.

13.  Contrary  to  the  respondent's  grounds   of   appeal,   the   FTTJ's
    proportionality assessment is based on a balanced assessment of all the
    relevant factors and that the conclusion reached is sustainable on  the
    evidence before her.

14. For these reasons, there is no error of law in the FTTJ's decision  and
    reasons.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed      A M Black                        Date  18 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed      A M Black                        Date  18 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black













