
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09228/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                master D D M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national  of  Jamaica  born  on  26  May  2002.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 26 March  2018  refusing  his  application  for  entry
    clearance pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. His appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet  for
    hearing on 6 March 2019.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  13
    March 2019, the judge dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  he  was  not
    persuaded that the Appellant's mother had had sole  responsibility  for
    his  upbringing,  because  that  has  clearly  been  shared  with   his
    grandmother [24].

 3. Permission to appeal was  sought,  in  time,  on  the  basis  of  three
    grounds.  Firstly, that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  or  properly
    consider material evidence and failed to properly apply the test as set
    out in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(c) sole responsibility) Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
    00049 at [49] and Nmaju v Entry Clearance Officer [2001]  INLR  26  per
    Lord Justice Schiemann at [9].  It was submitted that the test  is  not
    whether there is shared responsibility but whether the UK based  parent
    has  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the  child's  upbringing,
    including making all the important decisions in the  child's  life  cf.
    [52] of TD (Yemen). It was asserted that the judge had failed  to  give
    any or proper consideration to the witness statements  and  letters  in
    support and had failed to provide  reasons  as  to  why  this  evidence
    should be disregarded.

 4. The second ground of appeal asserted that there  had  been  a  previous
    refusal of a visit visa on 22 June 2016, which held that: "in isolation
    does not demonstrate that you have a parent or  guardian  in  the  home
    country  who  is  responsible  for  your  care  and  consents  to   the
    arrangements for your travel". It was submitted that the issue was  the
    same and the Entry Clearance Officer had previously concluded that  the
    Appellant's grandmother did not have responsibility for his care.

 5. The third ground of appeal drew a parallel between paragraph  297(i)(e)
    which provides "You have one parent who is present and settled  in  the
    UK who has had sole responsibility for your upbringing" and E-ECC1.6 of
    Appendix FM which provides that  "(b) the applicant's  parent  has  had
    and continues to have sole responsibility for the child's  upbringing".
    The point made here is that the case of TD (Yemen) focuses on what sole
    responsibility is but does not  address  when  that  assessment  should
    occur.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gumsley,
    on the basis that he was satisfied it was arguable the judge did err in
    law.  Although the judge sets out the evidence  before  him  and  makes
    some findings, it is arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  distinguish
    between  practical  day-to-day  care  of  the  Appellant  and  that  of
    continuing  care  and  control  when  assessing  the  issue   of   sole
    responsibility.  In addition, the reasons for the findings he made  are
    short and do not contain much detail in the  way  of  analysis  of  the
    evidence that was provided.  It is arguable that the reasons  given  by
    the judge for his findings are inadequate and do not allow  the  person
    reading the decision to understand in particular why  the  evidence  in
    favour of the Appellant has been rejected.

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms  Jones  acknowledged  that
    there was no Rule 24 response, however, she agreed that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained material errors in  law.   Whilst  at
    [27] the judge referred to the fact that  the  Appellant's  grandfather
    had died in November 2014 and up to that time sole  responsibility  had
    not been shown, he failed to go on to consider the position after  that
    date in circumstances where it is  clear  from  TD  (Yemen)  that  sole
    responsibility can be for a finite period.

 8. She further accepted at [21] that when considering  the  issue  of  the
    grandmother's medical condition, the judge should have gone on to  make
    findings about this but failed to give reasons or to engage  with  this
    evidence.

 9. Mr Balroop did not seek to rely on anything other than his  grounds  of
    appeal.

10. I informed the parties I was content, both  in  light  of  Ms  Jones's
    helpful concession and because I was  persuaded  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal disclosed material errors of law, to find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law and that I proposed to remake  the
    decision in its entirety, based on  the  evidence  that  was  currently
    before the  Upper  Tribunal,  i.e.  an  89  page  bundle  and  a  short
    supplementary bundle of six pages.

     Sponsor's evidence

11. The Sponsor, D P, was called to give evidence,  when  she  adopted  her
    statement dated 26 February 2019 and stated there had been  no  changes
    since that time and that her mother's health was still the  same.   She
    was still in receipt of a lot of medication and that  she  lived  alone
    with her grandson, the Appellant.

12. In cross-examination, the Sponsor was taken to the letter at pages 5 to
    6 of the supplementary bundle from Dr B MD dated 25 February 2019.  She
    stated she was not aware of the exact medication her mother was  taking
    but she knew it was for hypertension, for her  heart  problem  and  the
    fact that she had  had  a  fall  in  September  2018,  which  had  made
    everything in terms of housework and shopping more difficult,  although
    she had not broken any bones.

13. She accepted that she had had sight of the doctor's letter,  which  had
    been sent to her by her lawyers, but she had not  gone  through  it  in
    detail.  The witness confirmed that she spoke  to  her  mother  two  to
    three times a week and that she would send  her  mother  money  two  to
    three times a month in order to go to the doctor.  She  confirmed  that
    her mother also had eye problems. In respect of other family members in
    Jamaica, she said that she has siblings, two sisters and a brother, but
    her grandmother and her  son  live  in  a  different  parish  from  her
    siblings.

14. When asked if the siblings assisted after her mother's fall,  she  said
    they might go once or at a weekend, but they have their own families to
    look after.  When asked if the witness's mother would be on her own  if
    the Appellant's appeal was allowed, she said  she  would  have  to  pay
    somebody to look after her mother.  It was suggested that her  siblings
    would step in to help and she repeated her evidence that they  come  to
    see her not very often and have their own families so she did not think
    they would drop everything to come and look after their mother.

15. She stated that her son, the Appellant, has cousins, one the same  age,
    one aged 14, one aged 6 and  a  baby  which  was  born  lately  to  her
    brother's girlfriend.  She said that her  son  was  not  a  boarder  at
    school but would return home every evening by bus, that  he  was  doing
    very well at school and he had just taken the equivalent of his GCSEs.

16. When asked the last time was  she  had  contact  with  the  school  the
    witness stated this was two weeks previously in order to  pay  for  his
    graduation. The witness was asked how she obtained the letter from  the
    Appellant's school at page 4 of the supplementary bundle viz  a  letter
    from Ms F, the Appellant's form teacher dated 28  February  2019,  from
    Edwin Allen High School in Clarendon, Jamaica.  She said that she spoke
    to the school and said she was trying to get her son to come  and  live
    with her and asked them to provide a recommendation.

17. In respect of her mother's letter, she said her mother would  not  have
    typed it.  She would not know who typed it for her and did not ask her.
    In respect of her son's letter, she said that he did  type  it  himself
    and that he was able to do that.  The witness confirmed  she  had  left
    Jamaica in December 2002, at which time her son had been 7  months  old
    and that she had returned for visits for two weeks  in  2012  and  four
    weeks in 2016.

18. When asked how she could say she had a strong relationship with her son
    given the age at which she left him and the shortness of the time  that
    she had spent with him since that time, the witness stated  she  always
    sent pictures, that she provided her son with everything he needs,  but
    once he could speak she spoke to him almost every day.   She  confirmed
    although it was her mother that taught him to talk and to walk, she was
    responsible for checking his homework and that apart from  keeping  him
    washed and cooked for and clean, she was responsible for his wellbeing,
    that she would give permission for him to go on, for example, a  school
    trip, and that she had full responsibility for everything that he does.
     She was asked about the accommodation in Jamaica and she said that  it
    was her mother's house but that she did not receive a pension and  that
    she, the witness, paid for everything.

19. When asked about what her son would like to do in the future, she  said
    that he would like to be in the army and she accepted that he could  do
    that from either Jamaica or the UK.

20. There was no re-examination.

21. In her submissions, Ms Jones  referred  to  [44]  of  TD  Yemen,  which
    considers the test in relation to UK based carers.  She submitted  that
    the issue was whether one could believe what the  Sponsor  was  saying.
    The evidence at page 5  onwards  suggests  that  the  Sponsor's  mother
    appears to have a heart condition, however, this is neither exceptional
    nor is the fact that she is getting older.  The Sponsor in her evidence
    referred to her mother having had a fall, but this is not  referred  to
    in the medical letter.

22. Ms Jones submitted that the doctor exceeded his expertise in  referring
    to the child's need for strong emotional support and his  opinion  that
    his grandmother was unable to provide that.  She sought to rely on  the
    refusal letter and submitted that the key issue was whether I  believed
    and accepted that the Sponsor exercises strong  parental  control  over
    her son.

23. In his submissions, Mr Balroop invited me to find the Sponsor to  be  a
    credible witness.  He submitted she has always been entirely consistent
    in terms of how the relationship works.  He accepted she had  left  her
    son in order to come to the UK for a  better  life,  which  is  a  hard
    decision,  but  the  only  issue  is  whether  the  Sponsor  has   sole
    responsibility for her son and this does not mean necessarily that  she
    has a strong relationship with him.

24. Mr Balroop submitted  that  the  letter  from  the  Appellant  and  his
    grandmother and the oral  evidence  today  were  all  consistent,  that
    nothing happens without the Sponsor's permission or authority.  This is
    also clear from the Sponsor's statement.   Mr  Balroop  submitted  that
    this is the entire crux of the matter in light of [52] of  TD  (Yemen).
    The question is who it is that has  continuing  control  and  direction
    over the child's life. In this  case,  it  resides  squarely  with  the
    Sponsor.  He submitted her evidence was consistent with the  tests  set
    out in TD (Yemen).

25. In respect of the doctor's opinion as to  why  the  grandmother  cannot
    care for the child, it is not known what  information  the  doctor  had
    when making this assessment, which was in any event outweighed  by  the
    evidence. In respect of  whether  there  were  compelling  features  Mr
    Balroop acknowledged he was not pressing this matter.  The Appellant is
    now 17.  He lived alone with his grandmother.  Any grandchild in  these
    circumstances would lend a hand. Mr Balroop also sought to rely on  the
    point made at ground 3 of the grounds of appeal.

     Findings and Reasons

26.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

27. The Sponsor' evidence, as set out in her witness statement, is that she
    left Jamaica when the Appellant was 7 months  old.  She  was  a  single
    parent and left him in the care of her mother on  the  basis  that  she
    would continue to be responsible for him, emotionally and  financially,
    including the schools he attended and supporting him in his studied  by
    paying for extra classes and materials. She assisted  him  in  choosing
    his GCSE subjects and maintained regular contact with  his  schools  as
    well as paying for his education. She also gave permission for  him  to
    join the cadets and the football team. She also made provision for  his
    religious direction and for  his  bedtime  when  he  was  younger.  The
    Appellant has met her UK born son, O, when he visited Jamaica with  his
    father in April 2011 and July  2015  and  her  daughter,  J,  when  the
    Sponsor visited the Appellant with  both  her  UK  born  children.  The
    Sponsor visited her son in December 2012 and August 2016 [WS  at  [18]-
    [38].

28. The focus in cross-examination and submissions by Ms Jones was upon the
    Appellant's current circumstances. The Sponsor's account of the history
    of contact and financial and emotional support was not challenged and I
    find that it is credible.

29. I find that the Sponsor was only granted leave to remain in the form of
    3 years discretionary leave on 29 September 2011, which I  surmise,  in
    the absence of any evidence on the issue, was due to the fact that  her
    UK born British son, O, was by that time 7 years old. The Sponsor  also
    has a daughter, J, born in 2009, who has limited leave to remain in the
    UK. I find that the Sponsor was unable to  visit  her  son  in  Jamaica
    prior to 29 September 2011 because she would have lost the right to re-
    enter the United Kingdom, but she has visited him twice since that time
    and her children have also visited him. I also find  that  the  Sponsor
    made a visit visa application on behalf of the Appellant  in  2014  but
    this application was refused on 3 June 2014, in  part  because  it  was
    intended he travel with his grandmother and her application was refused
    and it was not accepted in the absence of evidence that his grandmother
    is his legal guardian.

30. The Sponsor's father died in Jamaica in November 2014. It would  appear
    that a further application was made for  the  Appellant  to  visit  the
    United Kingdom but this was refused on 19 November 2015 and there was a
    further refusal of a visit visa on 22 June 2016,  again  on  the  basis
    that there was no evidence that his grandmother is his  legal  guardian
    and because of apparent discrepancies between  the  Sponsor's  payslips
    and bank statements. The current application for settlement was made on
    20 December 2017, very shortly after the Sponsor was granted ILR in the
    UK on 4 November 2017.

31. The Sponsor had been employed as a health care support worker at  North
    Middlesex University Hospital since 12 September 2016. In  the  refusal
    decision of 26 March  2018  the  Respondent  accepted  there  was  some
    evidence of money transfers, a  letter  from  the  Appellant's  school,
    photographs taken during the visit made to Jamaica in August 2016, when
    the Sponsor was accompanied by O and J and some WhatsApp  message  from
    2017 but was not satisfied that the Sponsor has sole responsibility for
    the Appellant, in light of the 15  year  separation  and  the  lack  of
    evidence that the Sponsor has had the majority of control and  decision
    making  in  the  Appellant's  education  and  has  had   the   ultimate
    responsibility for the major decisions relating to his  upbringing  and
    has continuing care and control over the Appellant.

32. In respect of the current circumstances, I find that in  light  of  the
    deteriorating health of the Sponsor's mother that her ability  to  care
    for the Appellant is impacted as she now needs care herself. Whilst the
    Appellant is able to provide her with some care and support, given that
    he is now 17, I bear in mind the Sponsor's evidence as set out  in  her
    witness  statement,  that  she  does  not  wish  him  to   become   his
    grandmother's carer and, in her oral evidence,  that  there  are  other
    relatives in terms of three siblings  and  their  children  present  in
    Jamaica albeit living in a different parish. However, I  did  not  find
    this evidence of particular assistance in deciding the  issue  in  this
    case, which is whether or not the Sponsor has sole  responsibility  for
    the Appellant.

33. I have taken careful note of the guidance  set  out  in  TD  (Paragraph
    297(i)(c) sole responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049:

         "48. The purpose of paragraph 297 is clear: it is designed to
         maintain or effect family unity...


         49.  Where one parent has disappeared from the child's life and so
         relinquished or abdicated his (or her) responsibility for the
         child, the starting point must be that it is the remaining active
         parent who has "sole responsibility" for the child. The fact that
         the remaining active parent is in the UK makes no difference to
         this. Of course, the geographical separation of the parent from the
         child means that the day-to-day care of the child will necessarily
         be undertaken by others - relatives or friends abroad - who look
         after the child. Here, the issue under the immigration rules is
         whether the UK-based parent has, in practice, allowed the parental
         responsibility for the child to be shared with the carer abroad.
         This is, of course, the question we see most frequently in the case
         law.


         50.  The cases, particularly Nmaju and Cenir in the Court of
         Appeal, make clear that the touchstone of "sole responsibility" is
         the continuing control and direction by the parent in the UK in
         respect of the "important decisions" about the child's upbringing.
         The fact that day-to-day decision-making for a child - such as
         "getting the child to school safely and on time, or putting the
         child to bed, or seeing what it has for breakfast, or that it
         cleans its teeth, or has enough clothing, and so forth" (Ramos, per
         Dillon LJ at p 151) - rests with the carers abroad is not
         conclusive of the issue of "sole responsibility". However, if the
         UK-based parent has allowed the carer abroad to make some
         "important decisions" in the child's upbringing, then it may
         readily be said that the responsibility for the child has become
         "shared".


         51.  In reaching a decision on what is a fact-rich issue, it is
         important to take account of evidence of any contact between the
         parent and the carer in respect of important decisions to be taken
         about the child and its upbringing. The availability of modern
         communications technology may reduce the impact of distance alone
         on a UK parent's ability to be consulted (and therefore decide)
         about the child's upbringing in another country. The length, and
         cause, of the separation of parent and child and the reasons for
         its continuation may shed some light on the role played by the
         carer abroad. Likewise, it may be helpful to look at the financial
         support provided by the parent and, in particular, its absence may
         be very telling."


34. I find, despite the length of the separation between  the  Sponsor  and
    the Appellant, that she has retained control  and  direction  over  his
    life in Jamaica; she has been responsible for the  important  decisions
    in his upbringing; she has been in regular contact with his school,  as
    the letter from Ms F, his form teacher at Edwin Allen High School dated
    28 February  2019  attests  and  she  provided  financial  support  and
    maintained regular contact with the  Appellant  by  telephone.  I  find
    that, since the Sponsor was granted a period of discretionary leave  in
    the United Kingdom in September 2011, she has visited the Appellant and
    ensured  that  her  UK  born  children  have   also   developed   their
    relationships with him. Whilst there is limited evidence of her role in
    his life since she came to the United Kingdom in December  2002,  I  am
    able to find the Sponsor has exercised  sole  responsibility  since  at
    least her father's death in November 2014.

35. I find, in light of all the evidence before the First  tier  and  Upper
    Tribunal,  that  the  Sponsor  has  demonstrated  that  she  has   sole
    responsibility  for  her  son,  the  Appellant  and  thus   meets   the
    requirements of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It
    follows that the appeal falls to be allowed cf.  TZ  (Pakistan)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1109 at [34], that being the only issue that was in contention
    before the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I find a material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal  Judge
Sweet for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal. I set that  decision
aside and  re-make  the  decision,  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

