
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/09060/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 November 2017                       |On 27 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                              MISS SAMIKSHA PUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
                    instructed by Kent Immigration & Visa Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the SSHD against a decision of First tier Tribunal
    Amin, who allowed her appeal against  a  decision  refusing  her  entry
    clearance.

 2. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Nepal who was born on 1 January 1990.   She  made  an  application  for
    entry clearance to settle with her father who is a former Gurkha.  This
    application was refused on 21 September 2015.  Her appeal against  this
    decision came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Amin for  hearing
    on 10 January 2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  6
    February 2017 Judge Amin allowed her  appeal.   He  made  a  number  of
    findings, in particular at [28]:

         "I am satisfied on balance whilst the Appellant is an adult, she is
         emotionally and wholly financially  dependent  on  her  parents  as
         supported by the oral and documentary evidence of the visits by the
         sponsor and his wife and remittances.  I accept the  evidence  that
         contact is  by  phone.   The  unchallenged  evidence  is  that  the
         Appellant lived with her parents and siblings before they  came  to
         the UK.  The Appellant is still reliant on her parents  to  survive
         on a day-to-day basis.  The Appellant has not formed an independent
         family unit.  I accept that the sponsor coming to the  UK  has  not
         severed the  family  unit.   I  find  the  evidence  satisfies  the
         Appellant enjoys a relationship with her parents, which goes beyond
         normal emotional ties of a family, and therefore  article  8(1)  of
         the ECHR is engaged."

 3. Thus, having accepted that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules or Appendix K of the IDI's Chapter 15, Section
    2A 13.2 the judge found that the failure to admit the Appellant was not
    proportionate with regard to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  in
    time on 27 February 2017 on the basis  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    failing to give adequate reasons for his decision: (1) as  to  why  the
    Appellant's relationship with the Sponsor amounts to more  than  normal
    emotional ties bearing in mind the age of the Appellant and the  length
    of time the family have lived apart, and (2) that the judge had  failed
    to give adequate reasons as  to  why  the  Appellant  can  be  said  to
    overcome Section 117B of the NIAA 2002, as there is no  explanation  as
    to how the Appellant would be able to integrate  into  British  society
    with no English language skills nor any prospect of income.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on 1 September 2017 by UTJ Martin  for
    the following reasons:

         "The first ground that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for finding the Appellant to be dependent  on  her  parents
         has little merit.  However it is arguable that the Judge has  erred
         by failing to take into  account  s.117B  of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 when considering Article 8."

Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State
    sought, faintly, to rely on the grounds of appeal, the second  limb  of
    which concerned the manner in which the judge considered  Section  117B
    of the NIAA 2002.  However he accepted that the  Claimant  could  speak
    English and acknowledged at [32] it may be that the  judge's  reasoning
    could be considered sufficient.  This provides:

         "The Respondent  has  not  given  any  reasons  why  admitting  the
         Appellant would be against the public interest,  or  how  it  would
         undermine order in the United Kingdom.  There is nothing to suggest
         that the Appellant has a bad immigration history or has a  criminal
         record in Nepal that weighs in favour of the public interest."

 7. In her response, Ms McCarthy sought to rely on  the  Rule  24  response
    drafted by her colleague and dated 30  September  2017  which  asserted
    that the second ground of appeal was misconceived because it failed  to
    take into account the fact that Gurkha adult dependent  relative  cases
    are subject to a wholly different set of principles and other Article 8
    cases.  In short, where the Respondent relies only on the interests  of
    immigration control to resist an application  for  entry  clearance  in
    such a case and it is established that Article 8 is  engaged  and  that
    the Sponsor Gurkha soldier  would,  save  for  the  historic  injustice
    preventing him to do so, had settled in the UK earlier  "the weight  to
    be given to the historic injustice will normally require a decision  in
    the Appellant's favour" cf. Ghising  [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)  per  UTJ
    Taylor at [60].

 8. It was further asserted  that  the  matters  that  can  properly  count
    against the grant of entry clearance where  Article  8  is  engaged  in
    Gurkha cases  are  limited  to  matters  such  as  a  particularly  bad
    immigration history or criminal behaviour and that  the  argument  that
    Section 117B can add anything in such a case was explicitly rejected by
    the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO (New Delhi) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 320
    at [57].

 9. Ms McCarthy submitted in light of the decisions in Ghising and  Rai  it
    was essentially up to the Respondent to show that once family life  had
    been accepted as existing and enduring  why  entry  clearance  was  not
    merited.  Mr Bramble did not seek to make any response.

Decision

10. I find, in light of the submissions by both parties  and  having  taken
    into account the careful and detailed decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin as well as the grounds seeking permission to appeal and  the
    grant of permission to appeal, I find no material error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is  the  case  that  the
    judge made clear and unchallenged findings of fact in relation  to  the
    continuing existence of family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    parents who now reside in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  found  the
    witnesses to be credible [18] and was satisfied that the Claimant is an
    adult dependent child of a  Gurkha  veteran  [31].  He  also  expressly
    accepted the Sponsor's evidence that he would have settled in the UK if
    he had been allowed to after his discharge from the  British  army  and
    therefore the Claimant would have been born  in  the  UK  but  for  the
    historic injustice.  This is not disputed by the Secretary of State  at
    the appeal hearing.

11. The judge further noted at [32] that the Respondent has not  given  any
    reasons why admitting the Claimant would be against the public interest
    or how it would undermine order in the UK.  There is nothing to suggest
    that the Claimant has a bad  immigration  history  or  has  a  criminal
    record  in  Nepal  that  weighs  in  favour  of  the  public  interest.
    Therefore I find that the absence of any reference to Section  117B  of
    the NIAA 2002 is not material in light of the particular facts of  this
    case and the jurisprudence: cf. Ghising and Rai (op cit).  I  therefore
    uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin with  the  effect
    that it is now for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  implement  that
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  dismissed.  No  anonymity
direction is made.







Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 24.22.17


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman





