
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/09502/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2019                        | On 8 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     KK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan who was born in 2001.  By
    a decision dated 18 August 2017, the appellant  was  refused  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds. She  appealed  to
    the First-tier tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 23  January
    2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal was concerned with two appeals, one brought  by
    the appellant KK will appeal brought against a refusal of human  rights
    application by the appellants  brother,  WK.  The  renewed  grounds  of
    appeal state that WK has been granted additional  nationality  and  has
    withdrawn his appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant has been living in the United Kingdom for more than seven
    years and is, therefore, a  'qualifying  child'  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended). The appellant has been living
    in the United Kingdom more than 11 years.

 4. The judge concluded that, 'on a balance of probabilities,  interference
    in the family and private life of the appellants by the decision not to
    allow them to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  proportionate  when
    weighed against the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  by  the
    implementation of the immigration laws of the United Kingdom' [51]. The
    judge was aware that the  parents  of  the  children  are  citizens  of
    Pakistan and have no right to remain in the United Kingdom. The  family
    had first come to United Kingdom for a holiday of only one week but the
    appellant been registered in school very soon after arrival. An  appeal
    brought by the father of the appellants had been  dismissed  in  August
    2017. I am told that an older brother of the  appellant  has  now  been
    granted leave to remain.

 5. The appellant complains that her  status  as  a  qualifying  child  was
    effectively ignored by the judge in her analysis. The judge had  failed
    to follow the requirements of Secretary of State's  own  guidance  (IDI
    Family life; August 2015) which provided that 'strong reasons' would be
    needed to show that it was reasonable to expect a child who  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom for more than seven years to leave. The judge had
    also ignored MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in which  the  Court  of
    Appeal  had  likewise  indicated  the  importance  of  the   seven-year
    qualifying period. The Court of Appeal had found that  'the  fact  that
    child has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight
    when carrying out the proportionality exercise'.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal reached its decision before the  Supreme  Court
    gave its judgement in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. The effect  of  that
    judgement is declaratory. At [18-19], Lord Carnwath stated:

    On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges,  it  seems  to  me
    inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the  parents,
    apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,  since  it  will
    normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.  To  that  extent
    the record of the parents may become indirectly material, if  it  leads
    to their ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having  to  leave.
    It is only if, even on that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable  for
    the child to leave that the provision may give the parents a  right  to
    remain. The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS
    CSOH_117:




    "22.     In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of  whether
    it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one has to address
    the question, 'Why would the child be  expected  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom?' In a case such as this there can only be one answer: 'because
    the parents have no right  to  remain  in  the  UK'.  To  approach  the
    question in any  other  way  strips  away  the  context  in  which  the
    assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."




    19.              He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a  similar
    point in considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874, para 58:




    "58.      In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children must be made on the basis that the facts  are
    as they are in the real world. If one parent has no  right  to  remain,
    but the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
    assessment is conducted. If neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,
    then that is the background against which the assessment is  conducted.
    Thus the ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of
    origin?"




    To the extent  that  Elias  LJ  may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
    (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing  in
    the section to  suggest  that  "reasonableness"  is  to  be  considered
    otherwise than in the real world in which the children find themselves.

 7. Mr Bates, who appeared to the Secretary of State,  submitted  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  'absolutely  compliant'  with   the
    judgement of the Supreme Court in KO. I agree. I  am  aware  that  this
    appeal has been brought by a child of this family and not the  parents;
    the parents have  very  poor  immigration  history  having  arrived  as
    visitors but having never left. The father's own application to  remain
    was unsuccessful as was his subsequent appeal. I  am  in  little  doubt
    that this human rights application has been  brought  with  a  view  to
    securing the status of every member of  the  family  who  has  not  yet
    achieved leave to remain and not just that of the appellant. I am aware
    that the question of the 'reasonableness' of expecting the appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom addressed by First-tier Tribunal  was  in  the
    context of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended) rather than  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Notwithstanding that fact, KO (Nigeria)  is  a
    highly  relevant  guide  to   consideration   of   reasonableness   and
    proportionality in this appeal.

 8. I find that the First-tier Tribunal judge has  correctly  focused  upon
    the circumstances of the child appellant. She has not, in  my  opinion,
    fallen into the trap of visiting the immigration misdemeanours  of  the
    parents upon the child; the judge's observation at [44]  regarding  the
    immigration history of the parents does nothing more than to place  the
    circumstances of the appellant in  a  proper  context.  The  judge  has
    considered the strength of the private life ties  which  the  appellant
    has within the United Kingdom and the maintenance  of  family  ties  in
    Pakistan. Ultimately, the judge has addressed (albeit in the context of
    paragraph 276ADE) the question posed by Lord Boyd  in  SA  (Bangladesh)
    (see above), that is, 'Why would the child be  expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom?' In this instance, the answer is 'because  her  parents
    and sole carers have no right to remain in the United Kingdom' and,  on
    the evidence, it would not cause disproportionate interference to  such
    private life ties as the child has in the United  Kingdom  for  her  to
    return to Pakistan with her primary carers. In my  opinion,  the  judge
    has given clear and cogent reasons for concluding that there  are  good
    reasons for expecting the child to leave notwithstanding the length  of
    time she has lived in this jurisdiction. The judge has, quite properly,
    addressed the relevant  questions  within  the  'real  world'  approach
    approved of by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  At  [35]  the  judge
    wrote:

    Consideration has to be given to [the  appellant's]  education  health,
    the whereabouts of [her] parents, [her] ability to integrate into  life
    in another country... And to enjoy the full  rights  of  that  country,
    whether the child is lived in or visited the  country  or  is  able  to
    adapt to life there with the support of [her] parents, if  the  parents
    and/or the child have existing  family  and  cultural  ties  with  that
    country, where the child and all the parents can speak the language  of
    the country and whether the child had attended school in the country.

    In my opinion, those were the correct questions to ask  and  the  judge
    has answered the questions by reference to relevant evidence.  She  has
    reached an outcome available to her on that evidence.  Given  that  the
    child's parents have no right to be in the United Kingdom, it was  open
    to the judge to conclude, having due  regard  to  the  appellant's  own
    private life ties to the United Kingdom, that it was reasonable for her
    to return with her parents and sole carers to Pakistan  despite  having
    lived in the United Kingdom for 11 years. Another judge faced with  the
    same facts may have reached a different conclusion;  however,  that  is
    not the point. In the light KO, I do not agree with the appellant  that
    the only outcome on the facts was for the judge  to  have  allowed  the
    appeal. The judge's decision is not flawed in law for the reasons given
    in the grounds of appeal or at all.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

