
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09630/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Shahnaz khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam, Counsel instructed by Hamlet Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    it is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  She  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the respondent dated  14  May
    2019, being a decision to refuse a  human  rights  claim  following  an
    application for further leave  to  remain.   Her  appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge at a hearing  on
    15 July 2019 which resulted in the appeal being allowed.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision for  the  reasons
    set out in the grounds before me which were relied on by Mr  Tarlow  on
    behalf of the respondent.  Essentially the issue  revolves  around  the
    application of Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 40 and associated cases.   In  particular,  notwithstanding
    that Judge Davidge found that the appellant and her spouse  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship and that otherwise the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules were met,  it  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that  her  decision  does  not  comply  with  the  Chikwamba
    principle, in particular as set out at [44] of that decision. There  it
    states that:

         "Rather it seems to me that only comparatively rarely, certainly in
         family cases involving children, should  an  article  8  appeal  be
         dismissed on the basis that it  would  be  proportionate  and  more
         appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad."

 4. Mr Tarlow submitted that this was not a  case  in  which  children  are
    involved and accordingly Judge Davidge fell into error by applying  the
    Chikwamba principle.  It was  also  pointed  out  that  the  period  of
    separation  pending  an  application  for  entry  clearance  would   be
    temporary, as Judge Davidge acknowledged at [16] of her decision.

 5. Mr Alam submitted that the grounds were misconceived and that there was
    no error of law, or none that was material.  He relied on two decisions
    in particular: Chen v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    IJR UKUT 00189 (IAC) and Agyarko v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11, in particular at  [51].   It  was  submitted
    that there was nothing in Chikwamba or subsequent cases that  indicated
    that there was a need for there to  be  children  to  be  involved  for
    Chikwamba to apply.

 6. So far  as  an  application  for  entry  clearance  is  concerned,  the
    requirement of insurmountable obstacles which the respondent relied  on
    in support of the appeal was not a requirement for entry clearance.  In
    this case the appellant met the  financial  requirements,  the  English
    language  requirements  and  the  relationship  requirements.   It  was
    accepted that the eligibility requirements were not  met  in  terms  of
    insurmountable  obstacles  and  paragraph  EX.2.,  but   insurmountable
    obstacles are not a requirement of the Rules for entry clearance.

 7. It was pointed out that Judge Davidge had referred to  paragraph  EX.1.
    of Appendix FM at [5(a)] of her decision.  At [13] she  identified  the
    undisputed facts. She resolved the disputed facts, in part, against the
    appellant, concluding that the fact that the appellant's husband was on
    licence in relation to the criminal offence that he had  committed  was
    not a matter that could avail her.

 8. It was further submitted that whilst Judge Davidge did not refer to the
    decision in Chen, she in fact made her decision in line with  it.   She
    considered proportionality at  [17]  and  made  an  overall  assessment
    taking into account all matters at [22].

 9. As regards the period of overstaying by the appellant, it was  accepted
    that that was a period that started on 25 May  2018  and  was  for  six
    months until the application made in November 2018 but continuing until
    the appellant is granted leave.  Nevertheless, it  was  submitted  that
    periods  of  overstaying  do  not  defeat  an  application  for   entry
    clearance, at least not per se, and no such proposition was advanced on
    behalf of the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed,  none
    was advanced before me.  It was accepted on behalf  of  the  respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the requirements of the Rules  were
    met in terms of suitability.

    Assessment

10. It is evident that Judge Davidge considered all material  factors.   At
    [17] she set out the matters that went to proportionality  and  fleshed
    those out at [22].  In the first sentence of [22] she said this:

         "Before me it is accepted that  all  the  substantive  requirements
         have been demonstrated to the respondent's satisfaction."

    She referred to the public interest normally  associated  with  an  in-
    country "rules-based" position, being reduced because the  respondent's
    reasoning showed that a fresh application made in Bangladesh would meet
    the Rules and so would be bound to succeed.  She went on to state  that
    little weight was to be attached to private life in this case and  that
    the family life enjoyed in the UK had been built up in the  context  of
    precarious leave.  She noted that the appellant  has  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully and she referred to s.117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 in terms of  the  weight  to  be  afforded  to  the
    appellant's life in the UK in the context of unlawful presence.

11. She referred to other issues, such as the appellant's English  language
    ability, her ability to integrate, and her financial independence.  She
    concluded that nothing adverse flowed from the financial  and  language
    situation but correctly stated that those were neutral  considerations.
    She noted that there were no children of the relationship.

12. At [23] she said as follows:

         "In my balance  sheet  assessment  of  the  appellant's  article  8
         position  weighing  against  is   the   reduced   public   interest
         represented by removal of an appellant for a procedural requirement
         of making her application abroad.  Removal serves no good  purpose.
         There is no substantive immigration control benefit.  On the  other
         hand is the weight I  attach  to  the  family  life.   I  find  the
         positive outweighs the negative.  The proportionality balance falls
         in favour of the appellant."

13. In my judgement,  Judge  Davidge's  decision  is  consistent  with  the
    applicable legal framework and  with  authority.   It  is  correct,  as
    submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  that  the  issue  of   very
    significant  obstacles  does  not,  and  would  not,  feature   in   an
    application for entry clearance.   Judge  Davidge  correctly  concluded
    that all the entry clearance requirements would be met  in  a  putative
    application. Her assessment that no public interest would be served  by
    requiring the appellant to make such an application for entry clearance
    was one that was open to her and is free from legal error.

    Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Its decision to allow the appeal  therefore
    stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 20/11/19


