
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/09440/2015
     hu/09442/2015
     hu/09445/2015
     hu/09447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 14th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Abdenour [R]
                                  Lamia [R]
                                    [RR]
                                    [AR]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel instructed by Saifee
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Algeria.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife and the third and fourth Appellants are
    their children.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the
    decisions of the Secretary of State to refuse  their  applications  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  their  private  and  family
    life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel  allowed  their  appeals  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16th December 2016.  The Secretary of State now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

Background to this Appeal

 3. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  which  have  not  been
    challenged, are that the first Appellant entered the  UK  illegally  in
    June 1997 and remained without leave. The second Appellant entered  the
    UK in 2006 on a visit visa and joined the first Appellant.   The  third
    and fourth Appellants were born and have lived all their lives  in  the
    UK.  At the time of the application the third Appellant was 6 years old
    but had reached the age of 8 years  old  by  the  time  of  the  appeal
    hearing.  The third Appellant attends primary school and has a  medical
    condition relating to her  hips  and  feet  and  has  received  medical
    treatment to correct these issues.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge firstly considered the appeals under  the
    Immigration Rules.  In unchallenged findings the judge found that  they
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis
    of their private or family life.  The judge took into account the  fact
    that at the date of the application the third and fourth Appellants had
    not been in the UK for seven years and the first and second  Appellants
    had been in the UK for less than twenty years.  The judge found that it
    had not been established that there would be very significant obstacles
    to the first Appellant's integration in Algeria.

 5. The judge went on to consider whether it was appropriate to look at the
    appeals under freestanding Article 8 and considered the guidance in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.   The  judge  identified  the  compelling
    circumstances in this case as being the fact that the best interests of
    the  children  had  not  been  ventilated  in  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge went on  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 through the step by step approach set out  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  In so doing the  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellants  have
    established a private life within the UK and went on  to  consider  the
    proportionality of the decision.  The  judge  considered  a  number  of
    factors and concluded that it would not be  reasonable  for  the  third
    Appellant to leave the UK. In  the  context  of  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 she decided that, as  they
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with the third Appellant,  it
    would be disproportionate to remove the first  and  second  Appellants.
    She decided, due to his very young age and the fact that he has  always
    lived with his family, it would be in the best interests of the  fourth
    Appellant to remain with his family.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    balancing exercise is "overwhelmingly in  the  Appellants'  favour"  in
    that the removal of the first and second Appellants  to  Algeria  would
    have a detrimental effect on the third Appellant and would amount to  a
    disproportionate interference in their private and  family  life.   The
    judge allowed the human rights appeals of all of the Appellants [38].

 6. In her Grounds of appeal the Secretary  of  State  contended  that  the
    judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  or  made  a   material
    misdirection in law or made irrational findings.  It is contended  that
    the judge had failed to adequately reason the findings relating to  the
    third Appellant's private life.  It is contended that it is  irrational
    to find that the third Appellant would have no  knowledge  of  Algerian
    language and culture having been raised by Algerian parents in the  UK.
    It is contended that the judge had not asked himself whether the  third
    Appellant would be young enough to learn the Algerian language.  It  is
    contended that it is irrational to conclude that  the  third  Appellant
    had established a private life of her own that is not wholly  dependent
    on her parents.  It is contended that the judge materially  misdirected
    herself in  failing  to  adhere  to  the  principles  set  down  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and failed to take into account  all  of
    the factors set out in that decision.  It is further contended that the
    judge failed to properly reason  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration  control  considering  the  family's  negative  immigration
    history and the economic welfare and recourse to public funds.   It  is
    further contended that the judge erred in failing to make any  findings
    in the situation the family would face in Algeria on return and  it  is
    contended that there are no findings on education,  health,  employment
    or housing within the determination and little or no findings on public
    interest.  In these circumstances it is argued that the judge failed to
    adequately reason the findings in relation to the third  Appellant  and
    those findings border on irrationality.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission on 10th  July  2017
    on the basis that the grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that the First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge's  decision  was  made  in  a  vacuum  without   proper
    consideration of all of the facts.  It  is  contended  that  the  judge
    considered the best interests of the child at paragraph 34 but  stopped
    her consideration at that point.  It is argued that the judge used this
    factor as a trump card but failed to undertake the  balancing  exercise
    set out in MA (Pakistan).  She argued that the judge did  not  identify
    the pros and cons for and against the Appellants before coming  to  her
    overall conclusion.  Miss Willocks-Briscoe  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to take account of the factors listed in EV (Philippines) [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 at paragraphs 58 and 60.  It is contended that  the  judge
    failed to  take  into  account  a  number  of  factors  in  considering
    proportionality including the fact that if the third Appellant  had  to
    leave the UK she would be doing so within the family unit  which  would
    provide for protective factors.  In her submission the judge has failed
    to identify what makes this decision unreasonable and  failed  to  take
    into account real world factors as  highlighted  in  EV  (Philippines).
    She also argued that the judge failed to grapple with balancing all  of
    the factors in Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  against  the  positive
    factors identified.

 9. Ms Victor-Mazeli submitted that the Secretary of State raised two broad
    points in relation to  the  judge's  decision.   It  appears  that  the
    Secretary of State contends that  the  public  interest  has  not  been
    properly  considered.   However  in  her  submission  it  was  properly
    considered the  Appellants  were  considered  as  a  family  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  When  the  judge  considered  the  situation  under
    Article 8 she did so in a coherent way  having  decided  SS  Congo  and
    identified compelling factors before going on to look  at  the  factors
    relevant to the case. In considering proportionality the judge properly
    set out the factors in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The judge set out
    the factors against the Appellant  including  the  reliance  on  public
    monies and the immigration status of the first and  second  Appellants.
    Therefore the judge has undertaken a full assessment of all of the pros
    and cons in this case.  She submitted that the judge has  undertaken  a
    thorough analysis of the  situation  of  the  third  Appellant  and  in
    particular through Section 117B(6).  In her submission  the  judge  was
    not required to go through the cases one by one but to  deal  with  the
    principles and issues and she properly directed herself in relation  to
    those matters.

10. In response Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge looked at  the
    public interest in terms of the Rules.  Although the  judge  looked  at
    Section 117B and the factors  there,  she  submitted  that  the  public
    interest is not limited  to  those  factors  and  has  to  be  a  wider
    consideration of  the  facts  and  the  real  world  factors.   In  her
    submission the judge looked at the  factors  which  support  the  third
    Appellant but not those which do not. She argued that the judge  failed
    to engage in relation to  issues  relating  to  the  third  Appellant's
    education in Algeria or how she could maintain friendships built in the
    UK upon  return  to  Algeria  and  ignored  the  fact  that  the  third
    Appellant's parents are Algerian and fails to ask  why  they  have  not
    brought her up in the Algerian culture.  In her submission the issue is
    the method and approach undertaken by the judge who  has  not  properly
    considered all relevant factors.  She submitted that the  judge  failed
    to identify evidence to substantiate her findings.

Error of Law

11. In my view the judge took the  proper  approach  to  this  appeal.  She
    firstly set out the evidence and  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof
    before going on to consider the previous decision made  by  a  previous
    judge in July 2014 in accordance  with  the  principles  in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 007021.  The judge made findings at paragraphs 19  to  23.
    The judge then went on to apply the law to those findings.   The  judge
    firstly considered the Immigration Rules and made unchallenged findings
    in relation to those.

12. The judge considered Article 8 from paragraph  27.   Having  identified
    that there were compelling circumstances to consider the appeals  under
    freestanding  Article  8  the  judge  considered  in   particular   the
    circumstances of the third Appellant.

13.  In  considering  the  situation  of  the  third  Appellant  the  judge
    considered factors to be weighed against  the  Appellants  taking  into
    account the public interest factors set out at Section 117B noting that
    the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is engaged.  The judge noted that the third  Appellant  is  in
    school and receives medical treatment which is provided for from public
    monies that she will continue to be treated medically at public expense
    and if they remain the family will have the capacity  to  access  other
    publicly funded services and benefits.  The judge also noted  that  the
    Appellants have never been granted any kind of leave with the exception
    of entry clearance for the second Appellant as a visitor and noted that
    little weight ought to be attached  to  the  private  life  established
    [33].  Therefore  in  my  view,  contrary  to  the  submission  of  the
    Secretary of State, the judge did take into account the factors against
    the Appellants in terms of the public interest.

14. The judge considered factors in favour of the Appellants including  the
    finding that if the family were to be returned  to  Algeria  the  third
    Appellant will be isolated as she did not speak the language and  would
    be leaving the life she knew to go to a culture and country  completely
    alien to her [28].  The judge also considered the fact that the  family
    speak English, are not on benefits and are self-sufficient  [33].   The
    judge considered circumstances  relevant  to  the  third  Appellant  at
    paragraph 34 including the fact that she has attended school in the UK,
    has been resident in the UK for eight years, has participated in the UK
    culture,  values,  pastimes,  living  standards,   language   and   the
    prevailing education system having made good  academic  progress.   The
    judge noted that her connection with Algeria  is  minimal.   The  judge
    found for those reasons that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    third Appellant to leave the UK.  In my view the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for this conclusion having set out all of the factors in favour
    of the third Appellant including her length of residence in the UK, her
    integration in the UK in terms of her education and other  factors  and
    her lack of connection with Algeria including her  inability  to  speak
    the language, her disconnect from the  culture  and  also  her  medical
    condition.  Contrary to the submission of  the  Secretary  of  State  I
    accept that the judge gave sufficient reasons for  concluding  that  it
    was not reasonable to expect the third Appellant to leave the UK.

15. The judge then considered Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  in  the
    context of the first and second Appellants.  The  judge's  unchallenged
    finding that the  first  and  second  Appellants  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the third  Appellant.   Based  on
    the findings that it was not reasonable to expect the  third  Appellant
    to leave the UK the judge allowed the appeals of the first  and  second
    Appellants following Section 117B(6).  In  light  of  the  findings  in
    relating to the first, second and third Appellants the judge found that
    it was in the best interests of the fourth Appellant to live  with  his
    family and that it was proportionate to allow him to  remain  with  the
    family.

16. In my view it is clear that the judge took into  account  all  relevant
    factors, gave sufficient reasons for  the  findings  made  and  reached
    conclusions open to her on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  her.
    Therefore I conclude that the judge made no material error  of  law  in
    her approach to the Appellants' appeals.



Notice of Decision

The judge made no material error of law in the decisions.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated: 12th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                              Dated: 12th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

