
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09710/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 06 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                            mr amit kumar basnet
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal.  He was born on 24 June 1987.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain dated 22 March 2016.

 3. The appeal was allowed by Judge  O'Garro  (the  Judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 June 2018.  She found the respondent  had  failed  to
    prove the allegation of fraud and that the case had not been  made  out
    against the appellant.  Having found that the appellant did not  engage
    in fraud, and that he therefore met the suitability  requirements,  the
    Judge found the respondent's decision was not proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim  the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on a material matter.  The grounds cite the  case  of  Shehzad
    [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615  and  claim  that  properly  read,  the  witness
    statements the respondent  relied  upon  and  the  spreadsheet  extract
    showed the appellant's  English  language  test  had  been  invalidated
    because of evidence of fraud in the test he took.

 5. Given the Judge accepted that  the  evidential  burden  fell  upon  the
    appellant to first offer an innocent  explanation  that  had  not  been
    adequately addressed, it  is  not  clear  why  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant which the Judge relied upon would preclude the use of a proxy
    test taker during the test.   The  appellant  had  simply  described  a
    process which the respondent claimed was not the same as  an  "innocent
    explanation" for why  ETS  found  such  anomalies  as  to  warrant  the
    invalidation of his test scores.  The  grounds  claim  that  the  Judge
    erred because the appellant had failed to displace the evidence of  the
    Secretary of State which had been  accepted  as  satisfying  the  first
    burden and as such, the Judge's conclusion that the appellant  did  not
    use a proxy was in error.

 6. In reaching the material finding the Judge relied upon the  appellant's
    English language ability and other English qualifications but the  test
    was not whether the appellant spoke English but whether on the  balance
    of probabilities he had employed deception.  The witness statements and
    the spreadsheet provided the necessary evidence to demonstrate that  he
    did apply deception (see MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 at [57]).

 7. Judge Page refused permission to appeal in a decision dated  3  October
    2018.  He said inter alia:

         "2.  The grounds of appeal complain that the judge did  not  accept
             the respondent's case that the appellant had used a proxy test
             taker to obtain his  TOEIC  certificate  and  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's  evidence  that
             he had  not  used  deception  in  obtaining  his  certificate.
             Neither ground is arguable in my  view.   The  judge  was  not
             bound to accept the respondent's evidence as  conclusive  that
             the appellant had used deception.  It  is  apparent  that  the
             judge applied all the case law on the point.   After  weighing
             the appellant's evidence and  the  respondent's  evidence  the
             judge gave adequate  reasons  for  believing  the  appellant's
             evidence."

 8. The grounds were resubmitted to the Upper Tribunal arguing  that  Judge
    Page had failed to fully engage with the grounds.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission  on  11  December  2018.
    She said:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in finding that the  appellant
         had not used a proxy in an ETS TOEIC test purely on  the  basis  of
         his ability in the English language."

10. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

11. Mr Lindsay relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He said that the Judge's
    finding at [28] was insufficient and drew my attention  to  MA  (ETS  -
    TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC).  Mr Lindsay  submitted  that  the
    Judge had paid merely lip service to the relevant case law she set out,
    Gazi (ETS - judicial review) [2015] UKUT, SM and Qadir (ETS -  evidence
    - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229, Sheehan and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA
    Civ and MA.  There was prima facie evidence of fraud, so the Judge  was
    obliged to give proper reasons.

12. Mr Ahmed  submitted  that  the  Judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  the
    respondent's  evidence  as  conclusive  that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception.  She had applied all of the case law, properly  weighed  the
    evidence and gave adequate reasons for believing the appellant.

13. At the hearing before the Judge, the respondent was satisfied that  the
    appellant met all of the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM.   The
    only issue was the claimed deception on the part of the  appellant  who
    submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS)
    and  there  was  significant  evidence  to  conclude  the   appellant's
    certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy taker.   As
    a result, ETS cancelled his scores from the test that was taken  on  19
    March 2013.  That being the case, the respondent said that on the basis
    of the information provided by ETS, the  certificate  was  fraudulently
    obtained and that the appellant used deception in his application  made
    on 12 April 2013.

14. Save for what I have said above, ETS failed to provide evidence  as  to
    the reason  the  certificate  was  invalidated.   There  was  no  audio
    recording of the appellant or the alleged proxy and the  score  results
    for 19 March 2013 were incomplete as those  for  the  English  speaking
    tests were absent.  All that were  available  were  the  listening  and
    reading tests.  The respondent produced an  English  language  speaking
    certificate dated 16 April 2013 but that was a later test taken by  the
    appellant such that the wrong certificate had been  submitted  for  the
    Judge's consideration.

15. The Judge nevertheless considered the generic evidence in the statement
    of Rebecca Collings which said that ETS was "certain"  that  there  was
    evidence of proxy taking.  Accordingly, the Judge found  at  [24]  that
    the Secretary of State had discharged the evidential burden to raise an
    issue that the appellant was guilty of deception.  The Judge then  went
    on to consider the  appellant's  evidence  in  terms  of  any  possible
    innocent explanation.  The Judge set  out  the  factors  to  take  into
    account at [26].  Mr Lindsay  said  that  the  Judge  merely  paid  lip
    service to those factors, however, at [27]-[31] the Judge gave  all  of
    the reasons why she found that the respondent had not made out the case
    of  deception  against  the  appellant.   The  Judge   considered   the
    following:

      a) The appellant's academic record.  He came here in 2009 and  studied
         until 2013.  He produced provisional notification results  of  ACCA
         examinations he took in 2010.   He  achieved  a  pass  in  business
         accounting, financial accounting  and  management  accounting.   He
         produced his certificates for the award he received in January 2013
         for a level 7 BTEC diploma as  well  as  the  certificate  for  the
         Master of Business administration  course  which  he  completed  in
         April 2014.  The appellant's course of  studies  included  level  7
         courses which the Judge found would have required a high  level  of
         English language skills.

      b) Considering the issues in (a) above, the  Judge  found  that  there
         appeared to be no reason for the appellant to have needed  to  have
         used deception or to employ a proxy test taker.

      c) The Judge said she had concentrated on  the  appellant's  level  of
         English prior to 2013 because she said she found  it  necessary  to
         consider the appellant's proficiency in English prior to  19  March
         2013 which was the relevant date.

      d) The Judge commented that she could not overlook the  fact  that  he
         gave evidence before her  in  English  and  had  no  difficulty  in
         understanding the questions asked and responding  appropriately  in
         English.  Nevertheless, the Judge took into  account  that  it  was
         five years since the ETS test and she would expect  that  he  would
         speak better English today than in 2013.  Nevertheless,  in  taking
         that into account, she reflected back  upon  the  appellant  having
         started successfully a level 7 course of study in 2010 which  would
         have required a high level of English language skills.

      e) The Judge took into account the  appellant's  oral  evidence.   She
         said that she had seen the appellant, heard what he had to say  and
         that she believed him.  That was a matter for the Judge to consider
         and to decide.  Based upon  the  evidence  overall,  the  appellant
         found the respondent had not discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in
         order to satisfy the Judge that the appellant had used deception in
         a previous application.  That was a decision which  the  Judge  was
         entitled to come to on the evidence before her.

16. The Judge's decision contains no error of law and shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
