
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09373/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|hearing                              |On 16 November 2020                  |
|On 11 November 2020                  |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                                     A C
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant  or  his  minor
daughter. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them.  This direction applies to both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent and all other persons. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. The appellant sought  an
oral hearing. The respondent did not  object.  The  documents  described  at
para 4 below were submitted. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing  was
not held for the reasons given at paras 9-14 below. The order  made  is  set
out at para 29 below. (Administrative Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior
President of Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     [no written submissions]
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, a national of  Bangladesh  born  on  6  September  1962,
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on  4  September
    2019 following a hearing on 8 August  2019,  dismissed  his  appeal  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8) against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 15 April 2019 (not 10 April 2018, as stated at para 1 of the Judge's
    decision)  to refuse his representations on human rights  grounds  made
    in response to a notification by the respondent that she was seeking to
    deport him as a foreign criminal. As the index offences  were  offences
    for which the appellant was sentenced to  21  months'  and  14  months'
    imprisonment (concurrent), he was a "medium offender" as  explained  by
    the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) and others v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ
    662.

 2. On 13 May 2020, the Upper Tribunal issued  directions  to  the  parties
    seeking submissions on whether it would be appropriate in  the  instant
    case to decide the following questions without a hearing:

    (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making of an  error
         of law; and

    (b)  if so, whether it should be set aside.

 3. On 5 August 2020, the Upper Tribunal again  issued  directions  to  the
    parties.

 4. In response to the two sets  of  directions,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received the following:

    (i)  on the  appellant's  behalf,  a  document  entitled:  "Submissions
         following  Covid-19  directions"  by  Mr  M  Symes,   of   Counsel,
         instructed by Lawmatic  Solicitors,  submitted  under  cover  of  a
         letter dated 28 May 2020 and emailed to the Upper  Tribunal  on  28
         May 2020, timed at 17:48; and

    (ii) on the respondent's behalf, a document entitled: "SSHD's  response
         to Directions" dated 13 August 2020 by Mr Tufan submitted by  email
         dated 13 August 2020 timed at 15:31 hours.

The issues

 5. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

    (i)  whether it  is  appropriate  to  decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

         (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the  making  of  an
             error on a point of law; and

         (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.

    (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against the
         respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal  or
         whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 6. At para 2  of  his  written  submissions,  Mr  Symes  stated  that  the
    appellant sought an oral hearing.

 7. At para 9 of his submissions, Mr Tufan stated that, in the respondent's
    view, an oral hearing was not necessary.

 8. I have considered the circumstances for myself.

 9. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

10. The appeal in the instant case is straightforward. In addition, I  take
    into account the seriousness of the issues in the  instant  appeal  for
    the appellant. This appeal relates to the protected human rights of the
    appellant and members of his  family,  including  his  minor  daughter.
    These are  matters  of  some  seriousness  as  the  outcome  will  have
    considerable impact upon all of them.

11. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 to the effect, inter alia, that "oral argument is perhaps
    the most powerful force there is, in our legal process,  to  promote  a
    change of mind by a judge".  However,  having  considered  the  Judge's
    decision, the grounds and the parties' submissions,  I  concluded  that
    the Judge did materially err in law, that his decision  should  be  set
    aside and  that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Accordingly, there is no prejudice to  the  appellant  by  my
    proceeding to decide the Issues without a hearing notwithstanding  that
    he requests an oral hearing.

12. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal is now listing  some  cases  for
    face-to-face hearings and using technology to hold hearings remotely in
    other cases where it is appropriate to do so, the fact is  that  it  is
    not possible to accommodate all cases in  one  of  these  ways  without
    undue delay to all cases. Of course, the need  to  be  fair  cannot  be
    sacrificed.

13. There are cases that can fairly be decided without a  hearing.  In  the
    present unprecedented circumstances brought about  by  the  coronavirus
    pandemic, it is my duty to identify those  cases  that  can  fairly  be
    decided without a hearing.

14. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

15. Mr Tufan correctly states in his submissions that, as Leggatt  LJ  said
    in CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2027, it is unnecessary for a  Tribunal
    or  Court  to  refer  to  paras  398-399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Nevertheless, it is a concern in the instant case that  the  Judge,  in
    setting out the provisions of paras 399 and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at paras 8-9 of  his  decision,  set  out  provisions  which  are
    obsolete. For example, para 8.a.(a) of the Judge's decision  refers  to
    the test of whether it would be reasonable for a  qualifying  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom and para 9.2 to whether the appellant is  able
    to show that "he has no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)
    with the country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
    UK".

16. This is relevant in deciding whether  the  appellant  has  had  a  fair
    hearing when considered in conjunction with the errors of law  set  out
    below that I am satisfied he did make.

17. In his written submissions, Mr Tufan accepted that there were errors of
    law in the Judge's decision. He drew attention to  the  fact  that  the
    Judge  referred  to  Masih  (Deportation  -public  interest   -   basic
    principles) [2010] UKUT 00046 (IAC) and the fact that there  have  been
    further developments in case  law  since  Masih,  none  of  which  were
    considered by the Judge. As Mr  Symes  submitted  at  para  19  of  his
    written submissions, Masih pre-dated the reformulation of human  rights
    in the Immigration Rules with effect from July 2012.

18. The mere fact that a judge does not refer to recent case-law  does  not
    mean that he failed to  apply  relevant  principles.  However,  in  the
    instant case, the Judge said at paras 43 and 44 as follows:

         "43. The appellant committed a serious  fraud  and  theft  offences
             against an old, sick and vulnerable made [sic], for  which  he
             shows no remorse whatsoever.

         44.  I have considered all aspects of 2014  Act  in  coming  to  my
             decision and  find  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  any
             qualifying aspects under any  of  the  sub-sections  for  this
             legislation. In the circumstances I find that the respondent's
             decision is wholly proportionate to deport this  appellant  to
             Bangladesh".

19. Given that the Judge did not  set  out  a  version  of  para  398  that
    referred to the test of whether there are very compelling circumstances
    over and above the exceptions and that  he  did  not  consider  whether
    there were such very compelling circumstances, his reasoning at para 43
    of his decision must relate to his findings concerning the exception(s)
    he did consider, i.e. his finding at para 40 that:

         "... it will bot [sic] be dully [sic] harsh  for  [the  appellant's
         wife and minor daughter] to continue to reside in the UK in absence
         of the appellant".

20. If this is right, then it follows that the Judge erred in law by taking
    into account (at para 43) the seriousness of the  appellant's  offences
    in deciding whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant and  his
    minor daughter to live in the United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant,
    contrary to the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) &  Others
    v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

21. The Judge appeared not to be aware  that,  in  the  case  of  a  medium
    offender who fails to  satisfy  the  exceptions,  it  is  necessary  to
    consider whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above
    the exceptions. He failed to consider this issue, making  no  reference
    at all to it in his decision. This fact, taken together with  the  fact
    that he referred to Masih, which was decided before the  amendments  to
    the Immigration Rules in July 2012, and that he said at para 44 that he
    found the respondent's decision to "wholly proportionate", demonstrates
    that he had in mind, and applied, obsolete principles.

22. Whilst para 8.a.(a) of the Judge's decision referred  to  the  test  of
    whether it was reasonable for a qualifying child to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, the Judge said, at para 40, that "... it  will  bot  [sic]  be
    dully [sic] harsh for them to continue to reside in the UK  in  absence
    of the appellant". The decision is therefore confused. It is  difficult
    to be confident that he was aware of and applied the correct test, that
    is, whether:

         "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the [qualifying child/partner] to
             live in the country to which the person is to be deported; and



         (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the [qualifying child/partner] to
             remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported;"

23. In his written submissions, Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the  Judge  gave
    insufficient consideration  to  the  medical  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's minor  daughter.  Having  considered  paras  12-16  of  the
    written submissions of Mr Symes, I entirely agree.

24. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in law in each of the ways  that  I
    have identified above.  Furthermore,  given  that  he  plainly  applied
    obsolete principles, an obsolete  version  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    referred to case-law that was decided before the fundamental amendments
    made to the Immigration Rules with effect from  July  2012,  failed  to
    demonstrate that he was aware of and had applied  the  guidance  in  KO
    (Nigeria), I am driven to conclude that the appellant  simply  has  not
    had a fair hearing of his case.

25. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the Judge  to
    dismiss the appeal. His summary of the evidence he heard, at paras  23-
    30 of his decision, shall stand as a record of the  evidence  given  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

26. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

27. In my judgement, this case plainly falls within both para 7.2  (a)  and
    (b). Accordingly, the appropriate course of action  is  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    decision on the appellant's appeal.

28. The Judge made an anonymity order. He did not explain his  reasons.  It
    is not evident from the material before me that an anonymity  order  is
    appropriate in the instant case. The principle of open  justice  is  an
    important one. The appellant's minor daughter can  be  referred  to  by
    means of an acronym. The appellant's medical condition does not  appear
    to warrant an anonymity order. I have maintained  the  anonymity  order
    pending submissions on the point. The appellant  will  be  expected  to
    explain at the next hearing in the First-tier Tribunal why an anonymity
    order is necessary.



Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that the decision is set aside in  its  entirety.
    This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    on the merits on all issues by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal M A Khan.


Signed   Date: 11 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill




        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email


