
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09112/2017
     HU/09780/2017
     hu/09781/2017
     hu/09783/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th April 2019                            |On 15th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                 Pritpal [K]
                                Harcharan [K]
                                    [K K]
                                    [S K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan born on 15th May 1988,  14th
    August 1993 who is the appellant's wife and the children  are  born  on
    12th January 2012 and 16th April 2016.  They are the dependants on  the
    first appellant's appeal.  I  shall  however  for  ease  of  reference,
    continue to refer to them as they were in the  proceedings  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   Judge P S Aujla of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellants'
    appeal in a decision dated  12th  January  2019.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett gave permission to appeal the  decision  on  13th  March
    2019 stating that it is arguable that the judge erred in  treating  the
    appeal as an asylum appeal when there was  no  asylum  decision  before
    him.  The judge also found that it is arguable that the judge erred  in
    failing to apply Devaseelan UKIAT  00702  in  failing  to  address  the
    respondent's position on the expert report in full failing to  consider
    the current country conditions when allowing the appeal.

3.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the   appellants   have
    established on the lower standard of proof that he has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for a 1951 Convention reason if he is  returned  to
    Afghanistan.

 4. At the hearing ground 1 and 2 was not pursued by Ms Pal who represented
    the respondent.  Ground 3 essentially talks about the Devaseelan  point
    and the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision at paragraph 39 where  the
    Judge decided that he was not going to treat the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jones as a starting point  given  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan where a previous decision in respect of the appellant  by  a
    Tribunal must be considered as the starting point  for  any  subsequent
    decision. Ground 4 is  that  the  judge  did  not  follow  the  country
    guidance case of PG Afghan (Sikhs persecution) Afghanistan [2015]  UKUT
    00539 and instead relied on the expert report of  Professor  Giustozzi.
    Ground 5 states that there was a misapprehension by the judge that  the
    latest country evidence was limited to 2005 rather than 2015 which  was
    a serious mistake of fact which further compounded the findings of  the
    judge.

My Decision as to whether there is an error of law

 5. Having considered the submissions made on behalf of  both  parties  and
    the decision of Judge Aujla there is no question in my mind that  there
    have been material errors of law.  First in respect of  the  Devaseelan
    principle the way I understand Devaseelan is that  the  decision  of  a
    previous  judge  is  the  starting  point  for  any  subsequent  judge.
    Although it was argued on behalf of the appellant that even though  the
    judge said that he was not going to treat the decision  as  a  starting
    point, he in fact did so.

 6. I do not agree with that submission  because  the  Judge  categorically
    stated that he was not going to consider the previous decision  as  his
    starting point. The Judge is entitled to  take  evidence  into  account
    subsequent to that decision and that which was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Even though the first tier  Tribunal  do  not  find  the
    appellant credible, it was open to the Judge to have found him credible
    but only after giving reasons but Judge Jones findings in his  decision
    must be the starting point of the appellant circumstances and status as
    at the date it was made.  Not to do so is material error of law.

 7. I also found that the Judge made a mistake of fact at paragraph 42 when
    he said the country guidance case was promulgated in  2005  because  he
    states in his decision that it is clear that  a  lot  has  happened  in
    Afghanistan since 2005. However the country guidance  case  of  TG  was
    promulgated in 2015 with updated evidence as of that date.  This  is  a
    clear factual error amounting to an error of law  which  might  explain
    why the Judge decided to rely on the subsequent evidence  of  Professor
    Giustozzi for departing from it.

 8. I agree with the submissions made by Ms Pal that if the Judge is  going
    to depart from a country guidance  case,  which  of  course  he  it  is
    entitled to do, but he can only do so if  there  are  very  strong  and
    cogent reasons given for departing from it.  There is nothing  in  this
    decision which demonstrates to me  that  the  Judge  has  given  cogent
    reasons for departing from the country guidance  case.   Uniformity  of
    decision making is very important and  that  is  why  we  have  country
    guidance cases.

 9. Dr Giustozzi's report cannot  misplace  the  decision  of  the  country
    guidance case.  The decision is therefore not safe and I set  it  aside
    as finding that there are material errors of law therein.  I find  that
    material  findings  have  to  be  made  additional  evidence  might  be
    required, country guidance case has to be considered  and  therefore  I
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  placed  before  any
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 10th day of May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 10th day of May 2019


