
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09138/2017
                                                               HU/09142/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2019                          |On 20th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [g s]
                                    [K S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Appiah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  10th  October  2018,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana ("the Judge") dismissed the linked appeals brought
    by the appellants, following refusal of their  applications  for  entry
    clearance.

2.    The  decision  begins  by  purporting  to  record  the  names  of  the
    representatives.  Ms Appiah of Counsel, who appeared before  the  Judge
    in the First-tier Tribunal, confirmed that the name which appeared  was
    not hers.  A Home Office Presenting Officer is also  named,  as  acting
    for the respondent in the appeal.   Mr  Avery,  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, confirmed that no Presenting Officer was present at the hearing.



3.   At paragraph 14 of the decision, the Judge refers to  cross-examination
    and  summarises  evidence  which  apparently  emerged  from  it.    She
    distinguishes this evidence from what emerged in  questions  from  her,
    which are summarised at paragraph  15.   At  paragraph  17,  the  Judge
    records that she heard submissions from both  parties  as  follows:  "I
    heard submissions from the from both parties in the full notes  of  the
    hearing are in my Record of Proceedings (sic)."  The file does  contain
    the Record of Proceedings but the front page is not completed so as  to
    show who was present at the hearing and the handwritten  notes  contain
    on one page "XX", which is often used as an  abbreviation  for  "cross-
    examination".  As there was no Presenting Officer at the hearing, it is
    not clear what the Judge had in mind.

4.   Mr Avery said that the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  decision
    contained an error of law.  In addition to the  inaccuracies  regarding
    the representatives, he accepted that there were other  errors  in  the
    assessment of the evidence.

5.   I find that the decision contains a material error of  law,  such  that
    it should be set aside and remade.  Someone reading the decision  would
    conclude that the Judge's  findings  were  based  on  submissions  from
    representatives of both parties and that a witness was  cross-examined.
    In reality, the appeal was not decided on this basis at all.

6.   The parties were agreed that the appropriate  venue  for  remaking  the
    decision is the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  decision  will  be  remade
    there, by a Judge other than Judge Chana.  The findings of fact made in
    the decision are not preserved.

DECISION

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  as  containing  a
material error or errors of law.  The decision will be remade in the  First-
tier Tribunal, by a Judge other than Judge Chana.


Signed                                  Date: 18th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no  order  or  direction  for  anonymity.
There has been no application before me and I make no order or direction  on
this occasion.


Signed                                  Date: 18th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



