
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09190/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 June 2019                              |On 13 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                   A-O. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby of Counsel instructed by Quintessence
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This case comes back before the Tribunal to remake the decision in  the
    appeal, pursuant to the 'error of law' decision promulgated on 11 April
    2019, and the Directions contained therein.


2.   By way of background, the text of  the  'error  of  law'  decision  and
    Directions are reproduced as an Annex to this Decision. The text should
    be read as an integral part of this Decision.


3.   I have had regard to all the evidence  on  file.  In  addition  to  the
    materials on file before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to  the
    Directions issued on  11  April  2019  the  Tribunal  has  received:  a
    Supplementary Bundle filed on behalf of the Appellant  under  cover  of
    letter dated 8 May 2019; a copy of the Cafcass report (dated  4  August
    2015), together with the Appellant's mother's statement dated  14  July
    2015 in support of an application for a Child Arrangement Order, and  a
    letter from  the  Family  Court  at  East  London  dated  17  May  2019
    confirming consent to disclose such documents to  the  Tribunal  (filed
    under cover of letter dated 23 May 2019). I also  heard  oral  evidence
    from the sponsor, a note  of  which  is  contained  in  the  record  of
    proceedings herein.


Initial Observations

4.   It is convenient in the first instance  to  approach  the  evidence  by
    making some observations pursuant  to  the  matters  discussed  in  the
    'error of law' decision, and raised in the Directions.


5.   In preliminary observations Mr Sowerby acknowledged the nature  of  the
    discussion in respect of 'sole responsibility' ('error of law' decision
    at paragraphs 41-54), and indicated that he accepted that that argument
    had been 'had and lost'. He also indicated further to the discussion in
    respect of the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 25 et  seq)  that  it  was
    accepted that Appendix FM did not apply to the Appellant. He  indicated
    that the Appellant's emphasis in submissions would  be  in  respect  of
    'best interests' and how they informed proportionality under Article 8,
    in which context it was contended that schooling in  Nigeria  would  be
    problematic for the Appellant because there would  be  nobody  to  look
    after her.


6.    Witness  statements  of  both  the  sponsor  (7  May  2019)  and   the
    Appellant's mother (8 May  2019)  stated  that  they  had  commenced  a
    relationship under "native law and custom" in May 2008, and  had  lived
    together from that time until June 2014 when the sponsor moved back  to
    the UK.


7.   As regards the Appellant's  schooling  in  Nigeria,  the  same  witness
    statements stated that she had  attended  a  private  school  from  the
    academic year 2009/2010 up to and including the academic year 2013/2014
    - i.e. up until the time she came to the UK in July 2014. A  supporting
    letter from the school dated 30 April 2019  confirming  attendance  and
    payment of fees was included in the Supplementary Bundle (page 12). The
    letter confirms that for three of the five years the  Appellant  was  a
    boarder - the level of fees suggesting that it  was  the  latter  three
    years. Fees for the last year, 2013/2014,  were  stated  to  have  been
    1,519,320 Nigerian naira (i.e. approximately �3300).


8.   The Appellant's schooling in the  UK  is  said  to  have  commenced  in
    September 2014 as a boarder in a junior school. Fees are stated to have
    been �12,900. The Appellant is presently a day student at  a  secondary
    school, with fees being stated as �7900.


9.   The sponsor states that he was advised to commence the  proceedings  in
    the Family Court by a lawyer in  order  to  confirm  his  authority  to
    engage with the Appellant's school and other authorities because he was
    the only person standing in  a  position  as  parent  in  the  UK;  the
    proceedings were commenced on 6 November  2014.  The  references  to  a
    guardian  (see  'error  of  law'  decision  at  paragraph  20(vi)   and
    Directions at paragraph 1(iv)) Arose because it had been intended  that
    a cousin of the sponsor act as guardian to the  Appellant  because  the
    sponsor was "shuttling between Nigeria and the United  Kingdom  to  see
    the  Appellant's  mother".  The  reference  to  a   private   fostering
    arrangement (again see 'error of law' decision at paragraph 20(vi)  and
    Directions at paragraph 1(iv)) was  intended  as  a  reference  to  the
    sponsor undertaking the care of the Appellant.


10.  Although the sponsor has  provided  a  copy  of  his  current  Nigerian
    passport (valid from 18 June 2015 until 17 June 2020) which shows entry
    and exit stamps for Lagos airport (Supplementary Bundle  pages  13-19),
    and copies of some flight tickets (pages 20-21) this does not cover the
    period  from  the  Appellant's  last  arrival  in  the  UK  up  to  the
    commencement of the Family Court proceedings. Nonetheless the extent of
    the sponsor's  'shuttling'  is  partially  discernible:  whilst  it  is
    possible to identify time spent in Nigeria  from  the  entry  and  exit
    stamps, it does not follow inevitably that the remaining time not spent
    in Nigeria was spent in the UK. Be that as it may, it may be seen  that
    from late November 2015 up until September  2018  the  sponsor  visited
    Nigeria on 21 occasions. Although some visits  were  short,  many  were
    not: I note in particular 27 December 2015 until 17  January  2016,  24
    January 2016 until 2 March 2016, 17 March 2016 until 2 May 2016, 15 May
    2016 until 11 July 2016, 18 July 2016 until 21 August 2016, 10 December
    2016 until 1 January 2017, 6 August 2017 until 7 September 2007, and 14
    July 2018 until 6 September 2018. It may be noted that the sponsor  was
    in Nigeria for more than 200 days in 2016, and over 100 days in 2017  -
    whilst the Appellant remained in the UK with no parent. It may also  be
    seen that the periods spent in  Nigeria  overlapped  to  a  significant
    extent with UK school summer holidays: the sponsor was in Nigeria  from
    18 July 2016 until 21 August 2016, from 6 August 2017 until 7 September
    2017, and from 14 July 2018 until 6  September  2018.  Given  that  the
    Appellant would not have been in a position lawfully to travel  outside
    the UK, it must follow that for considerable periods even when she  was
    not at school she did not have the company of the sponsor, or enjoy the
    benefit of his direct care and supervision.


11.  I pause to note that at the time of the  hearing  I  was  not  provided
    with a schedule of the sponsor's travels,  and  accordingly  have  only
    fully digested and processed the data provided by the  passport  stamps
    subsequent to the hearing. As such, the Appellant  was  not  asked  any
    questions directly  related  to  the  periods  spent  abroad.  In  such
    circumstances I am circumspect as to the weight to be accorded to  such
    matters. For the avoidance of any  doubt,  I  would  have  reached  the
    conclusion in this appeal irrespective of this factor. Be  that  as  it
    may, it seems to me appropriate to note that the significant periods of
    time spent by the sponsor away from the Appellant only  go  to  confirm
    and underscore the outcome at which I have arrived. Whilst  I  have  no
    reason to doubt that the material needs  of  the  Appellant  have  been
    adequately provided for by the  sponsor  at  all  material  times,  the
    picture that emerges is of a young girl, relatively recently arrived in
    the UK, left for significant periods without  the  immediate  emotional
    support of either her birth mother, or the partner of her birth  mother
    whom it is said she has come to regard as a father. This is  inevitably
    unsatisfactory and contrary to best interests: it is in the Appellant's
    best interests so far as possible to have  the  benefit  of  day-to-day
    care and supervision of a parent or parental figure.  As  I  say,  this
    underscores the notion that it is in the Appellant's best interests  to
    reside with her mother in Nigeria rather than living in the UK with the
    sponsor, whose presence in the UK has been interrupted  by  significant
    absences abroad.


12.  As regards the Appellant's  mother's  immigration  history  ('error  of
    law' decision at paragraphs 12-16, and Directions at paragraph 1(v)) it
    is said that whilst an appeal was lodged against the decision to refuse
    entry on 11 February 2015, the appeal was withdrawn on the advice  that
    a further application for entry clearance could be made after 12 months
    providing she left voluntarily during the period of two weeks temporary
    admission. No appeal was lodged against the decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance of 26 July 2016.


13.  As indicated above, pursuant to  paragraph  2  of  the  Directions  the
    Appellant has obtained permission for disclosure of the Cafcass  report
    which has now been filed  herein,  together  with  a  brief  supporting
    statement from the Appellant's mother. For the avoidance of any  doubt,
    there is nothing in the report or  statement  that  would  provide  any
    basis  for  reversing  my  earlier  analysis   in   respect   of   sole
    responsibility. Indeed the Cafcass officer noted: "It would not  appear
    that either party [i.e. the sponsor and the  Appellant's  mother]  make
    decisions unilaterally in respect of [the Appellant], and despite  [the
    Appellant's mother] being unable to visit the UK, she is  still  active
    in the decision making" (report at paragraph 15). As observed above, Mr
    Sowerby did not seek to reopen such argument.


14.  In his submissions Mr Sowerby referred me to  various  passages  within
    the report in so far as they spoke  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the sponsor, and emphasised the importance  of  stability
    and consistency in the life of the Appellant:  see  further  below.  He
    argued that support could be gleaned from the Cafcass  report  for  the
    notion that it was in the Appellant's best interests that  the  current
    situation that had been established in the UK should continue.


15.  The Respondent  did  not  make  any  formal  written  response  to  the
    Directions. Further to paragraph 3(iii) of  the  Directions,  Ms  Cunha
    informed me that she was instructed that the  processing  time  for  an
    application for entry clearance from Nigeria should  take  between  two
    weeks and six months depending upon  the  nature  of  the  application.
    Otherwise, Ms Cunha did not dispute the information from the  Appellant
    regarding any challenge by her mother to the adverse  decisions  of  11
    February 2015 and 26 July 2016;  Ms  Cunha  was  unable  to  offer  any
    further information pursuant to paragraph 3(ii) of the Directions.


16.  Further to the above I now turn to a  more  detailed  consideration  of
    the core issues in the appeal.


Education

17.  The Appellant's 'best interests' are a  primary  consideration  in  the
    appeal. In the context of the instant case the two  particular  matters
    upon which focus has fallen  are  the  Appellant's  education  and  the
    Appellant's parenting. In particular the Appellant seeks to answer  any
    suggestion that her best interests are served by returning  to  Nigeria
    to live with her mother in substantial part on the basis that she would
    face difficulties in respect of her education.


18.  It is in this context that it was directed that  the  Appellant  should
    provide an educational history (paragraph 1(ii) of the Directions), and
    also "In the event that it is contended that there is any difficulty in
    the Appellant continuing  her  education  in  Nigeria  because  of  the
    educational system or the unavailability  of  a  suitable  school,  all
    evidence  upon  which  such  a  claim  is  based"  should  be  provided
    (paragraph 1(iii)).


19.  As noted above, a response to paragraph 1(ii)  of  the  Directions  has
    been provided. In respect of paragraph 1(iii),  the  Appellant  through
    her  representatives  has  not  sought  to  argue  that  there  is  any
    deficiency in the  educational  system  in  Nigeria  or  that  suitable
    schools are not available per se.  No  documentary  evidence  has  been
    filed in this regard.


20.  For the avoidance of any doubt I  note  that  notwithstanding  no  such
    issue being raised in  the  witness  statements  or  otherwise  in  any
    written  submissions,  and  notwithstanding  no   relevant   supporting
    documentary evidence being filed, the sponsor  under  cross-examination
    did seek to suggest that there were general concerns within Nigeria  as
    to standards of education.  When  asked  if  the  Appellant's  boarding
    school in Nigeria was academically successful, he replied that not  all
    schools were, and that many people were  challenging  the  schools  and
    resorting to home-study. He also asserted that the downturn  in  school
    attendance resulted in an increase in kidnapping because some  teachers
    attempted  to  help  outsiders  plan  kidnappings  to  combat  economic
    squeeze.


21.  Given the  nature  of  the  Directions  generally,  and  in  particular
    paragraph 1(iii), and bearing in mind that the burden of  proof  is  on
    the Appellant, I interrupted Ms Cunha's cross-examination  to  indicate
    that I did not consider it necessary for her to explore  the  sponsor's
    perceptions and opinions in respect of quality  of  education  and  the
    risk of kidnapping in circumstances  where  there  was  no  independent
    documentary evidence on point. Indeed in the absence of such evidence I
    am not prepared to accept the sponsor's testimony  in  this  regard  as
    reliable to the standard of a balance of probabilities.


22.  It is to be noted that the  Appellant  was  previously  educated  at  a
    private boarding school in Nigeria. The level of fees  due  in  Nigeria
    were significantly less than the fees paid  in  the  UK.  There  is  no
    independent evidence that access to high-quality private  education  in
    Nigeria is not available to the Appellant in  principle.  There  is  no
    independent evidence  before  me,  and  there  is  no  attempt  by  the
    Appellant's representatives to argue, that  the  quality  of  education
    that could be afforded for the Appellant  in  Nigeria  is  in  any  way
    inferior to the education she is receiving at school in the UK.


23.  Rather, the  emphasis  in  submissions  is  that  there  are  practical
    difficulties because of the particular circumstances of the  Appellant,
    with reference to the health of her mother.


24.  In his witness statement dated  7  May  2019  the  sponsor  asserts  at
    paragraph 7: "On the  issue  of  the  Appellant  having  difficulty  in
    continuing her education in Nigeria, I state that the Appellant  cannot
    continue her education in Nigeria for the fact that there is no one  to
    monitor her." (The same assertion is made in the  Appellant's  mother's
    witness statement - which is drafted in near identical terms to that of
    the sponsor.)


25.  It is also asserted that the Appellant's mother "is currently  ill  and
    she is facing a lot of medical challenges" (sponsor's witness statement
    at paragraph 8, and see similarly the Appellant's mother's statement at
    paragraph 8).


26.  In support of this latter assertion reliance is placed on  two  medical
    documents (Supplementary Bundle, pages 7-11).

         (i) A medical report based on  an  examination  on  3  August  2017
         (pages 8-11). The patient (the Appellant's mother) presented with a
         complaint of generalised joint pain; on  physical  examination  she
         was described as "healthy looking",  and  it  was  stated  "General
         physical examination is essentially normal"; it was also  noted  by
         way of 'Occupational history' "Charity activities", and by  way  of
         'Recreational history', "Occasional light  exercise".  Pursuant  to
         tests a 'Conclusion' was stated in these terms:

             "Obese,   known   hypertensive,   history   of    deep    vein
             thrombosis/pulmonary  embolism  lady  with  moderate  cervical
             spondylosis. Has refractory error of the eyes, mildly elevated
             fasting blood sugar, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)  and
             calcium while chloride is depleted. There are  enlarged  lymph
             nodes in both arm pits, a  gall  bladder  stone.  Mild  first-
             degree  atrio-ventricular  conduction  effect  of  the  heart,
             trivial  pulmonary   regurgitation   and   asymmetric   septal
             hypertrophy are noted, the latter hypertension induced."


         In such circumstances it was recommended that there be some  weight
         loss and active weight  management,  and  that  the  patient  would
         benefit from  diuretic,  physiotherapy  and  body  kinetics  expert
         services. Blood pressure management was characterised as "vital  to
         prevent possible complications".



         (ii) Report of a consultant radiologist at the Union  Diagnostic  &
         Clinical Services plc dated 4 May 2019. The patient presented  with
         lumbar pains and "inability to walk well"; in  consequence  of  the
         observations (which whilst  not  expressly  stated  are  reasonably
         presumed to be consequent upon x-ray) the  consultant  offered  the
         impression   "Multilevel    degenerative    disc    disease    with
         spinal/foraminal stenosis/mild nerve root involvement at L4 - L5".


27.  There is no medical or other documentary  evidence  subsequent  to  the
    report of August 2017 which gives any indication as to  the  extent  to
    which the Appellant's mother followed the recommendations in respect of
    weight  loss  and  management,  blood  pressure  management,  suggested
    therapies (diet, physiotherapy,  body  kinetics),  or  pursued  regular
    guided exercise and daily  enhanced  physical  activities  (which  were
    suggested as "very beneficial"). Under  cross-examination  the  sponsor
    stated that the Appellant's mother had  undertaken  some  exercise,  in
    particular "she goes to the swimming pool"; however when asked  if  her
    circumstances had improved he replied "not really". I note there is  no
    supporting evidence as to the extent to which the  underlying  concerns
    identified were remedied, remained the same, or deteriorated. The  more
    recent document, whilst identifying the cause of  back  pain  does  not
    provide any meaningful information as to the extent of  any  consequent
    functional limitations.


28.  In particular, and most pertinently, there is nothing  in  any  of  the
    medical evidence that explains why the Appellant's mother would  be  in
    any way inhibited in monitoring the Appellant's education  in  Nigeria,
    or indeed be inhibited in providing emotional and practical support  to
    the Appellant - whether as a boarder or a day pupil. It is to be  noted
    that the Appellant is 15 years old and as such is independent  in  such
    actions as washing, toileting, dressing, and eating.


29.  In his oral evidence the sponsor was invited to expand upon  paragraphs
    7 and 8 of his witness statement. Ultimately, in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's possible return to Nigeria and pursuit of education  there,
    his main concern  was  in  respect  of  transport.  He  said  that  the
    Appellant's mother could not walk,  and  could  not  really  drive:  he
    claimed that if she (the Appellant's mother) needed to go  anywhere  he
    would make arrangements  through  a  friend  or  security  officer  for
    transport. He also asserted that the roads in Nigeria "are really bad",
    and that there were security issues  in  relation  to  kidnappings  and
    killings, which he said were "in newspapers  every  day".  He  asserted
    that public transport was not good, did not really  exist  in  Nigeria,
    and was not safe. He acknowledged that  the  Appellant  had  previously
    attended school in Nigeria, but stated whilst this had been  achievable
    whilst living in Lagos, since the Appellant's mother had moved  out  of
    Lagos the schools were "nothing to talk about".


30.  I do not accept that at the time the Appellant relocated to the UK  and
    commenced schooling here, or at present, or at any time in between, the
    Appellant could not access education in Nigeria commensurate  with  the
    standard of education she has received in the UK. In  particular  I  do
    not accept that it has been demonstrated that there is anything in  her
    mother's  medical  circumstances   that   prevent   her   mother   from
    'monitoring' her education either  as  a  day  or  boarding  pupil,  or
    otherwise providing her all the usual emotional support  and  practical
    advice that might be expected of a mother of a teenage girl.


31.  It follows that I can  identify  no  material  difference  between  the
    nature of the education that the Appellant might receive in either  the
    UK or Nigeria,  and  therefore  no  material  difference  to  her  best
    interests with regard to the place of education.


32.  It also follows that I reject the notion that there was some  expedient
    reason pertaining to the Appellant's mother's ill-health  that  led  to
    the arrangement being made that she would remain in the  UK  and  enter
    the education system notwithstanding that  to  do  so  contravened  the
    system of immigration control. Indeed I find the protestations  of  the
    sponsor and the Appellant's  mother  in  this  regard  to  be  entirely
    disingenuous and adverse to  their  credit  and  credibility.  In  this
    context,  and  notwithstanding  that  medical  evidence  has  now  been
    provided that was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I can  find
    no reason to go behind my  observations  at  paragraphs  12-16  of  the
    'error of law' decision, and my conclusion that  the  sponsor  and  the
    Appellant's mother have hitherto been disingenuous  in  the  manner  of
    presenting aspects of the Appellant's mother's immigration history.


33.  Notwithstanding my conclusion in respect of the comparable  quality  of
    education available to the Appellant in the UK and Nigeria, there is  a
    further  aspect  of  education  to  be   considered:   consistency   or
    continuity. In this context I acknowledge the importance  of  stability
    in a young person's life in  relation  to  numerous  aspects  including
    education. In this context I am mindful of certain of the  observations
    in the Cafcass report: for example "[The Appellant]  is  entering  into
    adolescence, this can be a challenging time,  but  is  made  easier  by
    consistent  and  stable  parenting"  (paragraph  10  of  the   report);
    similarly she "requires stability and certainty  with  regards  to  the
    care that is afforded to her in the UK" (paragraph 16) ; and  that  the
    Appellant felt settled in her first school in the UK (paragraph 11).


34.  However, notwithstanding such ideals, it is manifestly  the  case  that
    numerous  children  for  all  sorts  of  reasons  experience  temporary
    disruption to their education by reason of relocation, and  absent  any
    particular unusual circumstances are generally able adequately to cope.
    In this context notwithstanding  that  the  Cafcass  officer  expressed
    surprise at the prospect (report at paragraph 12), it is  to  be  noted
    that the Appellant changed schools whilst in the  UK.  The  theoretical
    ideals of a completely stable upbringing  are  rarely  matched  by  the
    vicissitudes of normal life to no particular detriment.


35.  I have not been provided with any independent  supporting  evidence  as
    to any possible differences between the curricula that the Appellant is
    pursuing  in  the  UK  and  those  available  in  private   educational
    institutions   in   Nigeria.   Accordingly   I   can   only    evaluate
    consistency/continuity with reference to the consistency/continuity  of
    remaining in the same school as opposed to relocating  to  a  different
    school.


36.  I note that if the Appellant were to return  to  education  in  Nigeria
    she would be returning to an environment  and  system  with  which  she
    already has familiarity: necessarily this would assist in  coping  with
    transition. Yet further, and perhaps of very  particular  significance,
    any return to education in Nigeria would  also  involve  the  Appellant
    making direct reconnection with her mother. Further, such  reconnection
    would not be at the cost of losing connection with the sponsor who - as
    identified above - is a  frequent  visitor  to  Nigeria.  As  such  the
    context of transition back into education in Nigeria would  be  in  the
    context of no particular destabilisation in  respect  of  contact  with
    parental figures. (See further below in respect of best  interests  and
    parenting.)


37.   In  all  the  circumstances  I  find  that  the  Appellant   has   not
    demonstrated that she would not be able to access education in  Nigeria
    of a comparable standard to the education that she receives in the  UK,
    has not demonstrated that there would be any disruption in  respect  of
    curriculum, and has not demonstrated otherwise that there would be  any
    particular  detriment  arising  by  reason  of   changing   educational
    institution per se to an extent any  different  from  any  other  child
    changing schools.


Parenting

38.  I have not been provided with any significant  or  meaningful  evidence
    in relation to the Appellant's mother's parenting skills. Unless  there
    was anything adverse, it  is  perhaps  not  to  be  expected  that  the
    Appellant would provide such  evidence  given  that  the  objective  in
    pursuing the appeal incidentally results in avoiding returning  to  the
    care of her mother  in  Nigeria.  Nor  can  it  be  expected  that  the
    Respondent would have available any pertinent evidence. In this context
    the best evidence would appear to be that of the Cafcass report. I  can
    identify nothing therein that would suggest that the Appellant's mother
    is anything other than entirely  competent  in  her  parenting  of  the
    Appellant. Indeed I note that it was the opinion of the Cafcass officer
    that the Appellant had "confidence" in her mother to make decisions for
    her (report at paragraph 9), and felt supported and cared  for  by  her
    (paragraph  10)  -  although  of  course  such  observations  must   be
    considered through the prism of the Appellant's lack of objectivity and
    maturity.


39.  I repeat the observation in the Cafcass  report:  "[The  Appellant]  is
    entering into adolescence, this can be a challenging time, but is  made
    easier by  consistent  and  stable  parenting"  (paragraph  10  of  the
    report). See similarly: "...  [The  Appellant]  require  stability  and
    certainty with regards the care that is afforded  to  her  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 16).


40.  In this context and  generally  it  is  to  be  acknowledged  that  the
    Cafcass officer considered the sponsor to have been "an active  father,
    for all intents and purposes, to [the Appellant] for the past 7  years"
    (report at paragraph 17). However, the officer expressed concerns about
    the Appellant "possibly being cared for in the main by a guardian,  and
    the impact that may have on [her] emotional well-being  as  she  enters
    into adolescence".


41.  Even before the analysis of the sponsor's passport stamps, it is to  be
    noted that he  acknowledged  in  his  witness  statement  that  he  had
    explored appointing a guardian "due to the fact that I was  not  stable
    then as I  was  shuttling  between  Nigeria  and  the  United  Kingdom"
    (witness statement at paragraph 14). It is also to be noted that in the
    Cafcass report the Appellant informed  the  Cafcass  officer  that  the
    sponsor "works away a lot visiting the US, Nigeria and  China"  (report
    at paragraph 12).  The  reference  to  China  would  suggest  that  the
    absences from the  Appellant  include  periods  in  addition  to  those
    identifiable from his Nigerian passport as time spent in Nigeria.


42.  The sponsor's absences from the UK were such that it was noted  in  the
    Cafcass report that if  -  as  was  contemplated  at  the  time  -  the
    Appellant were to move from her boarding school to  a  day  school  she
    would have a guardian to look after her - whom she understood to  be  a
    local pastor (report at paragraph 12). Whilst it is to  be  noted  that
    the Cafcass officer records the sponsor as "not  envisage[ing]  working
    away a lot in the future, and the Guardian [being] utilised on a  needs
    must basis" (report at paragraph 15),  the  pattern  of  the  sponsor's
    travel over the two years following the date of the report do not  bear
    this out.


43.  The sponsor's absences from the UK are of significance  not  merely  by
    reason of the absence  of  immediate  parental/family  care,  emotional
    support, and supervision, but also in a technical sense.  As  commented
    in the Cafcass report, (and necessarily  I  note  irrespective  of  any
    potential outcome in the Family Court proceedings), the  Appellant  was
    left in the UK not only without her mother or her mother's partner, but
    with no person able to exercise parental responsibility for  her  in  a
    legal sense (e.g. see report at paragraph 4).


44.  Any reservations I have with regard to parenting only really arise  out
    of  the  circumstances  that  have  given  rise  to  the  appeal:   the
    Appellant's mother and the sponsor engineering a  situation  where  the
    Appellant commenced education in the UK without any  prior  appropriate
    regularisation of her immigration status, and the  Appellant  remaining
    in the UK notwithstanding the exclusion  of  her  mother.  However,  it
    seems to  me  that  the  circumstances  arose  pursuant  to  the  joint
    collaboration of the Appellant's mother and the sponsor: to that extent
    there is nothing to choose between them in respect of such reservations
    as to the effectiveness of their protection  of  the  Appellant's  best
    interests - and what I adjudge to be their perception of a  short  term
    sacrifice  (loss  of  direct  contact  with  mother)  for  a  perceived
    potential long-term benefit (completing secondary education in the  UK,
    and perhaps obtaining settlement).


45.  Further to this - and picking up from the  various  references  to  the
    importance of stability - in  my  judgement  the  real  threat  to  the
    present stability of the Appellant's home and educational  life  really
    arises by reason of the predicament  that  both  the  sponsor  and  the
    Appellant's mother have placed her in. Not only has  a  situation  been
    engineered where she is without the direct contact of her  mother,  she
    has  been  presented  with  a  circumstance  where  she  has  also  had
    significant periods without the direct contact of the sponsor. Further,
    she  finds  herself  unable  to  travel  internationally  and  with   a
    precarious immigration status that is necessarily a threat to stability
    and otherwise contrary to her best interests. Her  best  interests  and
    future stability require resolution of the current predicament: it does
    not follow that such resolution must inevitably be that she be  allowed
    to remain in the UK.


The Appellant's Wishes

46.  The Cafcass officer records the Appellant as having told her "that  she
    prefers the education in the UK", albeit that she wished she  was  able
    to visit Nigeria to see her mother and return (report at paragraph 13).
    The officer concluded that it was "clear" that the Appellant "wishes to
    remain in the UK" (paragraph 13).


47.  Although the report is dated from August 2015 there is nothing  in  any
    of the evidence before me to suggest  that  the  Appellant's  essential
    wishes in this regard have altered.


Best interests

48.  Bringing the  foregoing  matters  together,  in  my  judgement  looking
    solely at the issue of  best  interests  the  distinction  between  the
    Appellant remaining in  the  UK  or  returning  to  Nigeria  is  finely
    balanced.


49.  Be that as it may, it seems to  me  clear  that  continuing  separation
    from her mother is not in the  Appellant's  best  interests.  Were  the
    Appellant to be allowed to remain in the UK,  it  is  entirely  unclear
    when and in what circumstances her mother would be permitted to enter -
    whether as a visitor or on some longer term basis. Of course, in such a
    circumstance, the Appellant would be able to visit Nigeria  and  return
    to the UK - but such visits would likely be limited to school holidays.


50.  Alternatively, if the Appellant  were  to  be  required  to  return  to
    Nigeria she would necessarily have as  much  direct  contact  with  her
    mother as would be determined by the family with reference  to  whether
    the Appellant would be schooled as a boarder or a day pupil.  Moreover,
    there would not appear to be a comparable limitation on the visits that
    the sponsor might make to the Appellant in Nigeria  -  his  pattern  of
    previous visits does not suggest that  he  would  be  limited  to  only
    seeing the sponsor outside term time.


51.  In all of the circumstances, and bearing in mind that  Nigeria  is  the
    country of the  Appellant's  nationality,  the  country  of  her  early
    upbringing, that she has  been  away  from  Nigeria  for  a  relatively
    limited period, and that by returning to Nigeria she would be  able  to
    enjoy a direct and stable relationship with  her  mother  and  continue
    regular and extended periods of contact with the sponsor,  I  find  the
    Appellant's best interests would be served by her returning to  Nigeria
    to live with her mother. I am not persuaded that  there  would  be  any
    material difference in respect of education. In so far as a  return  to
    Nigeria is contrary to the Appellant's own wishes, this  is  outweighed
    by the significance of resuming a conventional direct relationship with
    her mother.


Article 8

52.   I  discussed  the  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules   to   the
    Appellant's case in the Decision on error of law: see at paragraphs 25-
    39, and see further the discussion in respect of sole responsibility at
    paragraphs 41 et seq. See further above at paragraph  5,  and  note  Mr
    Sowerby's indication that the Appellant's emphasis in  the  appeal  was
    now  in  respect  of   'best   interests'   and   how   they   informed
    proportionality under Article 8, in which context it was contended that
    schooling in Nigeria would be problematic  for  the  Appellant  because
    there would be nobody to look after her.


53.  Mr Sowerby directed my attention to provisions within  the  Immigration
    Rules pertaining to children seeking to be present in the  UK  for  the
    purposes of education. He acknowledged that the so-called  'short-term'
    student Rules (paragraphs A57A -  A57H)  would  not  likely  avail  the
    Appellant because their scheme was such as to impose a  maximum  period
    of 6 months study for an applicant under 16. However longer periods  of
    study in the UK were possible pursuant to the Rules  in  respect  of  a
    Tier 4 (Child) migrant. The Appellant could not switch into the Tier  4
    (Child) category because she had not  last  been  granted  leave  in  a
    prescribed  category:  see  paragraph  245ZZC.  However,   Mr   Sowerby
    submitted that  the  Appellant  might  potentially  qualify  for  entry
    clearance in this  category,  and  argued  pursuant  to  the  Chikwamba
    principle that no  good  purpose  would  be  served  by  requiring  the
    Appellant to return to Nigeria simply to reapply to come  back  to  the
    UK: such a procedure would involve a disruption at a critical stage  of
    her education. In this regard my attention was directed  to  paragraphs
    51 and 52 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.


54.  For the avoidance of any  doubt  I  find  that  the  first  two  Razgar
    questions are to  be  answered  in  the  Appellant's  favour:  she  has
    established private life in the UK by reference to her  education,  and
    has established family life by reference to her relationship  with  the
    sponsor (notwithstanding his periods of absence abroad). In  the  event
    that the Appellant is required to leave the UK in  consequence  of  the
    Respondent's decision the interference with  her  protected  Article  8
    rights in the UK would be of a significance to surpass  the  relatively
    low threshold of the second Razgar question.


55.  There is no particular issue between the  parties  in  respect  of  the
    third and fourth Razgar questions.


56.  In considering the fifth Razgar question - proportionality - I am  duty
    bound to  have  regard  to  the  statutorily  defined  public  interest
    considerations pursuant to section 117B of the 2002 Act.


57.  I acknowledge the public interest in maintaining effective  immigration
    control. I note  that  this  is  generally  achieved  by  a  consistent
    adherence to the published Rules.  The  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of any identifiable in-country Rules.


58.  In respect of a potential application for entry clearance as a  Tier  4
    (Child) migrant it seems to me that Mr Sowerby put the case  no  higher
    than  there  being  potential  for  the  Appellant   to   satisfy   the
    requirements of  entry  clearance,  but  I  was  not  directed  to  any
    materials that were consistent  with  required  evidence  whether,  for
    example, in respect of a sponsoring educational institution or proof of
    availability  of  funds.  (It  is  a  feature   of   this   case   that
    notwithstanding the apparent availability of significant funds to  meet
    the cost of school fees either  in  Nigeria  or  in  the  UK,  and  the
    sponsor's frequent travel, no  specific  financial  evidence  has  been
    filed as to the quantum or source of any available funds.)


59.  Be that as it may, there is a more fundamental  reason  why  I  am  not
    prepared to conclude that the  Chikwamba  principle  should  avail  the
    Appellant on the facts of this particular case. This is because, on  my
    findings, the effect of allowing the appeal would be  contrary  to  the
    Appellant's best interests. The Appellant's best interests, I find, are
    served by returning to live with her mother in Nigeria. In this context
    it is to be noted that on the facts  in  Chikwamba  and  in  the  wider
    discussion  one  of  the  informing  factors  was  the  importance   of
    protecting family life (as distinct from private life) between a parent
    and child: e.g. see paragraphs 42,  44  and  46  of  Chikwamba.  In  my
    judgement the effect of allowing the appeal would not achieve  such  an
    aim, but would perpetuate the unsatisfactory disconnection between  the
    Appellant  and  her  mother.  Accordingly,  and   notwithstanding   the
    Appellant's own wishes  in  this  regard,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    invitation to allow the appeal by reference to the Chikwamba  principle
    is in substance an invitation to make a decision  that  not  only  runs
    contrary to the public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control by a consistent application of the structure and scheme of  the
    Immigration Rules, but also runs contrary to the best interests of  the
    Appellant.


60.  For completeness I note there are no language issues likely  to  be  an
      obstacle to integration (section 117B(2)); indeed it seems to me  that
      the Appellant's engagement in schooling in the UK has  given  resulted
      in a significant degree of integration. Further, although no  specific
      financial evidence has been filed the Appellant, through the  sponsor,
      appears to be essentially financially independent (section 117B(3)).




61.  The Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  has  been  for  the  main  part
      unlawful, and otherwise 'precarious': as such section 117B(4) and  (5)
      require that little weight  should  be  given  to  her  private  life.
      However, it seems to me sensible that in the overall balance  this  is
      to be ameliorated by the fact that the Appellant, as a minor,  is  not
      personally  responsible  for  her  immigration  status   and   general
      predicament.


62.  I have rejected  the  matters  upon  which  the  Appellant  has  placed
      particular reliance in support of her appeal. I do not accept that  it
      has  been  shown  that  the  Appellant  would  face  any   significant
      disruption to her education in the process of relocating to Nigeria. I
      do not accept that her best interests are served by remaining  in  the
      UK; indeed I consider her best interests are served  by  returning  to
      live with her mother in Nigeria. Moreover, I do not  accept  that  the
      Chikwamba principle should avail her.



63.  In all of the circumstances I find that the  Appellant's  case  has  no
      element or elements either individually or  collectively  sufficiently
      exceptional,  or  compelling,  to  render  the  Respondent's  decision
      incompatible with the Article  8  rights  of  the  Appellant,  or  the
      sponsor, or anybody else. In my judgement  the  Respondent's  decision
      accords adequate respect to the rights of the Appellant  and  sponsor,
      and is in all the circumstances proportionate.


64.  Finally I note that nothing in the foregoing -  including  my  findings
    in respect of best interests - prevents the  Appellant,  together  with
    her mother and the sponsor,  exploring  ways  in  which  she  might  be
    granted entry clearance for the purpose of being privately educated  in
    the UK.


Notice of Decision

65.  The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 8 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis





To the Respondent
Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)


I have dismissed the appeal and accordingly there can be no fee award.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis          Date: 8 November 2019
(qua a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal)




                                    ANNEX

        TEXT OF 'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION AND DIRECTIONS PROMULGATED ON
                               11 APRIL 2019.


1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese promulgated on 29 November 2018  dismissing  on  human  rights
    grounds the appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  26
    February 2018 to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a minor born on 2 June 2004.   She  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  She is the daughter of Ms O.M.A., a citizen of  Nigeria  born
    on 1 June 1968.  It is said that the Appellant does not  now  know  the
    whereabouts of her biological father, and has had little or nothing  to
    do with him during her childhood.   The  Appellant's  mother  is  in  a
    relationship with Mr A.A.O., a British citizen  born  on  20  May  1966
    ('the sponsor').


3.   It has not been disputed that the Appellant's mother  and  the  sponsor
    are partners. The exact nature of that  relationship  is  perhaps  less
    clear: in a covering letter with the Appellant's application solicitors
    acting for the sponsor described  the  relationship  as  "a  common-law
    relationship"; a witness statements filed in the appeal by the  sponsor
    stated he was married to the Appellant's mother "under the  native  law
    and customs in Nigeria"; the Appellant's mother's witness statement  is
    silent on the issue; no evidence has  been  filed  in  respect  of  any
    customary marriage in Nigeria. Further and in any event, it is  unclear
    - and seemingly was not explored before the First-tier Tribunal  -  the
    extent to which they have resided together in  either  Nigeria  or  the
    United Kingdom.


4.   The Appellant last entered the United Kingdom on a  visit  visa  on  13
    July 2014.  She was accompanied by her mother.  Her mother returned  to
    Nigeria, but the Appellant remained in the United Kingdom.  Indeed,  it
    appears that within two months of her arrival she had been enrolled at,
    and started at, a boarding school in the United Kingdom.


5.   No steps  were  taken  at  this  time  to  regularise  the  Appellant's
    immigration status, and her leave to enter  -  which  pursuant  to  her
    visit visa would have been limited to 6 months - expired. She became an
    overstayer.


6.   It was not until 4 October 2016 that an application  was  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf by the sponsor to seek  to  regularise  her  status.
    The application for leave to remain was made on the basis that she  was
    enjoying family life with a British citizen step-parent in  the  United
    Kingdom.


7.   The application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 26 February 2018.


8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


9.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 29 November 2010.


10.  The Appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  which  was
    granted (together with a grant of  extension  of  time)  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Murray on 7 January 2018.


Preliminary contextual observations

11.  Before considering the substance of the challenge to  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, I refer to three matters that form some of the
    context of these proceedings. (There  is  nothing  significant  in  the
    order in which I set out these three matters,  and  nothing  should  be
    inferred to the contrary.)


12.  First, there is on file  a  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  ('NoID')
    dated 26 July 2016 refusing the Appellant's mother a visit visa for the
    United Kingdom.  The NoID states that the Appellant's mother wanted  to
    visit the UK for tourism, for a family visit, and to see friends -  and
    that she had submitted a letter in support  from  her  British  citizen
    partner (the sponsor herein).  She had also provided evidence that  she
    was a director and shareholder in her  own  company  in  Nigeria.   The
    application was refused for the following reasons,  as  stated  on  the
    NoID:

         "I am aware that you have previously visited the UK  and  that  you
         were refused entry when you arrived in the UK on 11 February  2015.
         Although you state  in  your  application  that  you  were  refused
         because you had visited the UK for a total of more than  6  months,
         our records show that there were concerns regarding  your  daughter
         [the Appellant], who was attending school in the UK even though she
         did not hold a visa or valid  leave  for  that  purpose.   In  your
         current application you show that your daughter is residing in  the
         UK  at  an  address  in  Essex.   You  have  provided  no   further
         information about your daughter and her status in  the  UK.   Given
         the reasons for your refusal of entry in 2015 I would have expected
         you to cover this point in some detail.  As it is our records  show
         that your daughter was issued with a visa on 21/4/2011 to accompany
         you, as the adult responsible for her care, on a visit to  the  UK.
         It is apparent that the true purpose of her travel was to  stay  in
         the UK for more than just a visit and this leads me to  doubt  that
         the reasons you now give for  your  travel  to  the  UK  have  been
         accurately and entirely stated in  your  application.   Because  of
         these doubts I am not satisfied that you are genuinely  seeking  to
         travel only for the visit stated or that you will leave the  UK  at
         the end of the period stated."


13.  By way of further context, I have been told -  and  see  no  reason  to
    doubt - that when the Appellant's mother arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in February 2015 although she  was  refused  leave  to  enter  she  was
    nonetheless granted a short period  of  temporary  admission,  and  was
    present in the  United  Kingdom  for  approximately  two  weeks  before
    returning to Nigeria.  It would appear that that is the last time  that
    the Appellant and her mother had direct contact.


14.  I mention this matter at the outset because  the  Appellant's  mother's
    claim in her visa application that the refusal of  leave  to  enter  in
    February 2015 had been because she had  been  a  too  frequent  visitor
    spending a total of more than 6 months in the  U.K.,  is  in  substance
    repeated in the witness statements of both the Appellant's  mother  and
    the sponsor.  See  for  example  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  at
    paragraph 15, "...I wish to state that on one of the occasions when she
    was coming to the United Kingdom she was queried at the airport on  the
    frequency of her journey into the United Kingdom on  the  11th  day  of
    February 2017." - (in context the reference to 2017 is plainly a simple
    error or slip).  See similarly the Appellant's mother's  own  statement
    at paragraph 8 - "...I was queried at the airport on  frequency  of  my
    journey into the United Kingdom...".  The NoID makes it plain that this
    was not the basis of refusal of leave to enter.


15.  I note the following from the foregoing:

         (i) Both the sponsor  and  the  Appellant's  mother  appear  to  be
         disingenuous in their witness statements in representing the reason
         for the Appellant's mother encountering difficulties on seeking  to
         enter the UK in February 2015. The problem is presented by both  of
         them as being an issue in respect of the frequency and duration  of
         the Appellant's mother's visit to the UK, whereas  in  reality  the
         problem was rooted in the unlawful presence of the Appellant in the
         UK and also the role of the Appellant's mother in bringing  her  to
         the UK. Even if it might be said that this was not clear to them or
         fully understood by them in February 2015, it must have been  plain
         and manifest at the time of the refusal of entry clearance in  July
         2016 because it is expressly so stated in the NoID.

         (ii) It must have  been  manifest  to  both  the  sponsor  and  the
         Appellant's mother in February 2015 that the Appellant had no basis
         to be in the UK, and that her lack of status  was  problematic.  No
         steps were seemingly taken to remedy this situation.

         (iii) Similarly it must  have  again  been  manifest  to  both  the
         sponsor and the Appellant's mother in July 2016 that the  Appellant
         had no basis to be in the UK, and  that  her  lack  of  status  was
         problematic. A little over two months later the current application
         was made.


16.   Further,  the  sponsor's  observation  in  his  witness  statement   -
    "Regarding the Appellant's mother, a settlement visa will be  processed
    for her when she is medically fit" (paragraph 15) -  must  be  seen  in
    light of the above. On its face this statement seems  to  suggest  that
    the only reason the Appellant's mother is not also in the UK is because
    she is in some way unwell. No supporting evidence of  any  illness  was
    presented to  the  Tribunal.  In  reality  it  would  appear  that  the
    Appellant's mother does not presently have any prospect of obtaining  a
    settlement visa because of the irregular circumstances surrounding  her
    daughter's immigration position. It seems to me  that  in  all  of  the
    circumstances this must be  plain  both  to  the  sponsor  and  to  the
    Appellant's mother. Accordingly, again, the sponsor has been, at  best,
    disingenuous.


17.  In this latter regard, and generally, it is to be noted that the First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  the  absence  of  any  medical   evidence
    (paragraphs 22 and 26), and did not accept that there was  anything  to
    establish any inability on  the  part  of  the  Appellant's  mother  in
    looking after the Appellant (paragraph 26 and 31).


18.  The second feature of the appeal upon which  I  make  some  preliminary
    observations is the slightly  unusual  circumstance  that  the  sponsor
    brought an application in the Family Court in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    respect of arrangements with regard to the Appellant.  This  culminated
    in an Order of the court on 13 August 2015 that "There be no  order  on
    the [sponsor]'s application for a Child Arrangement Order".


19.  The 'no-order order' is the only specific document  on  the  file  that
    relates to the proceedings before  the  Family  Court.  The  Appellant,
    before both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, has  placed
    very particular reliance upon some passages of this document.   In  the
    circumstances it is helpful to set out the contents of the document  in
    full:

         "UPON hearing Solicitor for the Applicant
         AND UPON the Cafcass officer, [named] being present in court


         Upon the evidence and information available to the Court


         IT IS RECORDED THAT:


         1.   Since February 2015 the child has been in the sole care of the
             Applicant, who the court is informed is her step-father,  with
             the consent of the mother [O.M.A.].


         2.   The court has read the Cafcass officer's report dated 04.08.15
             and the response from the UK Home Office dated 29.07.15.


         3.   The child appears to be well cared for by the Applicant.


         4.   The child's Nigerian passport has expired in March 2015 but  a
             visiting  visa  is  valid  until  2016.   There  has  been  no
             application for its renewal nor has there been any application
             made to regularise the child's immigration status in the UK.


         5.   An appeal by the mother  against  a  decision  preventing  any
             further entry by her to the UK is pending and due to be  heard
             in March 2016.


         6.   The Applicant is intending to travel  for  work  purposes  and
             move the child to a new school.  She will be cared  for  by  a
             "guardian" just as she  is  stated  to  have  been  cared  for
             previously.


         7.   The court has  been  informed  that  the  local  authority  is
             currently undertaking a private fostering  assessment  of  the
             child in the care of the Applicant.


         8.   The child is being well cared for by  the  Applicant  but  the
             court is of the view that in circumstances where there  is  no
             disagreement with the mother and  there  has  been  successful
             delegation of parental responsibility by  the  mother  to  the
             Applicant in respect of  the  child's  welfare  and  decisions
             about her care including her schooling and her "guardian", the
             principle of no order shall apply.  The  Cafcass  officer  has
             today confirmed that this court is appropriate and  consistent
             with the child's welfare.


         9.   The Court will forward a  copy  of  this  order  to  the  Home
             Office.


         IT IS ORDERED THAT:


         1.   There be no order on the Applicant's application for  a  Child
             Arrangement Order.


         2.   There be no order for costs."


20.  I make the following brief observations in respect of the  contents  of
    the 'no-order order':

         (i) It does not provide any independent corroboration of the nature
         of the relationship between the sponsor and the Appellant's mother,
         merely recording that "the Court is informed" that the  sponsor  is
         the Appellant's stepfather.

         (ii) The observation that the Appellant has been in the  sole  care
         of the sponsor since February 2015 raises  the  question  of  whose
         care she was in between July 2014 and February 2015.

         (iii) No information has been provided by either party  before  the
         Tribunal as to the Home Offices response of 29  July  2015.  It  is
         also to be noted that it is curious  that  this  is  purportedly  a
         response to the Cafcass officer's report but is dated prior to  the
         date of the report - although it is possible that it was a response
         to a draft of the report. Be that as it may, it does  suggest  that
         the Respondent was aware  of  the  Appellant's  circumstances  some
         considerable time prior to the application of 4 October 2016.

         (iv) Insofar as it is perhaps to be inferred that the Family  Court
         Judge thought that the  Appellant's  "visiting  visa"  being  valid
         until 2016 conferred leave to remain,  this  would  be  inaccurate.
         Whilst the entry clearance vignette may have been valid until 2016,
         and the entry clearance could be used to secure  entry  during  its
         validity, any particular entry would have been limited to 6  months
         leave to enter irrespective of a longer period of validity  of  the
         entry clearance. It seems likely that the Family Court may not have
         fully understood the Appellant's immigration position.

         (v) Neither party was able to clarify to me whether the Appellant's
         mother  pursued  an  appeal  in  March  2016;  nonetheless  it  was
         confirmed by the sponsor that she had not overturned the refusal of
         a further visit visa.

         (vi) Nothing seemingly was said in the evidence before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal - whether  written  or  oral  -  in  respect  of  any
         'guardian', or in respect of a private fostering assessment.


21.   Further  to  the  above,  it  is  not  manifest  when  the   sponsor's
    application for a Child Arrangement Order was initially made,  or  what
    specific order was being sought, or why. The order  was  referenced  in
    the immigration application covering letter of 4  October  2016  -  but
    necessarily the immigration application was made over a year after  the
    order was made. The approximate timing of the proceedings - bearing  in
    mind that it will have taken some time to prepare the Cafcass report of
    4 August 2015 - and the reference to the sponsor having had care of the
    Appellant since February 2015, suggest that the  application  may  have
    been prompted by the refusal of  leave  to  enter  to  the  Appellant's
    mother in February 2015; however, there is no direct evidence  on  this
    point


22.  I should also just say a very few brief  words  about  the  concept  of
    parental responsibility in the Family Courts.

         (i) 'Parental responsibility'  is  defined  by  section  3  of  the
         Children  Act   1989   as   "the   rights,   duties,   powers   and
         responsibilities that go with being a parent".

         (ii) Parental responsibility can be  lost  only  by  order  of  the
         court. A  parent  does  not  lose  parental  responsibility  merely
         because a child lives elsewhere on a daily basis.

         (iii)  A  step-parent  does   not   automatically   have   parental
         responsibility. Section 4A of the Children Act 1989 allows a  step-
         parent to acquire parental responsibility either with the agreement
         of the parents or by order of the court. 'Step-parent'  is  defined
         as "married to or a civil partner of" a parent of the child.


23.  As I have noted above, although it  has  not  been  disputed  that  the
    sponsor is the partner of the Appellant's mother, there is  a  lack  of
    clarity as to whether this is pursuant  to  a  marriage  recognised  in
    Nigeria (and thereby recognised in the UK), or on any other basis  that
    would bring the sponsor within the definition of a step-parent for  the
    purposes of the Children Act 1989. The Family Court in  observing  that
    it had been "informed" that the sponsor was the  Appellant  stepfather,
    did not  seemingly  make  a  finding  on  this  -  and  indeed  it  was
    unnecessary so to do in circumstances where the application  was  dealt
    with in the manner indicated.


24.  I return below to the words in paragraph 8 of the  'no-order  order'  -
    "... there has been successful delegation of parental responsibility by
    the mother to the [sponsor]...".


25.  The third matter to mention by way of preliminary  observation  is  the
    Immigration Rules.


26.  The appeal is based on human rights grounds, and accordingly  there  is
    no available ground of appeal that the decision was not  in  accordance
    with  the  Immigration  Rules.  However,  the  Rules  are  a   relevant
    consideration in respect of Article 8 both in the context of the public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control -  which  may  be
    promoted and protected by  the  consistent  application  of  a  set  of
    published  rules,  and  as  an  indicator  as  to  the   benchmark   of
    proportionality.


27.  At the hearing I had a brief discussion with the representatives as  to
    what appeared to be a misconception  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to the basis of the Respondent's decision in  respect
    of the 'relationship requirements' of Appendix FM and the status of the
    sponsor. The Judge had seemingly concluded that the concerns  expressed
    in the RFRL in respect of paragraph E-LTRC.1.6 were answered by  reason
    of the - undisputed - fact  that  the  sponsor  is  a  British  citizen
    (Decision at paragraph 21).


28.  In the RFRL the Respondent stated the Appellant did not to satisfy  the
    'Eligibility Relationship Requirement'  with  particular  reference  to
    paragraph E-LTRC.1.6 (pages 2-3 of 6 of the RFRL).  In  part  the  RFRL
    states:

         "Eligibility Relationship Requirement


         You  do  not  meet  the  eligibility  relationship  requirement  of
         paragraphs E-LTRC.1.2. to 1.6. because your  step  father  has  not
         been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  under  the  Appendix  FM
         Rules.


         E-LTRC.1.6 states: one of the applicant's parents (referred  to  in
         the section as the "applicant's parent") must be in the UK and have
         leave to enter or remain or indefinite leave to remain,  or  is  at
         the same time being granted leave to remain or indefinite leave  to
         remain, under this Appendix (except as an adult dependent relative)
         ..."


29.  The substance of this  is  repeated  in  the  RFRL  under  the  heading
    'Parent's Immigration Status'

         "Your mother  is  not  in  the  UK  and  your  biological  father's
         whereabouts are unknown.  Your step-father has not applied  for  or
         been granted leave under Appendix FM.  Therefore you are unable  to
         meet E-LTRC.1.6 for this reason as well."


30.  I pause to note that the Respondent also concluded that  the  Appellant
    did not meet the 'eligibility relationship' requirement because he  was
    not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant; however, this is not the focus of the present comments.


31.  On its face it seems to me that the  RFRL  is  correct  in  identifying
    that the sponsor did not "have leave to enter or remain  or  indefinite
    leave to remain, or is at the same time being granted leave  to  remain
    or indefinite leave to remain, under ... Appendix [FM]". His status  as
    a British citizen is not an answer to this.  The  Judge's  approach  is
    thus erroneous.


32.  During the discussion with the parties I noted that there was no cross-
    challenge to this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  evaluation
    of the case, whether pursuant to a Rule 24  response  or  otherwise.  I
    indicated that in circumstances where there had been no challenge,  and
    given that the real focus in the appeal both under  the  Rules  and  in
    respect of Article 8 was the issue of  the  sponsor's  'responsibility'
    for the Appellant - and also where the wider consideration of Article 8
    meant that any strict requirement of the  Rules  need  not  necessarily
    defeat an application - no  further  point  should  be  taken  in  this
    regard.


33.  However, upon further consideration in the writing of this  Decision  -
    and with the caveat that I have not heard argument on the  issue  -  it
    seems to me that scrutiny of this  point  reveals  a  more  fundamental
    problem  with  the  consideration  of  the  application  by  both   the
    Respondent and the First-tier Tribunal. It would seem that Appendix  FM
    did not apply to the application.


34.  The Appellant's  application  was  made  using  form  FLR(FP)  (Version
    05/2016). At Section 2 - 'Which category? -  two boxes  were  ticked  -
    'Family Life as a Parent (10 year route)', and 'Private Life in the  UK
    (10  year  route)'.  Necessarily  the  former  did  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant, although the latter was of potential application. (The other
    available categories on the face of the form were  'Family  life  as  a
    Partner (10 year route)' and 'Family life as a Parent (5 year route)' -
    neither of which were applicable to the Appellant.) As such,  the  form
    completed did not expressly relate to an application  based  on  family
    life as a child - although in its contents reference was  made  to  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor.  Further  to  this,  the
    covering letter (which is drafted on the basis that the sponsor  rather
    than the Appellant is the client of the solicitors) declares the intent
    "to regularise [the Appellant's] stay in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    ground of family life with our  client".  The  sponsor's  status  as  a
    British citizen is expressly declared, and his  passport  was  enclosed
    with the application. The letter concludes  with  a  request  that  the
    Appellant "be granted leave to remain without client on  the  basis  of
    family life". Nothing is expressly stated as to any limit in the length
    of leave sought, and there is no indication that leave  is  sought  for
    temporary purposes, or that any departure date is envisaged.


35.  The section of Appendix  FM  dealing  with  children  has  the  heading
    'Family life as a child a person with limited leave  as  a  partner  or
    parent', followed by this introductory paragraph:

         "This route is for a child whose  parent  is  applying  under  this
         Appendix for entry clearance or leave, or who has limited leave, as
         a partner or parent. For further provision on a  child  seeking  to
         enter or remain in the UK for the purposes of their family life see
         Part 8 of these Rules."


36.  Further to paragraphs A277 and A280 of Part 8 of the  Rules,  paragraph
    298 applies to applicants seeking leave to remain on  the  basis  of  a
    relationship with a parent who is present and settled in the UK -  such
    as a British citizen ordinarily resident in the UK.


37.  Whilst there may  be  difficulties  in  the  Appellant  satisfying  the
    requirements of paragraph 298 - both in respect of 298(i), and also  in
    any event in respect of 298(ii) by reason of her immigration history  -
    it does appear to be the applicable Rule, rather than Appendix FM.


38.  I return to the implications of this error of approach further below.


39.  This is a convenient juncture to note  that  I  also  raised  with  the
    parties the question of whether any consideration had been given to the
    Appellant's circumstances with reference to the Rules relating to study
    (Part 3 of the Immigration Rules), which include provisions for a child
    student. It appeared not - either in the context of the appeal,  or  as
    an alternative basis of regularising the Appellant's status.


The Challenge to the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

40.  Mr Sowerby has broadly pursued four bases of challenge to the  Decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal: that the Judge  erred  in  respect  of  the
    issue of sole responsibility; that the Judge erred in respect of  'best
    interests' of the Appellant as a child; that undue weight  was  put  on
    the Appellant's immigration history/status in circumstances where as  a
    minor it was not her  responsibility;  and  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    consideration of the Appellant's 'private life'.


'Sole responsibility'

41.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge identified that "The main issue  concerns
    the  eligibility  criteria  and  the  issue  of  sole   responsibility"
    (paragraph 21). In so far as  it  was  claimed  that  the  sponsor  had
    assumed parental responsibility because the Appellant's mother was  not
    capable of looking after her in  Nigeria  because  she  had  a  medical
    condition, the Judge observed that  there  was  no  supporting  medical
    evidence (paragraph 22). Moreover, in respect of  general  credibility,
    the Judge found that the arrangement whereby the Appellant was left  in
    the UK by her mother "was contrived" by  the  mother  and  the  sponsor
    (paragraph 23). The Judge found that the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant while she was living with  her  mother
    in Nigeria (paragraph 23),  and  further  concluded  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the  sponsor  had  acquired  sole  responsibility  since
    (paragraph  25  and  26).  In  this  latter  regard  the   Judge   gave
    consideration to the order of the Family Court (paragraph 25).


42.   The  Appellant  challenges  the  conclusion   in   respect   of   sole
    responsibility in significant part by repeating the  substance  of  the
    case as presented before the First-tier Tribunal - e.g. see paragraph 4
    of the grounds. However, more pertinently in the context  of  error  of
    law, Mr Sowerby emphasised paragraph 8 of the Family Court  order,  and
    the following passage at paragraph 25 of the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal:

         "Paragraph 8 states that the court made no order because there  was
         no disagreement between the sponsor and the appellant's mother  and
         there had been successful delegation of parental responsibility. It
         is not in dispute that the appellant was placed  with  the  sponsor
         while she is this country by her mother but this does not amount to
         sole responsibility."



43.   Mr  Sowerby  contended  that  the  only  sensible  interpretation   of
    paragraph 8 was that there had indeed been a transfer of responsibility
    from the Appellant's mother to the sponsor, and the sponsor thereby had
    become solely responsible for the Appellant.


44.  I do not accept that submission.


45.  Mr Sowerby placed reliance in particular  upon  the  words  "there  has
    been successful delegation of parental responsibility by the mother  to
    the Applicant in respect of the child's welfare and decisions about her
    care including her schooling  and  her  "guardian""  in  the  'no-order
    order'. It seems to me that that passage  must  be  understood  in  the
    context both of the application being made (and the decision to make no
    order on it), and, necessarily, the context of family law  proceedings.
    In this latter context it is be noted that in family law terms a  step-
    parent has no parental responsibility absent either  an  order  of  the
    court or consent of the child's parents. Moreover a parent cannot  lose
    parental responsibility absent an order of the Court. The Court made no
    order, so there was no act that recognised the Appellant's  mother  had
    given up her parental responsibility. In my judgement the reference  to
    a  'delegation'  of  parental  responsibility  was  no  more   than   a
    recognition of the Appellant's mother's consent that the sponsor should
    be able to exercise parental responsibility. In such circumstances I do
    not accept that the Family Court Order amounts to recognition of, or is
    otherwise reliable evidence of, the fact  of  a  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility negating the mother's own responsibility.  As  Ms  Cunha
    put it, this was not a case where  there  was  any  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's mother had given up her interest in being a mother  to  the
    Appellant;  this  was  a  delegation  not  an  abdication  of  parental
    responsibility.


46.  Further, a wider consideration  of  the  issues  and  evidence  in  the
    appeal do nothing but reinforce this notion.


47.  As indicated above, the Appellant's application  for  leave  to  remain
    was made on the basis of her family life with the sponsor in the United
    Kingdom.  The application form (reproduced in the  Respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal) was forwarded to the Secretary of State
    with a covering letter dated 4 October 2016.   It  was  stated  in  the
    covering letter that the sponsor and the Appellant's mother were  in  a
    relationship which had commenced in 2008.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    sponsor was "the sole carer  of  the  child  in  the  United  Kingdom";
    however, nothing further was raised in the application or the  covering
    letter that in terms asserted that the  Appellant's  mother  no  longer
    acted in a parental capacity - whether as sole responsible parent or  a
    jointly responsible parent.  Nor was anything asserted to suggest  that
    the Appellant's mother would be unable to continue to exercise  a  role
    in respect of directing the life of the Appellant whilst she was in the
    UK, or would be unable to care for the Appellant if she had  to  return
    to Nigeria.  In particular, there was no suggestion that there was  any
    ill health on the part of the Appellant's mother.


48.  Following the refusal of the  application,  grounds  of  appeal  lodged
    with the Notice of Appeal again made no assertion or reference  to  any
    limitations in the capacity of the Appellant's mother -  either  to  be
    involved, even at a  distance,  in  directing  the  upbringing  of  her
    daughter or to be able to care for her daughter were the  Appellant  to
    return to Nigeria.  Again, no specific reference was  made  as  to  any
    medical problems or issues of illness in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    mother.


49.  There was, however, an assertion that the sponsor was  exercising  sole
    parental responsibility (paragraph 12 of the grounds of  appeal).   The
    grounds note this is "especially evident as her  mother  is  unable  to
    enter the UK presently".


50.  I observe that the inability to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  does  not
    equate with an inability to exercise control over the direction of  the
    Appellant's upbringing.


51.  As regards responsibility for the  upbringing  of  the  Appellant,  the
    mother says this at paragraphs 11 and 12 of her witness statement:

         "11. Since the Appellant stayed back in the United Kingdom with her
             sponsor, he has been solely taking  care  of  her  without  my
             contribution.  He is responsible for everything  that  affects
             the Appellant as a child.


         12.  The Appellant's sponsor  had  my  unreserved  consent  in  the
             Appellant staying with him.  I wish to state that due  to  the
             Appellant's sponsor's fantastic  fatherly  role,  I  (as  sole
             biological  parent)  have  done  a  change  of  name  for  the
             Appellant to bear his name."


52.  I note that paragraph 11 is drafted in terms of the exercise of day-to-
    day care rather than parental responsibility  in  its  wider  sense  in
    immigration jurisprudence of 'exercising control and direction' -  e.g.
    see TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
    49.


53.  Whilst paragraph 12  might  at  first  blush  appear  to  suggest  that
    'responsibility' for the Appellant has been passed exclusively  to  the
    sponsor, in my judgement ultimately it cannot bear that  meaning.   The
    first thing to observe is that  the  Appellant's  mother  has  provided
    consent to the Appellant staying with the sponsor: implicit is that she
    could, if she so  wished,  withdraw  consent.  The  decision  that  the
    Appellant stay with the sponsor is a decision in respect of  which  the
    Appellant's mother has taken a role. The decision  that  the  Appellant
    remain in the UK to pursue the proceedings herein, is  contingent  upon
    the Appellant's mother's continuing consent  -  and  in  continuing  to
    provide that consent the Appellant's mother continues  to  control  and
    direct the Appellant's upbringing.


54.  More particularly, plainly and obviously the  decision  to  change  the
    Appellant's name to accord with that of the sponsor is a decision  that
    impacts upon the upbringing of the Appellant and  is  relevant  to  the
    shape and  direction  of  her  life.   This  is  a  decision  that  the
    Appellant's mother says that she has taken: in my judgement that  is  a
    concrete admission of a continuing exercise of parental responsibility.


'Best interests'

55.  The Judge addresses best  interests  in  the  final  paragraph  of  the
    decision before announcing that the appeal was dismissed:

         "I am also of the view that it is  in  the  best  interest  of  the
         appellant to be with her mother who has  been  refused  a  visa  to
         enter the UK. I consider that Section 55 of the BCIA 2009  in  this
         instance should be interpreted because I am not persuaded that  the
         appellant's biological mother is unable to look after the appellant
         in Nigeria. The appellant is  attending  boarding  school  in  this
         country and there is no reason  in  my  view  why  this  could  not
         continue in Nigeria." (paragraph 31)


56.  It  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  paragraph  31  is
    inadequately reasoned. Mr Sowerby submits -  it seems to me  with  some
    force and merit - that the sentence "I consider that Section 55 of  the
    BCIA 2009 in this instance should  be  interpreted  because  I  am  not
    persuaded that the appellant's biological  mother  is  unable  to  look
    after the appellant in Nigeria" quite simply does not make  sense.  The
    notion that it is in the Appellant's best  interests  to  be  with  her
    biological mother is based on no more than an assumption,  and  is  not
    reasoned against the  context  of  the  role  of  the  sponsor  in  the
    Appellant's  life.  Moreover,  it  is  argued,  there  is  no  reasoned
    consideration to the impact on best interests of the disruption to  the
    Appellant's education in the event  that  she  is  required  to  change
    schools (as well as countries).


57.  I remind myself that 'best interests' is a  primary  consideration.  To
    that extent it is dubious that it appears only at the conclusion of the
    Judge's decision. I acknowledge that the position in a Decision of  any
    particular factor  need  not  automatically  be  an  indicator  of  the
    significance accorded to the factor in the overall consideration  of  a
    case. However,  in  the  instant  circumstance  the  opening  words  of
    paragraph 31 - "I am also of the view..." - reinforce the  notion  that
    this factor was only given consideration after the otherwise  seemingly
    determinative factors referred to in the preceding  paragraphs.  In  my
    judgement this circumstance compounds the concern  in  respect  of  the
    incomprehensible sentence in respect of section 55, and what  I  accept
    to be otherwise a paucity of reasoning.


58.  Had it not been  for  other  factors  in  this  appeal,  which  I  have
    discussed herein and also find further expression in the Directions set
    out below (including an apparent confusion as to the applicable Rules),
    I might have been minded to conclude that this error did not justify an
    exercise of the discretion under section 12(2) of the Tribunal,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 such as to  set  aside  the  decision  in  the
    appeal. On balance, however, I am persuaded that in consequence of this
    error of law the decision in the appeal requires to be remade.


The other grounds of challenge

59.  I do not  consider  there  to  be  substance  in  the  other  lines  of
    challenge pursued by the Appellant.


60.  I do not accept that the consequence of the Respondent's decision,  and
    in turn  the  Judge's  decision  was  to  'penalise'  or  'punish'  the
    Appellant for the wrongdoing of others, as is submitted at paragraph  1
    of the grounds of appeal. The consequences of her predicament  for  the
    Appellant in the event that she is unable to secure leave to remain  in
    the UK (as the Judge found) arise,  in  immigration  terms,  not  as  a
    penalty or punishment for the wrongdoing of others but because  she  is
    unable to establish a basis  to  remain  under  the  Rules  and  it  is
    considered that her consequent removal would not  be  disproportionate.
    In considering proportionality a decision-maker is obliged to take into
    account the public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration
    control, and to that extent is entitled to have regard to  the  overall
    circumstances in which a minor applicant comes  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The obverse position - which appears to be that  contended  on
    behalf of the Appellant in the grounds - is  that  in  so  far  as  the
    Appellant is an innocent in the wrongdoing of others, she should not be
    removed from the UK. I do not accept that there  is  any  principle  in
    immigration law that creates a right to remain as a  consequence  of  a
    minor's innocent unlawful presence.


61.  Further to this, and also with reference to the criticisms  in  respect
    of private life, I find that the Judge was entitled  to  consider  that
    the Appellant's immigration status in the UK was 'precarious'  for  the
    purposes of section 117B(5); accordingly  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    attach little weight to the private life established by  the  Appellant
    during her time in the UK - see paragraph 28.  I  do  not  accept  that
    there is any substance to the submission pleaded in the grounds to  the
    effect that the Judge also used this provision to attach little  weight
    to the Appellant's family life with the sponsor. The Judge is overt  at
    paragraph 28 in relating  the  Appellant's  precarious  status  to  the
    weight to be attached to her private life. Nor do I consider that  this
    particular reference to private life is indicative of the Judge failing
    to have regard to the Appellant's family life with the sponsor: plainly
    that was at the core of the Appellant's case, and it  is  addressed  in
    substance in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Conclusion on error of law

62.  Further to the above, I am persuaded that there was  a  material  error
    of law in the Judge's approach to the issue  of  the  Appellant's  best
    interests.




Remaking the decision in the appeal

63.  The decision in the appeal requires to be remade accordingly.  However,
    I do not consider that  a  full  rehearing  is  required:  I  have  not
    impugned any aspect  of  the  Judge's  decision-making  in  respect  of
    primary findings of fact. In my judgement it is  appropriate  that  the
    decision in the appeal be remade  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    foundation of the primary findings of fact of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    and pursuant to the Directions set out below.


                                 Directions

    To the Appellant:

    1. The Appellant is to  file  and  serve  any  further  statements  and
    supporting evidence upon which she wishes to rely within 28 days of the
    date shown as the date of promulgation of this document.

    So far as possible such evidence should include:

         (i) Clarification of the status of  the  relationship  between  the
         sponsor and the Appellant's mother,  together  with  a  history  of
         their cohabitation (including in particular periods  at  which  the
         sponsor has lived in the same household as the Appellant  prior  to
         her entry to the  UK  in  July  2014).  Supporting  evidence  might
         include passport stamps, bank statements, travel tickets,  and  any
         other documents which might show the whereabouts of the sponsor.

         (ii) Clarification of the Appellant's educational history  both  in
         Nigeria and in the UK - preferably by way of a  schedule  detailing
         name of school, dates of attendance, whether a boarding  school  or
         day school, and whether fee-paying or not (and  if  fee  paying  to
         include the level of fees).

         (iii) In  the  event  that  it  is  contended  that  there  is  any
         difficulty in the Appellant continuing  her  education  in  Nigeria
         because of the  educational  system  or  the  unavailability  of  a
         suitable school, all evidence upon which such a claim is based.

         (iv) Clarification of the matters arising from the contents of  the
         Family Court order as discussed above. In particular

             a) When such proceedings were commenced, why,  and  with  what
                purpose/s.
             b) In whose care, and where,  the  Appellant  resided  between
                July 2014 February 2015.
             c) The references to a guardian or guardians.
             d) The references to a private fostering arrangement;

         (v) Clarification of whether or not any appeals were pursued by the
         Appellant's mother against the refusal of  leave  to  enter  on  11
         February 2015, and/or the refusal of entry  clearance  on  26  July
         2016  -  and  in  the  event  that  there  were  any  such  appeals
         copy/copies of the Tribunal's Decision/s.


    2. The  Appellant  is  also  to  use  her  best  endeavours  to  obtain
    permission from the Family Court to disclose the Cafcass  report  of  4
    August 2015, and  the  Respondent's  response  to  the  Cafcass  report
    (supposedly dated 29  July  2015).  In  the  event  of  obtaining  such
    permission the Appellant is to file and  serve  both  within  the  same
    timescale - or otherwise as  soon  as  available.  In  the  event  that
    permission is not obtained, the Appellant is to file all evidence as to
    the attempts made to obtain such permission. (The Tribunal is aware  of
    the protocol between the IAC and the Family Courts, but at  this  stage
    does not consider it necessary to resort to its  use  in  circumstances
    where there is no obvious reason  apparent  as  to  why  permission  to
    disclose the report should  be  denied  to  the  Appellant  and/or  the
    sponsor - bearing in mind that there was no contest between any parties
    in the Family Court proceedings.)


     To the Respondent:

    3. The Respondent is to file and serve within 28 days of the date shown
    as the date of promulgation of this document:

         (i) Clarification of whether or not any appeals were pursued by the
         Appellant's mother against the refusal of  leave  to  enter  on  11
         February 2015, and/or the refusal of entry  clearance  on  26  July
         2016 - and in the event that there were any such  appeals  copy  of
         the Tribunal's Decision/s.

         (ii)  Clarification  of  any  knowledge  /  involvement  with   the
         Appellant's case prior to the  application  of  4  October  2016  -
         together with any relevant disclosable materials, (bearing in  mind
         apparent involvement in the Family Court proceedings).

         (iii)  Any  available  evidence  as  to  process  times  for  entry
         clearance applications from Nigeria, either under  Part  8  of  the
         Immigration Rules or as a child student. (If  such  information  is
         not available by category, then  evidence  as  to  general  waiting
         times should be provided.)


     To the Appellant and the Respondent:

    4. The parties are not expressly directed to  file  and  serve  written
    submissions save in this respect:


         (i) Both parties are invited to  indicate  whether  they  agree  or
         disagree with the discussion above in  respect  of  the  applicable
         Immigration Rules (paragraph 25-37, and in particular at paragraphs
         33 et seq.)


         (ii) In  the  event  that  there  is  disagreement,  brief  written
         submissions are to be  provided  as  to  the  contended  applicable
         rules.


    5. Both parties are otherwise at liberty  to  file  and  serve  written
    submissions in the appeal. Whether or not any written  submissions  are
    presented, the Appellant will be expected to address in submissions  at
    the next hearing:

         (i) Any claimed  difficulties  in  respect  of  being  schooled  in
    Nigeria.

         (ii) If it is to be contended that the Appellant could satisfy  the
         requirements of Part 8 of the Immigration Rules, or  the  Rules  in
         respect of a child student, why the Appellant could not  reasonably
         be expected to return to Nigeria (possibly during the  long  summer
         vacation) and make an application for entry clearance from abroad.


    6. Both parties are at liberty to file and serve any  further  evidence
    in response to the evidence filed by the other party in accordance with
    the Directions above, within 42 days of the date shown as the  date  of
    promulgation of this document


     Relisting

    7. The appeal is to be relisted at Field House on the  first  available
    day after 49 days of the date shown as the date of promulgation of this
    document, with a time estimate of 2.5 hours.  (It  is  not  anticipated
    that it will be necessary to hear any live evidence - or  alternatively
    any live evidence at length.)




    8. The appeal is reserved to me.


                          >>>>> End of Annex <<<<<
