
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09745/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 07 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            Ranmit Singh DHILLON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal of Counsel, Visa Expert Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   On 20 September 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  gave  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hamilton (the Immigration Judge).  The Immigration Judge
    decided to dismiss the appeal against the decision of the respondent to
    refuse indefinite leave to remain in this case. The Immigration Judge's
    decision was promulgated on 20 August 2018. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew gave permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  grounds
    that there was an arguable error of law in not  considering  fully  the
    implications of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and in  giving  no  proper  consideration  best
    interests of the child.

2.   Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that in relation to a genuine
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child (one who is a
    British national who has been in the UK for seven years) the removal of
    a person not subject to deportation is not require unless it would be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK with the appellant. In
    addition, section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009 (2009 Act) requires the respondent when exercising his functions
    to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the UK.

Background

3.   The appellant entered the UK illegally in 2002 and does not  appear  to
    have applied for leave to remain until 2010.   By  that  time,  he  had
    taken up with a lady by the name of  [TD]  whom  he  married,  and  the
    marriage was recognised in English law in 2010.  He  is  therefore  the
    spouse of [TD] and they have a child together,  namely  [GD],  who  was
    born on 8 October 2011.  There is no dispute  that  [TD]  is  a  person
    present and settled in the UK who is a British citizen and that in 2014
    the appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with her.  That application was unsuccessful but on 20 May
    2017 the appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  grounds  that  the
    respondent's policy ought to permit him to remain in the UK,  in  other
    words, the decision to remove him would be contrary to the respondent's
    stated policy of allowing people to remain in the UK where they have  a
    subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child.    However,   the
    respondent refused the application because the  respondent  found  that
    the appellant had cheated in relation to an application for an  English
    language test when he had sat the exam for the English language test on
    22 January 2014.  The English  language  test  was  therefore  obtained
    fraudulently, and the certificate was invalid.  Hence  the  appellant's
    presence in the  UK  was  not  considered  in  the  public  good.   The
    respondent applied paragraph 322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provided that it is a ground of refusal  to  an  application  made  for
    leave to remain that it is undesirable for that person to be allowed to
    remain in the UK because of his conduct.

Summary of the Arguments

4.   The appellant was represented by Mr Iqbal of  Counsel,  the  respondent
    by Ms Isherwood a Home Office Presenting Officer.  Mr  Iqbal  submitted
    that there was little need to elaborate on his grounds of appeal  which
    he relied on in full.  He said this was  not  a  deportation  case  and
    although  frauds  had  been  alleged  and  had  not  been   effectively
    challenged, it only related to an  English  language  test  certificate
    which was not specifically related to the issue in hand,  that  of  his
    relationship with a qualifying child.  He said that the respondent  had
    raised the question of character as a basis for refusal but in  essence
    his client did qualify for leave to remain  in  every  respect  as  the
    requirements of Section 117B(6) were  met  in  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect his child to leave the UK.

5.   The respondent, on the other hand, had submitted  a  response  pursuant
    to Rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal Rules of 2008, which  stated  that  in
    the respondent's view it was reasonable for  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion he had. In summary, the appellant had utilised fraud and, if
    it was in the best interests of the child to remain in the UK with  the
    sponsor's mother, there was no reason why that should not occur.   This
    was a matter of choice for the appellant's wife and it was open to  her
    either to stay in the UK with her child, who is now just over  the  age
    of 7, or to return to India with her child so  she  could  re-join  the
    appellant.

6.   Mr Iqbal made  further  submissions  to  the  effect  that  the  public
    interest did not require the removal of a child in such  circumstances.
    He referred  to  a  number  of  passages  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, including the Immigration Judge's analysis at  paragraph  99,
    where he said that the need to maintain effective immigration  controls
    was a paramount consideration in this case.  He said that there  was  a
    conspicuous absence  of  any  reference  to  Section  117B(6)  in  that
    paragraph and that should not have been absent from that paragraph.  He
    said it was misconceived to say that the appellant had any choice;  his
    wife and child were here, and it was in their best interests to  remain
    together in the UK as a  family.  Therefore,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to have adequate regard to the  respondent's  obligations  under
    the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  Article  8  and  the  other
    statutory obligations referred.

7.   He made several references to the decision in the case,  including  the
    case of MA  (Pakistan)  which  considered  the  wider  public  interest
    considerations in greater detail.  He said that the Immigration Judge's
    analysis was flawed, the judge had given  inadequate  consideration  to
    the private or family life which had been formed and  excessive  weight
    to the alleged fraud.  I say "alleged" but in fact Mr Iqbal reluctantly
    accepted that it had not been contested before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that his client had committed fraud in this case in the  sense  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He said there was no  criminal  act  as  such,  the
    respondent's own policy guidance was clearly  satisfied  and  therefore
    his client ought to have been given leave to remain.

Issues

8.   Given that the appellant is with his wife and child in the UK  and  has
    been here for many years the principal issue is whether the appellant's
    removal would be in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in
    accordance with the respondent's own policy guidance as  discussed  and
    considered in the leading case of Zambrano [2011] All ER (D) 199.   The
    question is whether the Immigration Judge had properly considered  that
    guidance and that section and whether in the light of that guidance and
    that section the Immigration Judge was entitled to reach  the  decision
    he reached.


Conclusion

9.   Having considered carefully the  arguments  for  both  sides  and  read
    carefully the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I have  decided  that
    there was no material error of law in the decision that the Immigration
    Judge reached.  This is a very detailed and careful decision  in  which
    the relevant case and statute law  and  guidance  was  considered.   It
    specifically referred to the respondent's guidance in a paragraph which
    I will identify shortly.  More importantly I have  no  doubt  that  the
    Immigration Judge had in mind the welfare of the appellant' s child. As
    Ms Isherwood submitted, in a case of this type a child cannot  be  used
    as a "trump card".  The need for effective immigration controls weighed
    more heavily in the balance than the need for respect  for  the  family
    life the appellant and his family had developed in the UK  due  to  the
    appellant's own poor immigration  history  and  his  use  of  fraud  in
    relation to his English language test.

10.  I am satisfied that the Immigration Judge  had  in  mind  all  relevant
    factors when he reached his decision.  Although the  Immigration  Judge
    does not explicitly refer to Section 117B(6) at  paragraph  99  of  his
    decision, I am satisfied that it was  at  the  forefront  of  his  mind
    having been  referred to extensively earlier in his decision. This  was
    therefore a decision the Immigration Judge was entitled to come  to  on
    the evidence, although other judges may have given different weight  to
    different factors.

Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any  material
    error of law and accordingly I dismiss the appeal against the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  No anonymity direction was made, and I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 30 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 30 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
