
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/09796/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 March 2021                         |On 24 March 2021                   |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                  YADA PUN

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Mr D Balroop, instructed by Gordon & Thompson Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated that I found an error of law in the  decision  but  reserved  my
full reasons, which I now give. The order made is described at the end  of
these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Nepal with date  of  birth  given  as
   23.3.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 19.2.20 (Judge  Plumtre),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 14.5.19, to refuse her  application  for  entry
   clearance as the dependent daughter of her father and sponsor,  a  former
   Gurkha soldier present and settled in the UK since 2010.

2. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  asserted  that  the  judge
   erred in law as follows:

     a. Making findings contrary to the weight of the evidence. Reliance is
        particularly placed on:

           i.  The  large  sums  paid  by  the  sponsoring  father  to  the
              appellant.

          ii. The appellant's access to the sponsor's bank  account,  which
              it is claimed "the pattern of the withdrawal suggests, on the
              balance that she withdrew large amounts  and  deposited  back
              when it was not spent".

         iii. The appellant's mother's long visits to the appellant in 2016
              (over 6 months) and 2018/19 (1 year and 2 months).

     b. Taking into account irrelevant matters, including  sums  of  monies
        paid to others. It is submitted that this fact does not exclude the
        appellant being dependent on the sponsor.

3. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
   Osborne) on 21.5.20, considering the grounds set out above arguable in an
   "otherwise careful decision." It was considered arguable that  the  judge
   failed to give consideration to the large amounts paid to  the  appellant
   by the sponsor for her maintenance, and the long visits to the  appellant
   by his mother. Additionally, it  was  arguable  that  sums  paid  by  the
   sponsor to persons other than the appellant are irrelevant. "Furthermore,
   it is arguable that the deposits paid into the sponsor's bank account  by
   the appellant are in respect of sums not used by the appellant."

4. The Upper Tribunal has received, and I  have  taken  into  consideration,
   the appellant's further submissions, dated  28.8.20,  together  with  the
   oral submissions made to me at the remote hearing. On 1.10.20, the  Upper
   Tribunal issued directions requiring the respondent  to  respond  to  the
   appellant's further submissions. To date, there has been no such response
   or Rule 24 reply and Mr Tan did not indicate  that  there  was  any  such
   written response.

5. At the outset of the appeal, Mr Tan explained that he did not oppose  the
   appeal. Having read the further submissions, he  accepted  that  material
   errors were disclosed.

6. In relation to the appellant's asserted access to the sponsor's  Nepalese
   bank account, this is confirmed in principle by the bank in the letter at
   [41] of the appellant's bundle and [5] of the sponsor's witness statement
   of 7.12.19. However, as I explained to Mr Balroop, the  letter  does  not
   state that the appellant is the sole authority  holder,  as  the  grounds
   assert. Further, the assertion in the grounds that  "it  is  more  likely
   than not, on the balance of probabilities  in  civil  standard  that  the
   appellant herself withdrew the monies... The pattern  of  the  withdrawal
   suggests, on the balance that she withdrew large  amounts  and  deposited
   back when it was not spent," is little more than speculation.  There  was
   no evidence indication in the banking evidence  carefully  considered  by
   the judge as to which withdrawals and in what amounts were withdrawn from
   the account by the appellant. The sponsor's statement  stated  only  that
   she withdrew money from the bank account from time to time to "cover  her
   expenses". There is no reference in that statement to monies  being  paid
   back into the account by the appellant, or the reason for  so  doing.  In
   the premises, no error of law is disclosed by the failure  to  take  this
   assertion into account.

7. However, I am satisfied that the judge failed to  take  the  evidence  of
   financial support fully into account. It is clear from the decision  that
   the judge took into account the sums of monies paid to the  appellant  by
   the sponsor but factually erred in stating at [23] of the  decision  that
   no payments were made to the appellant during a period  between  May  and
   July  2017.  In  fact,  as  the  grounds  point  out,  there  were  money
   remittances for considerable sums made in May and June  2017.  Similarly,
   the judge failed to record or acknowledge all of the payments  that  were
   made to the appellant. It would have assisted the First-tier Tribunal  if
   a schedule had been prepared  setting  out  the  financial  payments  and
   remittances in chronological order rather than  expecting  the  judge  to
   detect the information from the appellant's bundle  financial  documents.
   However, I am satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  properly  take  into
   account all of the financial evidence, which undermines  the  conclusions
   reached.

8. In addition, it is unclear from [31]  of  the  decision  that  the  judge
   properly took into account the visits of the appellant's mother to Nepal.
   Only one of two such visits  was  there  mentioned  and  when  the  judge
   commented that the mother  had  two  part-time  jobs  in  the  UK  "which
   precluded long absences," it is not clear what the  judge  has  concluded
   about the mother's visits.

9. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I  find  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside to be remade.

10. Although  the  further  submissions  contended  for  the  matter  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Balroop urged me to deal with the
   appeal on submissions on the issue of dependency in Gurkha-related  cases
   in which the public interest can be outweighed by the historic injustice,
   provided family life engaging article 8 is established. However,  Mr  Tan
   indicated that given the  approach  taken  in  the  grounds  he  was  not
   prepared to deal with the matter immediately and pointed to a  number  of
   factors identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  which  went  against
   the appellant. In the premises, I concluded that the  appropriate  course
   was to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  for
   the decision to be remade de novo.


11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge vitiate all findings of fact and the conclusions from  those  facts
   so that there has not been a valid determination of  the  issues  in  the
   appeal. In all the circumstances, I remit this appeal for a fresh hearing
   in the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a case which  falls
   squarely within the Senior President's Practice  Statement  at  paragraph
   7.2.
Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
      be remade de novo with no findings preserved.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 March 2021







