
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/09537/2015

                                                  HU/09538/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31st August 2017                      |  On 1st September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                              Samsun Nahar Rina
                             nurjahan sadia iva
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Ross promulgated on 25  May  2017  in  which  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against the decisions to refuse their applications for entry  clearance
    dated 25 June 2015 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh born on 4 January  1975  and
    10 December 1997  respectively.   They  are  mother  and  daughter  who
    applied for entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  to  join  Mr  Ali
    Roufique,  (the  "Sponsor")  their  husband/father  who  is  a  British
    Citizen.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 25 June  2015  on  the  basis
    that the spousal and parental relationships claimed were not accepted.

 4. Judge Ross dismissed the appeals in a decision promulgated  on  25  May
    2017 on the basis that he did not accept that the First  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting relationship; that neither
    Appellant could satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a
    grant of entry clearance and there would be no interference with family
    life which would continue in the same way as it had done since 2004.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on 4 grounds  which  can  be  taken  together  as
    follows.  First, that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  approach  the
    issue of whether  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the First Appellant and the Sponsor in accordance  with  Goudey
    (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC)
    and Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012]  UKUT
    00040 (IAC); making a flawed assessment of credibility and  using  that
    as determinative of the issue.  Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to give sufficient reasons for the finding  that  there  was  no
    genuine and  subsisting  relationship  despite  factual  findings  that
    indicated that there  was.   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    applied the wrong standard of proof in basing findings on suspicion and
    one adverse credibility finding to determine the issue of whether there
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Holmes on 6 July 2017 on  all
    grounds and a in addition, it was noted that the Judge appeared to have
    accepted all of the necessary ingredients for the existence  of  family
    life between the Second Appellant and the Sponsor but  concluded  there
    was none..

 7.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Miah  relied  on  all  grounds  of  appeal  and
    respectfully  relied  upon  the  reasons  of  Judge   Holmes   granting
    permission to appeal; emphasising that in light of the factual findings
    which indicated a genuine and subsisting relationship and family  life,
    there were insufficient reasons given to support the  findings  to  the
    contrary in dismissing the appeal.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tarlow  submitted  that  the  issue  of
    whether there is a genuine and subsisting relationship was an  exercise
    of fact finding for the First-tier Tribunal and the findings made  were
    open to Judge Ross, specifically that the accepted evidence  of  visits
    to Bangladesh and financial maintenance were for  the  benefit  of  the
    Sponsor's daughter and not  indicative  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  In paragraph 14 of  the  decision,  sufficient  separate
    consideration was given to right to respect for  family  life  of  each
    Appellant and sustainable reasons were given for the dismissal  of  the
    appeals on human rights grounds.





Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the relationship between the  First  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, Judge Ross accepted (in paragraphs 9 to 11  of  the  decision)
    that the couple married in 1996 and were  living  together  until  2004
    when the First Appellant was unable to return to  the  United  Kingdom.
    It was further accepted that the couple had  three  children  together,
    that the Sponsor had visited Bangladesh  in  2007,  2008,  2010,  2011,
    2013, 2015 and 2017, there were photographs of the family  together  in
    Bangladesh and that there was evidence of financial  support  from  the
    Sponsor in 2014 and 2015.  The sole reason given in  paragraph  11  for
    the finding that there was no genuine and subsisting  relationship  was
    an adverse credibility finding against the Sponsor who was found to  be
    unable to credibly explain why no application for entry  clearance  had
    been made between 2004 and 2015 for his wife to join him in the  United
    Kingdom.  The accepted evidence was found to  be  consistent  with  the
    Sponsor visiting and supporting his children in Bangladesh rather  than
    his wife and that the application was made in 2015 only to  provide  an
    opportunity for the Second  Appellant  to  obtain  a  British  passport
    before she became an adult.

 2. The issue of whether a marriage is genuine and  subsisting  is  a  fact
    sensitive one which requires an assessment of not only whether there is
    a valid marriage which formally continues but also whether there  is  a
    real relationship in  which  there  is  a  genuine  intention  to  live
    together  as  man  and  wife  (see  in  particular  Goudey).    In   GA
    ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    held that where there is a legally recognised marriage and the  parties
    who are living apart both want to be together and live as  husband  and
    wife, the Tribunal could  not  see  that  more  would  be  required  to
    demonstrate that the marriage is subsisting.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not refer to any of the case law on genuine
    and subsisting relationship, nor has it approached determination of the
    issue in the way set out in those cases.  It is for the First Appellant
    to show, on the balance of probabilities, that she is in a genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  the  Sponsor  and  given  the  accepted
    evidence  in  support  of  that  (of  the  marriage,   children,   past
    cohabitation, visits and financial  support),  it  was  irrational  for
    Judge Ross to conclude, on the correct  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    marriage was  not  genuine  and  subsisting  due  to  what  essentially
    amounted to suspicion of why an application for entry clearance was not
    made sooner.  This is particularly so when the Sponsor's  evidence  did
    include an explanation as to the late timing  of  the  entry  clearance
    application  because  he  wanted  the  children  to  be   educated   in
    Bangladesh, which is not referred to at all in the  decision  of  Judge
    Ross.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in   the
    assessment of  whether  the  First  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage with  the  Sponsor  and  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for the finding that there was no such relationship.

 4. In paragraph 14 of the decision, separate consideration  was  given  by
    Judge Ross to the Appellants' right to respect for  family  life  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   In  respect  of
    the First Appellant, he concluded that as  there  was  no  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage, no family life had been established either between
    her and the Sponsor.  That finding is unsafe in light of  the  material
    error of law identified above.

 5. As to the Second Appellant, in paragraphs 9  to  11  of  the  decision,
    Judge Ross accepted that she was the Sponsor's daughter  and  that  the
    Sponsor had been visiting  Bangladesh  to  see  her  and  had  provided
    financial support to her.  However, in paragraph 14 of the decision, he
    did not find that the Second Appellant had established family life with
    her father, the Sponsor, for the purposes of Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  This fails to acknowledge that family life
    for the purposes of Article 8 is presumed between a  parent  and  minor
    child and in any  event  is  contrary  to  the  accepted  evidence  and
    findings as to their contact and  parental  support.   Whether  or  not
    visits can be maintained may go to  an  assessment  of  proportionality
    (which Judge Ross did not purport to do) but is  not  relevant  to  the
    existence of family life  at  all  nor  as  to  whether  there  is  any
    interference with it given the positive duty to  promote  family  life.
    The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  the  assessment  of
    the appeals under  Article  8  as  to  whether  family  life  had  been
    established and whether there was an interference with such family life
    and therefore erred in failing to  go  on  to  consider  the  remaining
    questions for an Article 8 assessment as set out by the House of  Lords
    in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL  27,
    specifically whether the refusal was  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the right to respect for family life.

 6. The Appellants' appeal against the decision of Judge  Ross  is  allowed
    for the reasons given above and their appeals are remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before any  Judge  other  than
Judge Ross.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
     [pic]

Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson                                         Date
     1st September 2017
