
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09512/2015
                                                               HU/09501/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2017                               |On 30 May 2017                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                     mrs arshia wasim (First Appellant)
                     miss Hoor-ul-Ain (Second Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, instructed by Milestone Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mrs Wasim and her daughter against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge who dismissed their appeal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer's  decision  of  14  October  2015  refusing   entry
    clearance to enable them to join the sponsor,  Mr  Malik,  who  is  the
    husband of the first appellant and father of the second  appellant,  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.   The appeal was dealt with on the papers by  request.   I  need  not  go
    into any great detail in what I say about the judge's decision,  except
    to say that the appeal was dismissed on the basis that as  it  was  not
    shown that the sponsor was permanently residing in the United  Kingdom,
    it was concluded that the requirements to the Rules could not  be  met,
    but among other things an ongoing concern of the  respondent  was  with
    regard  to  the  ability  of  the  appellants  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.  This was purported to be done by means of a
    gift that had been made to the first appellant by her father, and it is
    clear from the judge's paragraph 9 that he accepted the deed of gift as
    valid and the respondent was not justified  in  rejecting  it  for  the
    reason that she gave and there is no challenge to that finding.

3.   When the matter came to  the  First-tier  Judge,  Judge  Gibb,  on  the
    application for permission, he noted (very helpfully  at  paragraph  4)
    that as in the grounds of appeal it was pointed out  that  the  sponsor
    had been intending to travel with the appellants, under the Immigration
    Rules there  was  an  exception  in  the  case  where  a  sponsor  with
    settlement, as in this case, is travelling  with  his  family  for  the
    purposes of settlement is not required to  be  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that point had  been  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    factually rather than as a  legal  submission.   That  point  was  very
    properly and helpfully accepted  by  the  respondent  in  the  Rule  24
    response and the only outstanding issue then was the issue of financial
    support and since the drafter of the Rule  24  response  did  not  have
    sight of the judge's decision she could not have known that in fact the
    judge had accepted that the deed of gift was valid.  Those  two  points
    essentially dispose of the outstanding issues in this  appeal.   It  is
    accepted and is common ground that the sponsor was not required  to  be
    in the United Kingdom and the judge found that the  deed  of  gift  was
    valid and therefore the requirements of the Rules as regards  financial
    matters were met, so as a consequence, in substitution for the  judge's
    decision dismissing the appeals, is a decision allowing them.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 25 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

