
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/09770/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                              |Decisions and Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                     |
|On 8th May 2019                          |On 15th May 2019                |
|                                         |                                |

                                   Before

                      THE HON. MR JUSTICE MICHAEL SOOLE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HUSSEN [H]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Robinson, of Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction

    1. The claimant's mother was an Ethiopian citizen of Eritrean ethnicity
       who died in 2003. The claimant was born in 1981 in Saudi Arabia. His
       father has apparently died having divorced his mother and left Saudi
       Arabia to go back to Ethiopia or Eritrea.

    2. The claimant arrived in the UK on 10th February 1994 when he was  12
       years old with his mother  and  sister  on  his  mother's  Ethiopian
       passport. His mother claimed asylum on the basis she was an Eritrean
       citizen who was at risk of persecution in that country, but this was
       claim was refused and the appeal dismissed. The claimant was granted
       indefinite leave to remain in August 2001.

    3. Between June 2001 and April 2016 the claimant was  convicted  of  51
       offences  involving  violence,   dishonesty,   disorder,   motoring,
       alcohol, failure to surrender, possession of  an  offensive  weapon,
       breach of an existing sentence and racially/ religiously  aggravated
       conduct. He was warned in November 2013 and  September  2014  if  he
       continued to offend he would face deportation proceedings, but  this
       did not cause him to modify his behaviour. The  Secretary  of  State
       decided to make a deportation order in July 2016, and refused asylum
       and human rights representations in August 2017 and September  2018.
       The claimant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  the  human  rights/
       asylum claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan  on
       Article 8 ECHR grounds only in a determination  promulgated  on  the
       26th October 2018.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 13th November 2018 on the basis  that
       it was arguably an error of law to find that the claimant's  history
       of violence, dishonesty, drinking and disorderly  behaviour  weighed
       in his favour, as an obstacle to his integration if he  is  returned
       to Ethiopia, in deciding the deportation appeal. Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Davidge granted permission to the  claimant  to  cross
       appeal on 4th February 2019, and extended time to admit this appeal,
       on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
       had erred in law in failing to  provide  sufficient  reasoning  with
       respect to the dismissal of the asylum claim based on the claimant's
       Ethiopian citizenship.

    5. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The Secretary of State argues in the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge errs by failing  to  provide  adequate  or
       proper reasons for the conclusion that the claimant would have  very
       significant obstacles to integration  on  return  to  Ethiopia.  The
       First-tier Tribunal found that  there  were  possibly  relatives  in
       Ethiopia to whom the claimant could turn (paragraph 28 g); there  is
       no finding the claimant could not reacquaint himself with  Ethiopian
       languages; further the fact that the claimant drinks and is prone to
       crime, disorder and violence should not be facts which assist him in
       showing he would not be able to integrate as this would  defeat  the
       deportation regime. In oral submissions regarding whether the  error
       of law was material Mr Melvin sought  to  argue  that  it  was,  but
       accepted that there was only a challenge in the grounds to paragraph
       24(c)(v) of the decision, and not to the other findings with respect
       to integrative challenges the claimant would face,  and  that  there
       was also no challenge to the conclusion, based on  expert  evidence,
       that Ethiopia  would  probably  not  recognise  the  claimant  as  a
       citizen.

    7. In a skeleton argument dated 1st May 2019 permission was  sought  by
       the Secretary of State to also challenge the finding of  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal  that  the  claimant  is  socially   and   culturally
       integrated in the UK. It is argued that this is not a  safe  finding
       in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Binbuga  (Turkey)
       v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551  that:  "breaking  the  law  may  involve
       discontinuity in integration" because the claimant was convicted  of
       51 offences between 2001 and 2016. It is also argued that alcoholism
       is not a factor which supports the claimant being integrated either,
       and so it was an irrelevant consideration placed in the balance.

    8. The claimant argues with respect to the Secretary of State's  appeal
       grounds that the First-tier Tribunal undertook a holistic and  broad
       assessment required by paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules/  the
       first exception at s.117C(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002, and that the grounds are just a  disagreement  with
       the outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
       claimant to be vulnerable (see  paragraph  19);  that  he  had  been
       resident in the UK most of his life (see paragraph 24); he had never
       lived in Ethiopia, and there was no evidence he  spoke  any  of  its
       languages; he suffers from ADHD and alcohol dependence syndrome, has
       previously self-harmed and there is a risk he will do so  again;  he
       has no significant qualifications and has a  penchant  for  alcohol,
       disorder, dishonesty and violence. It is argued that these  are  all
       valid reasons for  finding  that  he  would  have  very  significant
       obstacles to integration and thus allowing the appeal.

    9. With respect to the new ground the claimant argues that  the  ground
       should not be admitted as it is  very  late.  The  case  of  Binbuga
       relies on an older Upper Tribunal authority of Bossade (ss.117A-D  -
       interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 and so the point could
       have been taken when the grounds were first  drafted.  In  any  case
       Binbuga is not authority  finding  that  it  is  mandatory  to  find
       offending  causes  a  person  not  to  be  socially  and  culturally
       integrated and there  was  full  consideration  of  this  factor  in
       concluding that the claimant was an integrated person.

   10. The claimant argues in his cross appeal  that  a  ground  of  appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal was that he would face persecution by
       way of being denied citizenship  and  a  right  to  enter  Ethiopia.
       Reliance was placed on the expert evidence of Dr John Campbell,  who
       provided two reports and gave oral evidence, who found  that  it  is
       probable that  neither  Ethiopia  nor  Eritrea  will  recognise  the
       claimant as a citizen, and that the Ethiopians were unlikely  to  do
       this as he was not born in Ethiopia  and  has  no  documentation  to
       prove his claimed nationality, and further because he  has  criminal
       convictions he would not be issued with a passport. Dr Campbell also
       found that the claimant had made a bona  fide  effort  to  obtain  a
       passport from the Ethiopian authorities. The evidence of Dr Campbell
       is further that there are stigmatising  social  attitudes  to  those
       with mental health problems and it was extremely unlikely  he  would
       be able to access free mental health care in Ethiopia. It is  argued
       that the First-tier Tribunal errs as the evidence of Dr Campbell  is
       accepted at paragraph 25 of the decision, and thus it was irrational
       for the First-tier Tribunal to find that any  information  that  the
       claimant or his sister could provide regarding relatives in Ethiopia
       would  have  made  any  difference  to  the  Ethiopian  authorities,
       especially  as  he  had  attended  an  interview.  The  findings  at
       paragraph 28 of the  decision,  it  is  said,  contradict  those  at
       paragraph 25 of the decision.

   11. The Secretary of State, in his Rule 24  response,  argues  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge gave adequate  consideration  and  reasons
       with respect to the issue of  the  claimant  being  accepted  as  an
       Ethiopian national. It was open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  find
       that the claimant had not been  frank  about  his  connections  with
       Ethiopia and that he may have some family support there, and that he
       had not done what could be expected to  obtain  recognition  of  his
       citizenship from the Ethiopian authorities.

   12. We asked Ms Robinson if she wished to pursue the cross appeal if our
       decision was that we found that there was no material error  of  law
       in the decision allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR. We rose to
       consider whether we would admit the new ground put  forward  by  the
       Secretary of State and to allow Ms Robinson to take instructions  on
       pursuing the cross appeal. When the hearing reconvened  we  informed
       the parties that we did not extend time to admit  the  Secretary  of
       State's new ground due to it being late  and  the  point  previously
       available to be  taken.  We  also  informed  the  parties  that  our
       decision was that there was no material error of law in the decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
       grounds, but that our full reasons  would  follow  in  writing.   Ms
       Robinson confirmed that the cross appeal was not  pursued  in  these
       circumstances and so we make no findings on that appeal.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   13. The First-tier Tribunal finds at paragraph 24 of the  decision  that
       the claimant can fulfil the first two requirements of the  exception
       to deportation at paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules as he  has
       lived lawfully in the UK for most of his life and  is  socially  and
       culturally integrated. The First-tier Tribunal also  finds  that  he
       would have obstacles to integration if returned to Ethiopia  because
       he has never lived in  Ethiopia;  because  he  does  not  speak  any
       Ethiopian languages; because  of  discrimination  against  those  of
       Eritrean ethnicity in Ethiopia; and because of his inability to keep
       himself from committing crime which is related to his ADHD diagnosis
       and problems with alcohol abuse, which in turn have  caused  him  to
       self-harm in the past. At paragraph 25 the First-tier Tribunal finds
       that the Ethiopian authorities would not recognise the  claimant  as
       an Ethiopian citizen, relying upon Dr Campbell's evidence, and  that
       this conclusion was not affected by the fact that the  claimant  had
       not done all he should have done to assist the Ethiopian authorities
       and even though there was a lack of candour by the claimant and  his
       sister about family matters, as set out at paragraph 26  and  27  of
       the decision. At paragraph 27 the First-tier Tribunal  decides  that
       taken as a whole, relying upon the facts as found  at  paragraph  24
       and adding in the claimant's lack of any significant qualifications,
       the claimant had shown he would have very significant  obstacles  to
       integration if returned to Ethiopia  and  thus  had  shown  that  he
       qualified under the exception at paragraph 399A of  the  Immigration
       Rules making his deportation disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

   14. We find that the only question which arises from  the  Secretary  of
       State's grounds of appeal is whether the reliance on the fact of the
       claimant's "penchant  for  disorder,  dishonesty  and  violence"  in
       finding that he would have very significant obstacles to integration
       was an error of law.  Factually  it  is  obviously  correct  that  a
       likelihood of future criminality would  make  it  difficult  for  an
       appellant to integrate in  any  society.  There  is  authority,  for
       instance in the cases of Binbuga and  Bossade  referred  to  in  the
       discussion of the Secretary of State's additional ground of  appeal,
       that supports a conclusion that an appellant may not  be  integrated
       into society into the UK if he or she has led a life  of  crime.  We
       agree with the submission  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
       however that an appellant cannot  properly  argue  that  his  future
       propensity to commit crime, and  be  violent  and  dishonest,  is  a
       factor strengthening his or her case that  he/she  would  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration if deported. This is for public
       policy reasons. It would defeat the  rationale  of  the  deportation
       regime, and would strengthen the case of those who have the  highest
       chances of recidivism and disadvantage those  who  have  managed  to
       reform themselves and have the very likely prospect of living a law-
       abiding life in the future.

   15. We find that the finding that a propensity  to  commit  crime  is  a
       factor which strengthens the claimant's case that he would  struggle
       to integrate is quite different from the finding that  the  claimant
       suffers from alcohol dependency syndrome and  ADHD  and  that  these
       conditions will inhibit  his  integration.  These  are  medical  and
       neurological conditions which may  well  disadvantage  a  person  in
       integrating in  society,  and  may  properly,  without  contravening
       public  policy  considerations,  be  factors  to  which  weight   is
       attributed depending on the facts of the individual  case.  It  goes
       without  saying  that  people  with  conditions  such  as  ADHD   or
       alcoholism do not always or even commonly commit crime.

   16. We are however satisfied that the error of  law  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in including the claimant's propensity to commit crime as a
       factor which assisted him in proving he would have very  significant
       obstacles to integration is not material on the particular facts  of
       this case. This is because we are satisfied that the  other  factors
       found in this case going to the  claimant  having  very  significant
       obstacles to integration are undoubtedly  sufficient  to  meet  this
       test. The First-tier Tribunal makes the following findings which  we
       find show that the outcome would  inevitably  be  the  same  if  the
       appeal were remade: the finding that expert evidence shows that  the
       claimant is, on the balance  of  probabilities,  not  a  citizen  of
       Ethiopia and would not be given a passport; the finding that he  has
       never lived in that country; the finding that he does not  have  any
       significant qualifications; the finding that his main family member,
       his sister, lives in the  UK  although  he  might  not  be  entirely
       without family support in Ethiopia; the finding  that  he  does  not
       speak the languages spoken there; the finding  that  he  would  face
       discrimination in Ethiopia due to his Eritrean  ethnicity;  and  the
       finding that he suffers from alcoholism and ADHD, and has  committed
       acts of self-harm in the past.

          Decision:

      1. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of a material error on a point of law.


      2. We uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
         appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:    13th May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






