

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09956/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 7 February 2017                      |On : 8 February 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               EZILDA KAWAKUBO

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, Counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Ms  Kawakubo's  appeal
against the decision to deport her from the United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse
her human rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent  and  Ms  Kawakubo  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen Brazil born on 6 August 1958. She arrived in  the
United Kingdom on 8 August 1986 and  was  given  leave  to  enter.  She  was
subsequently granted further periods of leave to remain and on 28  September
1988 she was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  her
marriage to a British citizen. She had a daughter,  Lana,  born  on  7  June
1991, a British citizen. Her marriage was dissolved on 10 November 2003.


On 3 March 2011 the appellant was  convicted  of  eight  counts  of  benefit
fraud and was sentenced on 27 April 2011 to 21 months' imprisonment.  On  18
May 2011 she was served  with  a  liability  to  automatic  deportation  and
responded by completing a questionnaire and making several  representations.
On 20 July 2015 a Deportation Order was signed against the appellant and  on
20 October 2015 the respondent made a decision to deport her and  to  refuse
her human rights claim. The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  Her
appeal was allowed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  18  August  2016.  The
Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal that decision.

The appellant's human rights  claim  was  presented  on  the  basis  of  her
relationship with her daughter Lana, her strong  ties  to  the  UK  and  her
numerous and significant  medical  problems  and  inability  to  access  the
necessary treatment in Brazil. The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's
claim, accepted that she had the medical problems  listed  in  the  decision
letter and that she was taking the medication listed,  but  considered  that
there were adequate medical facilities available  in  Brazil  and  that  her
deportation would not breach Article 3 of the ECHR. With regard  to  Article
8, the respondent considered that the appellant could not meet the  criteria
in paragraph 399(a) or (b) and that, whilst she could meet the  criteria  in
paragraph 399A(a) and (b) on the basis of her private  life  established  in
the UK, she could not meet the requirements in paragraph 399A(c) as  it  was
not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
integration into Brazil. The respondent did not accept that there were  very
compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation.

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam  on  27  July  2016.
The appeal was not pursued on Article 3  grounds,  but  on  the  basis  that
there were very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Brazil.  Judge
Lingam heard from the appellant and her daughter Lana. She considered  three
expert reports, one relating to the appellant's mental health problems,  one
relating to her medical problems and one relating  to  the  availability  of
medical treatment in Brazil. She  accepted  that,  whilst  basic  government
funded medical treatment may be available to the appellant  in  Brazil,  the
more complex treatment she required for her many  medical  conditions  would
not be available without private health insurance. The judge  accepted  that
the appellant would have difficulty finding employment in Brazil because  of
her medical conditions and  therefore  would  not  have  access  to  private
medical insurance through employment.  She  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's daughter Lana  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  finance  her
mother's medical bills and other related costs and  she  accepted  that  the
appellant's  other  relatives  in  Brazil  would  not  be  able  to  provide
financial assistance. She found that the medical evidence  showed  that  the
appellant's deportation would seriously impact  on  her  medical  conditions
which would in turn  impact  on  her  mental  well-being  and  there  was  a
likelihood of increase in suicidal ideation. The judge  concluded  that  the
appellant would face very significant obstacles  to  integration  in  Brazil
and allowed the appeal on private life grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge Lingam's  decision  on  the
ground that she had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  accepting  the
appellant's daughter's evidence that she would  be  unable  to  support  her
mother.

Permission was granted on 14 December 2016.

Both parties made submissions before me and I advised them that I  found  no
error of law in the judge's decision.


The only challenge to the judge's decision,  in  the  respondent's  grounds,
was to her acceptance of the appellant's daughter's evidence that she  would
be unable to support her mother if  she  returned  to  Brazil.  The  grounds
assert that there was a lack of reasoning  by  the  judge.  However,  as  Mr
Haywood submitted, there was no challenge  to  the  evidence  given  by  the
appellant's daughter, either at  the  hearing  or  in  the  grounds  seeking
permission, and neither was there any conflict between her evidence and  the
other evidence. It is clear from the  judge's  decision  what  her  evidence
was, as that was set out in detail by the judge at [13]. At [80]  the  judge
found that she was an impressive witness who gave her evidence in  a  direct
and candid matter. It  is  thus  clear  why  the  judge  accepted  that  the
appellant's daughter was not able to finance her mother's medical bills  and
support her in Brazil and there was no requirement for  the  judge  to  give
detailed reasons.

In any event, as Mr Jarvis candidly  accepted,  the  appellant's  daughter's
evidence was only one of the reasons given by the  judge  for  reaching  the
conclusions that she did  in  regard  to  paragraph  399A.  The  judge  also
considered the appellant's  complex  medical  needs  and  need  for  medical
intervention and the lack of  assistance  that  could  be  provided  by  the
health care system in Brazil and from  other  sources.  There  has  been  no
challenge to the medical evidence or to the judge's findings on  the  expert
evidence or in any other respect. The judge  considered  the  relevant  test
for "integration"  and  considered  all  of  the  appellant's  circumstances
including her ties to Brazil and  to  the  UK,  her  employment  and  health
record  and  took   full   account   of   the   relevant   public   interest
considerations. She undertook a detailed assessment of all relevant  matters
and reached a conclusion that was fully and properly  open  to  her  on  the
evidence before her. Accordingly, any error in relation to the  adequacy  of
her reasoning with  respect  to  the  appellant's  daughter's  evidence  was
plainly immaterial.


For all of these reasons I find that the respondent has  not  made  out  her
grounds of appeal and that the judge did not err in law as asserted.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.





















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
