
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 November 2018                        |On 13 December 2018             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Ms J. Rothwell, instructed by BMAP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For convenience, we shall refer to the parties  as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal although  technically  the  respondent  is  the
    appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.    The appellant entered the UK on  22  December  2007  and  applied  for
    asylum. The claim was refused and a subsequent appeal  dismissed.  From
    April 2003 he remained in the UK unlawfully. On 12  July  2004  he  was
    convicted of conspiracy to  make  a  false  oath  or  declaration  with
    reference to marriage. He was sentenced to two years'  imprisonment  on
    16 February 2005, which  was  reduced  to  12  months  on  appeal.  The
    appellant was served with a Notice of Intention to  Deport  on  23  May
    2006. He did not appeal the decision. A deportation order was signed on
    21 July  2006.  On  17  July  2008  the  appellant  was  listed  as  an
    immigration  absconder.  On  21  June  2010  the  appellant   submitted
    representations to the respondent, which were treated as an application
    to revoke the deportation order. Further evidence was sent in 2011, but
    it appears that no decision was made in  response.  Nor  is  there  any
    evidence to show that the respondent sought to enforce the  deportation
    order. On 03 January 2015 the appellant contracted an Islamic  marriage
    with a British citizen. Their daughter was born on  04  November  2015.
    The appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds on 17
    February  2016.  The  subsequent  decision  to  refuse  the  claim  was
    eventually withdrawn and a fresh decision giving rise  to  a  right  of
    appeal was made on 14 August 2017.

First-tier Tribunal decision

3.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 14 August  2017
    to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of   deportation
    proceedings. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A.  M.  Black  ("the  judge")
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 September 2018.  The
    judge outlined the appellant's immigration history and  antecedents  in
    detail [2-11]. She summarised the evidence before the Tribunal and  the
    case put forward by both parties [16-19]. She set out the correct legal
    framework in some detail [20-25].

4.    The judge went on to analyse the facts of the case with  reference  to
    the relevant legal framework. She noted that the appellant had lived in
    the UK for 20 years. He was in a relationship with a  British  citizen.
    She observed the focus of the case was on the children (his wife's  son
    from  a  previous  marriage  involving  domestic  violence  and   their
    daughter). She  correctly  identified  the  'unduly  harsh'  test  with
    reference to paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules and section 117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002")  [43-
    45]. The judge referred to MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  450  and
    was clearly aware of the stringent nature of the  'unduly  harsh'  test
    [44]. She correctly identified  the  fact  that  the  threshold,  while
    stringent, was not as high as the 'very compelling circumstances'  test
    contained in paragraph 398 of the immigration  rules  [48].  The  judge
    considered the best interests of the children in  some  detail  without
    reference to the appellant's immigration history [52-68]. She concluded
    that it was in the interests of both children to remain in the UK  with
    their mother and father, and in the case of the older child,  with  the
    appellant as his step-father.

5.          The judge devoted a  whole  section  of  the  decision  to  "The
    Appellant's  Criminality  and  the  Public   Interest"   [69-78].   She
    considered and quoted the judge's sentencing remarks. She accepted that
    the appellant was remorseful for the offence. Prior to the  offence  he
    had been of good character. There was no evidence to  suggest  that  he
    had come to the attention of the police  since  he  was  released  from
    prison. The judge correctly identified the fact that the  offence  came
    within the category identified in paragraph 398(b) of  the  immigration
    rules of "less than 4 years but at least 12 months". She  was  entitled
    to take into account the fact that the offence was at the lowest end of
    that scale [73]. The judge went on to consider various aspects  of  the
    appellant's  history.  She  found  that  he  had  "an  extremely   poor
    immigration history" but accepted that he was remorseful and that there
    was no risk of reoffending.

6.    After having devoted two detailed sections of the decision to the  two
    crucial aspects of the case for and against  the  appellant  the  judge
    moved on to make detailed findings on the evidence [79-115]. She  began
    her conclusions by stressing that she had given "considerable weight to
    the public  interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation"  and  reminded
    herself that she needed to  take  into  account  the  statutory  public
    interest considerations as part of an evaluative assessment.  She  went
    on to give  weight  to  those  considerations  with  reference  to  the
    appellant's immigration history and the criminal offence  [80-84].  The
    judge then evaluated the evidence relating to  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances. She gave weight to the unchallenged social  work  report
    [85-87], which concluded that deportation  would  have  a  "significant
    emotional and educational effect"  on  the  children.  The  judge  gave
    proper weight to the best interests of the children. She considered the
    best interests of the children as a 'primary consideration'  [90].  She
    reminded herself of the nature of the 'unduly harsh' test  once  again.
    In assessing whether it would be 'unduly harsh' to expect the  children
    to live in Algeria she took into account the fact that they  were  both
    British citizens and that the oldest child had regular contact with his
    father. There was cogent evidence from the  oldest  child's  father  to
    indicate that he would not allow his son to live in Algeria. There  was
    no requirement for British citizens to leave the UK in any event [92].

7.    The judge correctly identified the central issue,  which  was  whether
    it would be 'unduly harsh' to  expect  the  appellant's  wife  and  the
    children to remain in the UK  without  him  [93-113].  In  making  this
    assessment she took into account  evidence  showing  that  his  removal
    would have a detrimental impact on the children.  She  also  identified
    other compelling and compassionate circumstances  over  and  above  the
    negative  effects  that  deportation  usually  has  on   children.   In
    particular, the appellant's wife had a difficult relationship with  her
    first husband, which involved domestic abuse. Although she  now  had  a
    "reasonable relationship" with him, her evidence was that she was still
    a "bit scared" of him. The judge accepted that the appellant's presence
    was a protective factor that gave his  wife  confidence  when  she  had
    dealings with her former husband. Her son  witnessed  violence  in  the
    relationship. The child now had a stable home life with his mother  and
    the appellant, whose role is akin to that of a  biological  father  and
    son. The judge quoted the child's head teacher who said  that  he  "has
    learnt what a real father should be" [99]. The judge had concerns about
    the effect on the oldest child  of  the  loss  of  this  stability  and
    whether  his  mother  may  become  vulnerable  without  the  protective
    presence of the appellant. In turn, this may have an additional  impact
    on her ability to care for the children [100]. Later  in  the  decision
    she also took into account the compassionate circumstances  surrounding
    a recent miscarriage. The judge concluded that the appellant's wife was
    "currently vulnerable and needs the practical and emotional support  of
    the appellant." [113]

8.    The judge made clear that the decision was finely balanced  [106]  She
    reminded herself of the relevant  public  interest  considerations  and
    weighed   them   with   the   compelling   and   compassionate   family
    circumstances. The judge made clear  that  she  had  given  the  public
    interest  "considerable  weight"  but   concluded   that   the   family
    circumstances were such  that  it  would  be  'unduly  harsh'  for  the
    appellant's wife and two children to remain in the UK without him if he
    is deported [111].

Grounds of appeal

9.    The Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds:

       i) The judge failed to apply the correct threshold  in  relation  to
          the 'unduly harsh' test with reference to MM (Uganda).
      ii) The judge failed to take into account relevant considerations and
          failed to make adequate findings relating to the vulnerability of
          the appellant's wife. The judge failed to consider the fact  that
          his wife could seek assistance from the school,  social  services
          or the wider family.
     iii) The judge incorrectly applied the mandatory provisions of section
          117B of the NIAA 2002. Mr Bramble  withdrew  the  ground  at  the
          hearing because it was clear from the face of the  decision  that
          the provisions had been considered.
      iv) The judge erred in finding that the public interest  was  reduced
          given the passage of time since the deportation order was made.

Decision and reasons

10.   We  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error of law. Our summary  of
    the judge's findings makes clear that the decision  is  a  careful  and
    comprehensive analysis of the competing factors the judge was  required
    to  evaluate.  The  judge  repeatedly  emphasised  the  correct   legal
    framework and reminded herself of the stringent threshold  required  to
    meet the 'unduly harsh' test. She rightly identified that the test  was
    not as high as the 'very compelling circumstances' test.

11.   The judge gave clear, cogent and sustainable reasons  to  explain  the
    likely impact of deportation on the appellant's wife and children.  She
    identified additional compassionate factors that,  in  her  assessment,
    took the circumstances over and above the  usual  negative  effects  of
    deportation. It was open to the judge to take into account  the  impact
    of the previous history of domestic violence on  the  appellant's  wife
    and her son  and  to  place  weight  on  the  importance  of  continued
    stability in light of that history. The judge considered the fact  that
    the appellant's wife might have support from wider family such  as  the
    appellant's brother and sister-in-law [98]. We are told  that  this  is
    not a matter that was raised by the respondent at the hearing either in
    evidence or submissions. In any event, the judge made clear that it  is
    the appellant who provides the  practical  and  emotional  support  she
    needs to continue some  form  of  co-parenting  relationship  with  her
    former husband.  It is not arguable that the appellant's  brother  (who
    lives some distance from them) or social  services  would  be  able  to
    replicate the kind of support and stability his wife and children need.



12.   The first ground amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with  the
    judge's findings, which were properly directed and unarguably within  a
    range of reasonable responses to the evidence. Similarly,  the  judge's
    findings about the impact of domestic violence,  the  vulnerability  of
    the appellant's wife and child, and the need for  continued  stability,
    were open for her to make on the evidence. The third ground relating to
    the  length  of  time   since   the   deportation   order   is   poorly
    particularised. The judge was entitled to take into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant's circumstances had changed significantly since  the
    deportation order was made in assessing whether  it  would  be  'unduly
    harsh' to expect his wife and children to remain in the UK without him.
    It was open to the judge to observe that, if  the  public  interest  in
    deportation was so compelling, the respondent failed to take any action
    to enforce  the  deportation  order  after  the  appellant  voluntarily
    brought himself to the attention of the  authorities  in  2010  (albeit
    after a period as an absconder).

13.   For the reasons given above, we conclude that  the  decision  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date   10 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
