
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: hu/09769/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At    Royal Courts of Justice                 |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on    22.01.2018                              |On 30.01.2018                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               jagmohan singh
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Usha Sood (counsel instructed by direct access)
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ian Howard), sitting at Harmondsworth on 13 October, to
     a deportation appeal by a citizen of India, born 1988.  The  appellant
    had arrived here on a husband visa in  2007,  and  received  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2009; but in 2012 he was sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment for the rape of a girl of 16, at their  joint  work-place.
    Meanwhile he and his wife had had a daughter 'S' themselves, born on  3
    January 2009.

 2. That resulted in a deportation order,  made  in  2014,  and  an  appeal
    against that was dismissed the following year  by  a  first-tier  panel
    (Judge PJM Hollingworth and a lay member). Final refusal of  permission
    to appeal was followed by judicial review proceedings: an interim  stay
    on removal was granted by Kitchin LJ on 1 February 2016,  but  judicial
    review was finally refused on 3 May. The appellant  had  been  on  bail
    from 12 July 2016 to 15 January 2017. Two sets of  further  submissions
    followed, and on 3 February 2017 there was a further stay:  however  on
    the 22nd judicial review was again refused.

 3. On 14 June 2017 the decision in Kiarie and Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42 came
    out, and the appellant was granted a further in-country right of appeal
    against the deportation order, though this had not been based on s. 94B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  Having  arrived
    when he was  already  grown-up,  and  been  sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment, the appellant had to show, in terms of s. 117C (5) of the
    Act, not only that he had a 'genuine and subsisting relationship'  with
    his wife or S, and that the effect of his deportation on either of them
    would be unduly harsh;  but  also  that  (6)  it  would  involve  'very
    compelling circumstances' over and above that consideration.

 4. The judge accepted the necessary family life between the appellant  and
    his wife and S, and that S's interests  would  in  the  short  term  be
    significantly adversely affected by his removal; but he did not  accept
    that this would necessarily be the case in the long term. He  concluded
    that "... in the absence of evidence of both significant and persistent
    detriment to the health and well-being of [S] ..." the necessary  'very
    compelling circumstances' were not present.

 5. Apart from the appellant's own evidence, and  his  wife's,  there  were
    three main sources before the Judge:

        a) Dr Jagbir Jhutti-Jowal, a university lecturer  in  Sikh  Studies
           (report 22 January 2016);

        b) Dr Vinod Kumar, a consultant  psychiatrist  (report  9  February
           2016); and

        c) Mrs Michelle Johnson. Mrs Johnson was  appointed  as  litigation
           friend for S, in place of her mother, and  her  statement  of  6
           October 2017 does not amount to  expert  evidence.  However  she
           says she has some teaching experience, and an interest in  child
           welfare: she gave  oral  evidence  before  the  judge,  and  her
           statement provides a useful summary of  what  is  said  to  have
           happened since reports (a) and (b) were compiled.

 6. The appeal before me turned on how the judge dealt  with  the  evidence
    from these sources. He did not deal with Dr  Jhutti-Jowal  at  all,  or
    with the events set out by Mrs Johnson, except, at 19, for one of them,
    as related  by  the  appellant's  wife,  though  without  reaching  any
    conclusions on its bearing on the questions posed by s.  117C  (5)  and
    (6). He did give a fair summary at  17,  as  Mrs  Sood  agreed,  of  Dr
    Kumar's conclusions about likely short and long  term  effects  of  the
    appellant's deportation on S.

 7. The question is how far the judge's treatment of the evidence  affected
    the validity of his conclusions. In his summary of Dr Kumar's evidence,
    at  17,  he  noted  the  short-term  ones  as  "...  temper   tantrums,
    clinginess, sleep difficulties and  occasional  bedwetting,  which  are
    continuing ... symptomatic of adjustment disorder". In the short  term,
    the appellant's removal would definitely have a detrimental  effect  on
    both her psychological and emotional progress.





 8. So far as the long-term factors are concerned, these  would  depend  on
    other considerations. The judge quoted Dr Kumar as saying that "... the
    negative cultural impact of  [the  appellant's]  deportation  would  be
    detrimental to S, as it would shatter her picture of her father".  This
    was not quite right: what Dr Kumar had  actually  said  was  that  "...
    finding the real reason [in other words, his conviction for rape]"  for
    his detention and possible deportation would have this effect.

 9. However, as the judge went on to say, Dr Kumar  went  on  to  give  his
    opinion that

       "... children who  have  absent  fathers  are  more  likely  to  have
       difficulties in forming relationships particularly  with  members  of
       the opposite sex. When considering the impact of a  deterioration  in
       her mother's ability to cope, this, like the  absence  of  a  father,
       would be strongly mediated by the reaction of her  wider  family  and
       peers."

10. At this point, 18 - 19, the judge went on to  discuss  the  appellant's
    wife's depression, and the incident referred to  at  6:  S  had  locked
    herself in her bedroom and, when the door was forced  open,  was  found
    holding a pair of scissors, the fear being that she had meant  to  harm
    herself. The date of this incident, as related to her, is given by  Mrs
    Johnson at paragraph 7 of her statement as 22 February 2017.

11. While the judge may well have been right in saying, at 19,  that  there
    had been no repetition of this behaviour, there was  another  incident,
    dated by Mrs Johnson as 9 July, where S's  mother  had  found  she  had
    hidden a packed rucksack, and announced her intention of going to  find
    her father. Although she has been taken to see him where  he  has  been
    detained, she is said to know nothing about the reasons for him  living
    there.

12. Dr Kumar had gone on from the passage quoted at 9 to say  that  if  S's
    mother "... goes downhill and becomes more depressed and  feels  unable
    to cope as a lone parent, then she [S] is likely to  suffer  with  more
    problems". Mrs Sood's main challenge to the judge's decision is on  the
    basis of his not assessing S's  history  since  Dr  Kumar  reported  in
    February 2016 by way of making his own findings  on  the  February  and
    July 2017 incidents, and  taking  a  view  on  whether  they  showed  a
    continuing decline in her and her mother's condition, in line with that
    prediction, hypothetical as it was when Dr Kumar made it.

13. Dr Jhutti-Jowal's evidence  was  mainly  directed  to  the  appellant's
    wife's potential situation as a lone mother, in terms of  Sikh  custom,
    on which she is well qualified to give expert evidence. It was relevant
    to the questions before  the  judge,  but,  at  least  so  far  as  the
    existence of 'very compelling circumstances'  was  concerned,  only  in
    terms of how her situation might have an effect on S's.

14. At 24 the judge dealt with the questions before him as follows:

       "It is the effect of his deportation upon his wife and in  particular
       his daughter that the appellant submits would  be  unduly  harsh  and
       that there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  that
       render his deportation unnecessary. [He went on to accept there would
       be short-term adverse effects]

       However the evidence, be it that of either doctor [the  reference  is
       to another psychiatrist who  had  given  a  report  for  the  earlier
       appeal] does not establish  to  the  requisite  standard  that  these
       adverse effects will persist. [The point about the importance of help
       from the family is repeated here]

       The bar set by paragraph [sic] 117C (6) is a very high one and in the
       absence of evidence of both significant and persistent  detriment  to
       the health and well-being of S, I am not satisfied that criterion was
       met."

15. The judge  did  not  consider  in  terms  whether  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on S would be unduly  harsh,  by  weighing  the
    circumstances of his crime against the effects on her. Although he  was
    quite right to point out the stringency of the requirements of s.  117C
    (6), he needed to consider whether the February and July incidents  did
    show, in terms of Dr Kumar's conclusions, that some kind of significant
    detriment to S had already taken place, and take an  informed  view  on
    whether it was likely to persist after the appellant's removal. Then he
    could have made a fully-reasoned decision as to whether  those  effects
    would  be  unduly  harsh,  and  if  so,  amount  to  'very   compelling
    circumstances'.

16. Both sides agreed that the result of my finding  an  error  of  law  in
    these terms would have to be a  fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, so, regrettable as that is, it must follow.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh first-tier hearing at Harmondsworth, not before Judge Howard
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
