
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/09400/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2019                        | On 19 March 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                              mr Nasir Mahmood
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi of counsel, instructed by M&K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Easterman, promulgated on 11 December 2018. In the First-tier Tribunal,
    the appellant was represented by Ms Saifolahi who again represents  him
    today.  The respondent was not represented.

2.   The factual background can be shortly stated.  The appellant  was  born
    on 6 September 1998 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He  came  to  this
    country on 10 August 2009  with  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor.   In
    circumstances which I do not need to explore, his parents  returned  to
    Pakistan leaving him in the care of an uncle and aunt.  At  this  stage
    he was some 10 years of age.  He has remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    ever since, completing his secondary education.

3.   The judge was invited to consider this matter under  Immigration  Rules
    FM and paragraph 276ADE in particular.  Although other matters may have
    been raised in the  alternative,  the  primary  claim  was  under  sub-
    paragraph (1)(iv)  of  276ADE,  under  which  the  requirement   is  as
    follows.

         "the appellant  is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
         continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  seven  years
         (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect the applicant to leave  the  United  Kingdom."
         (emphasis added)

4.   In addressing whether this appellant came  within  the  terms  of  this
    requirement, the judge made the following findings at paragraph  56  of
    the determination:

         "I find that the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
         respondent.  For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept that there
         are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant integrating into  his
         home country, particularly where he has his own parents  and  other
         family members there, and he speaks the language." (emphasis added)

5.   It is plain on any sensible  reading  of  the  determination  that  the
    introduction  of  the  term  "insurmountable   obstacles"   is   highly
    suggestive of the judge mistakenly applying sub-paragraph  (vi)  rather
    than (iv) of 276ADE. This error might be  explicable  because  although
    the application was lodged when the appellant was  still  17  years  of
    age, he had reached his majority by the time of  the  hearing.   It  is
    also of note that there is no specificity within  paragraph  56  as  to
    which  of  the  component  parts  of  paragraph  276ADE  the  judge  is
    addressing.

6.   With great fairness, Ms Jones accepted that in  all  the  circumstances
    the judge's decision cannot stand. There is a self-evident error of law
    in not applying the correct sub-paragraph of the Immigration Rules.

7.   Accordingly I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   With the  concurrence  of  both  representatives,  I  now  re-make  the
    decision.  The  background  facts  and  issues  involved  are   largely
    uncontentious. The sole matter which remains to be properly  determined
    is the question of whether it would be reasonable for the appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

9.   The refusal letter from the Secretary of State includes the following:

         "At the time of application you were under the age of 18, you  have
         lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 7  years  but
         it would be reasonable for you to leave the United  Kingdom.   This
         is because you have lived the majority of your  life  in  Pakistan,
         you stated that your parents live in Pakistan and you would be able
         to return to your parents, you stated to speak English and  Punjabi
         which are both recognised languages in Pakistan.  Consequently  you
         fail to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

10.  Ms Jones invites me to uphold that reasoning, pointing particularly  to
    the fact that both the appellant's parents reside in Pakistan, that  he
    is a fit and healthy  young  man  and  someone  who  has  clearly  been
    educated to a good standard.  The family members with whom he has lived
    in the United Kingdom are able, it  would  appear,  to  visit  Pakistan
    reasonably regularly and for lengthy periods.  The preponderance of the
    appellant's time in the United Kingdom has been without permission  and
    there was significant delay in making this application. He speaks  some
    Urdu and any readjustment to living in  Pakistan  would  be  reasonably
    straightforward.

11.  Ms Saifolahi draws my attention to factual matrix as  recorded  in  the
    determination, refers me to relevant sections of the documentation that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appellant  arrived  in  this
    country at the age of 10 and has  stayed  here  ever  since.  In  large
    measure this has been against his will, or at least  he  has  not  been
    complicit in any decision to stay here.  His mother  felt  she  had  to
    leave him in this country was that health concerns  made  it  difficult
    for her to care for the appellant. To the extent that the appellant has
    been in the UK unlawfully, it has been the fault family members. It  is
    well established that children should not be penalised for  the  wrong-
    doing of  others,  and  thus  any  public  interest  considerations  in
    ensuring immigration control carry far less weight.

12.  In my judgment, an unduly  formalistic  approach  was  adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State as evidenced in the refusal letter.  It  is  correct
    that at that time, more than half of  the  appellant's  life  had  been
    spent in Pakistan. But the reality is that in terms of  influences  and
    attachments, the period 0 to 10 years is much less significant than the
    period 10 to 17 years. This appellant  has  formed  highly  significant
    attachments to friends and the wider community during the time that  he
    has lived here and although  he  could  reintegrate  into  Pakistan  if
    returned, I do not consider that it would not be reasonable to  require
    him to do so having regard to the particular facts of  his  case.   The
    United Kingdom is where he has lived the bulk of his adolescence and it
    is the country which he properly regards as his home.

13.  This appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules, and it  is  therefore
    unnecessary to consider the application of under Article 8 outside  the
    Rules.


Notice of Decision

   1) An error of law having been found,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside;


   2) The decision is remade, allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules;



   3) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     18 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



