
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09566/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2019                              |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               Vv (sri lanka)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Charlotte Bayati, Counsel instructed by A&P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shore sitting at Taylor House on 13  November  2018)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse his human rights claim in which
    it was maintained that his removal to Sri Lanka would breach Articles 3
    and 8 ECHR on suicide risk/mental health grounds.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes,
    but following a renewed application to the Upper  Tribunal,  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 4  February  2019  for
    the following reasons:

         "(1) It is arguable that the Judge misunderstood the scope  of  the
         appeal.  It is arguable  that  the  Judge  should  have  considered
         whether there had been a change of circumstances.  So  far  as  the
         grounds relate to the assessment of evidence they  are  lacking  in
         focus, but it is arguable that the Judge did not  engage  with  the
         evidence of risk of suicide.

         (2) It is expected that the grounds are presented [in] more focused
         form before the UT."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  25
    November 1979.  He applied for a visit visa in the United Kingdom on  4
    January 2008, and this was refused on  23  January  2008.   He  applied
    again for a visit visa on 6 February 2008, and this was  issued  on  10
    March 2008 so  as  to  expire  on  10  September  2008.   However,  the
    appellant claims to have entered  the  UK  illegally  by  lorry  on  17
    January 2009.  He claimed asylum on 19  January  2009  and  his  asylum
    claim was refused on 22 June 2009. His appeal  was  struck  out  on  10
    March 2010 because it had been lodged out of time.


 4. In May 2012 Dr Zapata examined the Appellant, who gave  an  account  of
    torture in detention in 2008. He also reported that  his  mother,  with
    whom he was in contact, had told him that the Sri Lankan Police and CID
    personnel had been making  enquiries  about  him  in  April  2012.  The
    Appellant reported that his symptoms of  mental  ill  health  had  been
    causing him significant distress, "resulting in social  isolation".  Dr
    Zapata opined in his subsequent report that he was suffering from  PTSD
    and a Major Depressive Disorder episode (Respondent's  Bundle,  Section
    A).

 5. On 29 July 2013, his legal representatives made further submissions  to
    the effect that the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution on
    return to Sri Lanka; or, in the alternative, that he  was  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka on medical grounds as he suffered  from  a  serious
    mental health condition.

 6. On 3 August 2014 the Department gave  their  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise  the  appellant  as  a  refugee.  His  account  of  his  past
    involvement with the LTTE and of his past detention as a result of such
    involvement was not accepted. This was due  to  internal  and  external
    inconsistencies.  In any event, he would not  face  a  risk  on  return
    having regard to the risk categories identified  in  GJ  -v-  SSHD  Sri
    Lanka [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  It was not accepted that he was  at  risk
    of persecution prior to leaving Sri Lanka, or that he would be at  risk
    on return.  With regard to the question whether his removal would be in
    breach of Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, there did not appear to be substantial
    grounds for believing that there would be a real  risk  that  he  would
    face treatment contrary  to  his  rights  under  either  of  these  two
    articles.   However,  it  was   deemed   appropriate   to   grant   him
    discretionary leave outside the Immigration Rules for 30 months.

 7. Under cover of a letter dated  1  February  2017,  his  representatives
    served an application for settlement on the  appellant's  behalf.   The
    appellant was now married and  had  one  child,  who  had  born  on  16
    February  2016.   He  was  currently  working  as  a  Customer  Service
    Assistant earning around �1,750 per month.  He had been  on  continuous
    medication for his mental illness.  He had been involved with the  LTTE
    prior to his departure in Sri Lanka.  His wife's brother was  a  member
    of the LTTE and had been granted asylum in the UK.  His wife  had  been
    heavily involved in Tamil diaspora activities, and their return to  Sri
    Lanka would create serious problems for the family.

 8. On 17 August  2017  the  Department  issued  separate  letters  to  the
    appellant's representatives.  In the first letter, the Department  said
    that as the appellant's asylum claim  had  been  refused,  any  further
    evidence that he wished to  provide  to  show  that  he  qualified  for
    protection had to  be  submitted  in  person  in  accordance  with  the
    published Home Office policy on further  submissions.   The  Department
    would consider the further leave application, but  they  would  not  be
    considering  the  protection-based  element  of  the  application  with
    reference to the representatives' covering letter.

 9. In the second letter, also dated 17 August 2017,  the  Department  gave
    their reasons for refusing the human rights application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of family and private life,  and  on  the
    basis of the appellant's medical circumstances (Articles 3 and 8 ECHR).
    The information provided  indicated  that  he  was  making  significant
    progress with his mental health.  It was also necessary  to  take  into
    account that the factors that were claimed to be the root cause of  his
    mental health were the protection-based claims that he  had  previously
    presented and which the Department had refused.  He  had  not  provided
    any new medical reports, but he had provided  his  prescriptions  which
    showed that he  had  received  the  following  five  medications  on  8
    December  2016,  which  the  Department  went  on  to  list.    Various
    psychotherapeutic medications were available in  Sri  Lanka,  including
    Olanzapine,  Sertraline,  and  Clonazepam.   These   were   the   three
    psychotherapeutic medications that had been prescribed to the appellant
    (the remaining two prescriptions being unrelated to mental health).

10. A Country of Origin Information Response on the topic of mental  health
    and PTSD, dated 6 May 2016, identified that psychiatric  treatment  was
    available in Jaffna and Vavinuya.

11. Reference was made to the case law of J -v- SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  629.
    The case law showed that Article 3 would not be breached in  a  suicide
    case where the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state
    was not well-founded.  It was considered that Sri Lanka had  sufficient
    mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.  In addition,  the  appellant
    still had family in Sri Lanka to  support  him.   Therefore,  with  the
    support from  his  family,  and  with  the  facilities  and  medication
    available, and taking into account the  relevant  case  law,  the  UK's
    obligations under Article 3 ECHR would not be breached by removing  him
    to Sri Lanka.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. Both parties were  legally  represented  by  Judge  Shore.   Ms  Bayati
    appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant.  She  had  prepared  a  lengthy
    skeleton argument in which she developed the case  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of persecution in Sri Lanka and/or of ill-treatment at
    the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities of such severity  as  to  cross
    the threshold  of  Article  3  ECHR;  and/or  that  his  removal  would
    constitute a breach of his rights under Articles 3  and/or  8  ECHR  on
    mental health grounds.

13. Most of her skeleton argument which ran from pages 1 to 13 was  devoted
    to the first two issues.  On the topic of the mental health claim,  she
    submitted that the appellant was suffering from severe depression  with
    psychosis and PTSD and that he had  been  continuously  in  receipt  of
    treatment.  His condition was enduring, and there had been  little,  if
    any, improvement over the years, despite the ongoing  support  provided
    by mental health services.  There was evidence that  he  had  attempted
    suicide in the past, and that his only protective factors are his  wife
    and children.  But, despite  this,  there  was  a  continuous  suicidal
    ideation.  Those treating the appellant and Dr Dhumad  (the  Consultant
    Psychiatrist) were of the opinion that there was a significant risk  of
    suicide in the context of removal.

14. At the outset of the hearing,  Ms  Bayati  said  that  her  instructing
    solicitors had not been served with a copy of the respondent's  bundle,
    and the solicitors had therefore not been informed that the  respondent
    had refused to consider the protection claim set out in  his  statement
    of additional grounds.  The Judge said  that  he  would  disregard  any
    mention of protection issues in her skeleton  and  that  he  would  not
    consider the section  in  her  skeleton  argument  entitled  "Scope  of
    Appeal."

15. The Judge proceeded to hear oral evidence from  the  appellant's  wife.
    She said he saw a Psychiatrist every three months and his Social Worker
    every two weeks.  She had family in Sri  Lanka.   She  spoke  with  her
    mother once in a while.  The appellant  was  a  loving  father  towards
    their children, but he could not always look after them because he  was
    unpredictable.  He had worked for 6-7 months in 2016.  He  had  stopped
    work in April 2017.  She took him to TGTE activities, shopping and  the
    park.  He was taking medication.  The  Social  Worker  had  counselling
    sessions with him.  He had never tried to harm himself  while  she  had
    been with him, but he often said that he felt like dying.

16. The Judge set out his findings at paragraph [61] onwards.  He began  by
    recording his empathy with the position in which  the  appellant  found
    himself.  He plainly had a number of severe mental  conditions  and  it
    must be extremely difficult for him and his family to deal  with.   The
    Judge then launched into a detailed  discussion  of  the  case  law  at
    paragraphs [62]-[68].  At paragraph [69], he directed himself that  the
    starting point was the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  condition  as
    required in J.  At paragraph [70], the Judge set out  his  findings  of
    fact on  the  appellant's  medical  condition  and  family  life.   The
    appellant had attempted suicide twice, in 2009  and  2010.  The  recent
    medical evidence was that of Dr Dhumad's report  of  6  November  2018.
    The appellant felt suicidal when  assessed,  and  his  main  protective
    factor was his wife and child. At paragraph  [70.9],  the  Judge  said:
    "The appellant's medical condition shows no  appreciable  worsening  in
    recent years and, in fact, appears to have improved with his  increased
    sociability, family life and brief period of being fit to work."

17. At  paragraph  [72],  the  Judge  held  as  follows:  "The  foreseeable
    consequences of returning to Sri Lanka are not so severe as to  satisfy
    the test of a real risk of suicide.  The medical evidence  simply  does
    not support such a conclusion in the context of the appellant who seems
    to be improving and has not attempted suicide for 8 years.   He  is  no
    longer socially isolated and has a caring family.  I took into  account
    the report of Dr Dhumad was specifically written for these  proceedings
    and that the  Appellant  must  have  been  all  too  conscious  of  the
    precarious nature of his immigration status when he  was  assessed,  so
    would have been naturally anxious."

18. At paragraph [73], the Judge found the appellant's fear to be  genuine,
    but  without  objective  foundation.   He  found  that  treatment   was
    available for the appellant in Sri Lanka, because he had not  shown  to
    the required standard that it was not available.

19. At paragraph [74], he found that the appellant had  not  shown  to  the
    required standard  that  his  medical  condition  had  reached  such  a
    critical state, "that there are compelling humanitarian grounds for not
    removing him to a place which lacks the  medical  and  social  services
    which he would need to prevent acute suffering."

20. At paragraphs [76] onwards, the Judge gave his reasons  for  dismissing
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds. His reasoning  included  consideration
    of Bensaid -v- United Kingdom [2001] INLR 325, MM (Zimbabwe)  -v-  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 279, GS  (India)  &  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40,  MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2007] EWCA Civ 797 and SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894.

21. At paragraph [83], he found that the appellant had not shown that there
    were very significant obstacles to his reintegration to Sri Lanka.   He
    had his mother in Sri Lanka; he spoke Tamil; he had spent most  of  his
    life in Sri Lanka and he was familiar with its customs and culture; his
    family unit could return with him, giving him  emotional  support;  and
    treatment for his illnesses was available.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Bayati developed the case that the Judge had misunderstood  the
    scope of the appeal and that the Judge should have  considered  whether
    there had been a change in circumstances since the  previous  grant  of
    discretionary leave.  In deference  to  the  direction  made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam,  she  also  provided  a  four  page  document
    entitled: "Focused Grounds on the Judge's Consideration of the  Medical
    Evidence."  She submitted that it was not open to  the  Judge  to  find
    that his condition had improved; and  that  he  had  made  inconsistent
    findings on the risk of suicide. Mr Tarlow submitted that no  error  of
    law was made out, for the reasons given by Judge Holmes when  initially
    refusing permission.

Discussion

23. Ground 1 relates to the scope of the appeal.  On analysis, Ms  Bayati's
    contention is not that the Judge misunderstood the scope of the appeal,
    but that he erred  in  law  in  not  considering  and  determining  the
    appellant's asylum claim.


24. So far as the Department was concerned, the scope  of  the  appeal  was
    confined to the appellant's human rights claim.   The  Judge  correctly
    understood this.  I am wholly unpersuaded that the Judge erred  in  law
    in not extending the scope of  the  appeal  to  cover  the  appellant's
    unexamined protection claim.

25. With regard to the letter from the Department of 17 August 2017 stating
    that the protection claim element of the application was not  going  to
    be considered, it is pleaded that this was "allegedly"  sent  with  the
    refusal decision, but not received.  There is no affidavit  or  witness
    statement from the instructing solicitors verifying  the  alleged  non-
    receipt of this letter.  In any event, it would have been  apparent  to
    the reasonable reader of the RFRL that the protection claim element  of
    the application was not being entertained by the Department.

26. Ms Bayati relies on the fact that the protection claim was raised in  a
    statement of additional grounds served in response to the  section  120
    notice issued by the Department; and by the fact that no objection  was
    raised by the Department in response.  But silence  does  not  indicate
    consent.  Judge  Shore  was  confronted  with  a  situation  where  the
    Department had not consented to the appellant  advancing  a  protection
    claim by way of appeal, and indeed Ms Bayati did  not  contend  in  her
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal that such consent  was
    to be inferred.

27. For  the  above  reasons,  there  was  no  procedural  irregularity  or
    unfairness in the Judge proceeding to hear and determine the appeal  in
    accordance with the limited scope of the RFRL.

28. Ground 2 relates to the Asylum  Policy  Instructions  on  Discretionary
    Leave.  Version 7.0 published on 18 August 2015 provides in  section  3
    as follows: "ECHR Article 8 may  also  be  raised  where  a  person  is
    suffering from a medication condition.  Article 8 deals with respect to
    private life, which includes a person's moral and  physical  integrity.
    The consequence to a person's physical or  mental  health  in  removing
    them from the UK can, in principle, engage Article 8."

29.  The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
    appellant had been granted discretionary leave to remain on  the  above
    basis.  At paragraph [69] of his decision, Judge Shore said that he did
    not agree with Ms Bayati's submission that the  starting  point  was  a
    comparison between the condition of the appellant when he  was  granted
    discretionary leave and his position now, because the test was  whether
    there was currently a real risk of suicide.

30. It is apparent from  the  Judge's  earlier  recording  of  Ms  Bayati's
    submissions that he understood her to conflate the question of  whether
    there  had  been  a  change  of  circumstances  since  the   grant   of
    discretionary leave to remain in 2014 with  the  separate  question  of
    whether the "real risk of suicide" test was made out so  as  to  engage
    Article 3 ECHR.  If he misunderstood Ms Bayati on this point, his error
    is not material with regard to the disposal of the claim under  Article
    3 ECHR. For he applied the right test with regard to  Article  3  ECHR,
    and Ms Bayati does not contend otherwise.

31. As discretionary leave was granted in 2014 under Article  8  ECHR,  the
    issue of whether there had been a material change  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances for the better arose in an Article 8 context, not  in  an
    Article 3 one.  Although the Judge did  not  specifically  address  the
    argument in the context of Article 8, his omission is not  material  as
    he made a specific finding of  fact  at  [70.9]  that  the  appellant's
    condition had improved  since  2014  with  his  increased  sociability,
    family life and brief period of being fit to work.

32. Ground 3 is that the  finding  at  paragraph  [70.9]  is  unsustainable
    because it was not supported by the medical evidence before the  Judge.
    Having carefully reviewed Ms Bayati's detailed summary of  the  medical
    evidence from March 2010 to November 2018, I am not persuaded that  the
    Judge's finding at  paragraph  [70.9]  is  unsustainable,  perverse  or
    inadequately reasoned.  There was a brief period of the appellant being
    fit to work. The Judge did not suggest that the appellant had continued
    to be fit to work.  It was open to the Judge to find that the appellant
    had  displayed  and  continued  to   display   increased   sociability,
    reflected, for instance, in him engaging in Tamil  diaspora  activities
    with his wife.  It was also open to the Judge to find that  the  family
    life which the appellant enjoyed with his wife and children constituted
    a significant protective factor which had not existed at the time  when
    he was granted discretionary leave to remain in 2014.

33. Ground 4 is that the Judge erred in failing to  engage  with  the  fact
    that the appellant's mental health condition had  been  caused  by  the
    trauma and torture that he suffered in Sri  Lanka.   However,  for  the
    reasons  given  in  earlier  in  this  decision,  it  would  have  been
    procedurally irregular for the Judge to proceed on the premise that the
    appellant's  account  of  past  persecution  and  future  risk  was  an
    established fact.

34. Ground 5 is that the Judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  expert
    opinion of Dr Dhumad and, in  particular,  that  he  made  inconsistent
    findings on it. At [70.7] the Judge quoted verbatim  from  Dr  Dhumad's
    report.  Dr Dhumad opined  that  the  risk  of  suicide  was  currently
    significant and was very likely to increase to a very severe  level  in
    the context of deportation.  In his  opinion,  the  threat  of  removal
    would trigger a significant deterioration  in  the  appellant's  mental
    suffering and would subsequently  increase  the  risk  of  suicide.  Ms
    Bayati points out that all the sub-paragraphs  of  paragraph  [70]  are
    prefaced by the description of them as being the Judge's  "findings  of
    fact" in respect of the appellant's medical condition and family  life.
    Accordingly, she submits that the Judge has adopted  as  a  finding  of
    fact the opinion of Dr Dhumad as  set  out  in  paragraph  [70.7],  and
    accordingly his subsequent findings at  paragraphs  [71]  to  [74]  are
    incompatible with that finding of fact.

35. However, it is clear from the context that the Judge has  simply  found
    as a fact that  Dr  Dhumad  has  expressed  the  opinions  reported  at
    paragraph [70.7], and he is not purporting to adopt these  opinions  as
    his own.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 16 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson






