
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09125/2019
                                                               HU/09126/2019
                                                                         (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Parties appeared remotely by Skype   |                                     |
|On 29th September 2020               |On 19th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MS TRACY [P] (1)
                         MS ALBRIGHT OPPONG [P] (2)
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Q Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Chipatiso
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The hearing before me on 29th September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  At the
      outset, I was informed by Mr Ahmed that neither appellant intended to
      join the hearing remotely and they are happy for the hearing to
      proceed in their absence. Their mother, the sponsor did join the
      hearing remotely and was able to see and hear the proceedings. I sat
      at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and
      building were open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and
      I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I
      would have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I
      was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
      open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      the parties had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


   2. The appellants are sisters and are both nationals of Ghana.  Their
      appeal against the respondent's decisions of 2nd May 2019 refusing
      their applications for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
      the children of a parent present and settled in the UK were dismissed
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 24th April 2020.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer


   3. Judge Spicer accepted the appellants are the daughters of Ms [EK]
      ("the sponsor") who left Ghana and arrived in the UK in November 2003
      shortly after the birth of the first appellant. The sponsor was 13
      years old when she gave birth to the second respondent and 15 years
      old when she gave birth to the first appellant.  The judge accepted
      the evidence of the sponsor that following her departure from Ghana,
      the appellants were cared for by her father ("their grandfather") and
      that following the deterioration in his health since 2016, he was
      assisted by a close family friend Ms Dorcas Berfi.  Judge Spicer
      accepted the appellant's grandfather passed away on 15 April 2018. She
      also accepted the sponsor sent money to her father between December
      2010 up to his death and that there was evidence of money transfers to
      Ms Dorcas Berfi from 31st May 2017.  She noted, at paragraphs [28] and
      [29] of her decision that the children had attended school and as at
      the date of the hearing before her, both were Boarders at school.


   4. At paragraphs [30] to [44] of her decision, Judge Spicer considered
      whether the requirement set out in paragraph 297(i)(e) of the
      immigration rules is met.  The issue was whether the sponsor has had
      sole responsibility for the children's upbringing.  At paragraphs [45]
      to [50], Judge Spicer went on to consider whether the requirement for
      indefinite leave to enter the UK set out in paragraph 297(i)(f) is
      met. That is, whether there are serious and compelling family or other
      considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
      suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care.


   5. Judge Spicer found the appellants cannot succeed under the immigration
      rules.  For reasons set out at paragraphs [51] to [56] of the
      decision, Judge Spicer found that it is not in the appellants' best
      interests to leave Ghana.  She went on to address the Article 8 claim
      outside the immigration rules at paragraphs [58] to [73] of her
      decision. She found that Article 8 is engaged and the decision not to
      grant entry clearance to the appellants is an interference with the
      appellants right to the future development of their family life. Judge
      Spicer had regard to the public interest considerations set out in
      s117B of the 2002 Act and at paragraphs [71] to [73] she said:


         "71. I have found that the appellants do not satisfy the
         requirements of the immigration rules, which carries significant
         weight in my proportionality assessment.


         72.  The respondent's decision maintains the status quo. There is
         no disruption to the lives of the appellants or the sponsor as a
         result of the respondent's decision. The sponsor is able to
         continue to provide financial support to the appellants from the
         United Kingdom, in the same way as she has done.


         73.  I find that the respondent's decision is not a
         disproportionate interference in the family life of the sponsor and
         the appellants."


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal. Permission to appeal
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 15th June 2020.  He
      noted:


         "The grounds in the application for permission to appeal are all
         arguable.  Whilst the Judge recognises the background of the
         appellants it is arguable that there is improper application of the
         principles of the case of TD (Yemen) to the facts of the
         appellants' case namely; significant changes with regard to
         arrangements for the children once the sponsor's father died; the
         impact that the sponsor plays with regards to education and
         finances not fully taken into account; the fact that the sponsor
         has also visited the children in 2013. The grounds give rise to an
         arguable error of law."


   7. The matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Spicer is vitiated by a material error of law.
      The first and second grounds of appeal relate to the finding by Judge
      Spicer that the sponsor has not had sole responsibility for the
      children's upbringing, and I consider those two grounds together.


   8. The first ground of appeal is that Judge Spicer failed to give due
      weight to the fact that the sponsor began sending money in 2010 after
      a period of absence from her children's lives of seven years. It is
      conceded that the sponsor did not have sole responsibility for her
      children until 2010.  It is said that thereafter, the sponsor began
      taking some responsibility for her children in Ghana and the
      arrangements changed. It is said that in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):
      "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049, the Tribunal found
      that financial support, particularly sole financial support of a child
      is relevant, since it may be an indicator of an obligation stemming
      from an exercise of responsibility by a parent.  The appellant claims
      the judge erred in failing to consider the financial support provided
      by the sponsor as a legitimate and important indicator of sole
      responsibility.


   9. The second ground of appeal is that Judge Spicer accepted the
      appellants' grandfather died on 15th April 2018 and the evidence from
      the sponsor was that the arrangements for the children to live with Ms
      Dorcas Berfi had been coordinated by the sponsor.  The appellants
      claim Judge Spicer failed to recognise the extent of the change in
      circumstances following the death of the appellant's grandfather and
      the evidence with regard to the role played by the sponsor since her
      father's death has been overlooked.


  10. Mr Ahmed submits Judge Spicer did not adequately consider the
      judgement of the Upper Tribunal in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole
      responsibility"), and in particular, the relevance of the financial
      provision provided by the sponsor.  He submits that at paragraph [34],
      Judge Spicer accepted that the sponsor began to send money to her
      father in 2010 once she obtained legal status and was able to work in
      the UK. Judge Spicer found that it is more likely than not that the
      status quo continued, in the absence of any precipitating factor.  Mr
      Ahmed submits that the subsequent death of the appellant's grandfather
      in April 2018 was a precipitating factor that changed the status quo
      and the arrangements for the care of the appellants.


  11. Mr Ahmed submits there had been a change in circumstances following
      the death of the appellant's grandfather and Judge Spicer accepted
      that the sponsor began to have more involvement with the appellants
      lives after her father's death.  He submits that in TD (Paragraph
      297(i)(e): "sole responsibility"), the Upper Tribunal noted, at
      paragraph [10] of its decision, that a parent who has settled in the
      UK may retain "sole responsibility" for a child where the day-to-day
      care or responsibility for that child is necessarily undertaken by a
      relative abroad. That day-to-day responsibility may include seeing
      that the child attends school, is fed and clothed and receives medical
      attention when needed.  Mr Ahmed submits that in reaching her
      decision, Judge Spicer did not consider the fact that it is quite
      possible that the sponsor has sole responsibility for the appellants
      but the day-to-day implementation of decisions made have been carried
      out by the appellants grandfather, and following his death, by Ms
      Dorcas Berfi.  He submits that at paragraph [6] of her witness
      statement, the sponsor had set out the role played by the sponsor and
      Mr Dorcas Berfi in the appellants lives.


  12. I reject the claim that Judge Spicer erred by failing to consider the
      financial support that has been consistently provided by the sponsor
      since 2010 and failed to recognise the extent of the change in
      circumstances following the death of the appellant's grandfather and
      overlooked the evidence regarding the role played by the sponsor since
      her father's death.


  13. In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility"), the Upper Tribunal
      highlighted that financial support is clearly relevant since it may be
      an indicator of the obligations stemming from an exercise of
      responsibility by a parent. At paragraph [16] of its decision, the
      Upper Tribunal said:


         "Financial support, particularly sole financial support, of a child
         is relevant since it may be an indicator of obligation stemming
         from an exercise of "responsibility" by a parent but it cannot be
         conclusive. [my emphasis] There may be other reasons why an
         individual financially supports a child and so it can only be a
         factor to be taken into account along with all the other facts.
         Rudolph v ECO, Colombo [1984] Imm AR 84 illustrates this."


  14. Drawing together the threads, the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph [52],
      summarised the issue in this way:


         Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:


             i.   Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and
             whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to
             be decided upon all the evidence.


             ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should
             not to be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact is exercising responsibility for the child. That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.


             iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be shared between different individuals: which may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own country
             whilst the only parent involved in its life travels to and
             lives in the UK.


             iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in
             the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that one
             of them will have sole responsibility.


             v.   If it is said that both are not involved in the child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be that the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility. In such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that that parent no
             longer has responsibility for the child.


             vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a
             matter between the parents. So even if there is only one
             parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may not
             have sole responsibility.


             vii. In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for the child's welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such as relatives or
             friends) because of the geographical separation between the
             parent and child.


             viii.    That, however, does not prevent the parent having
             sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.


             ix.  The test is, not whether anyone else has day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including making all
             the important decisions in the child's life. If not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole".


  15. The provision of financial support is therefore clearly a factor that
      is relevant and must be taken into account, but is not conclusive.
      Financial support, even exclusive financial support, will not
      necessarily mean that the person providing it has "sole
      responsibility" for the child. It is a factor but no more than that.


  16. It is accepted by the appellants that the sponsor did not have sole
      responsibility for them between 2003 and 2010.  At paragraph [32],
      Judge Spicer found that the appellant's grandfather took care of them
      after the sponsor left Ghana in 2003.  She acknowledged at paragraph
      [33] that the sponsor herself was a child when she came to the United
      Kingdom and was not in a position to provide any financial assistance
      to her father.  At paragraph [34] of her decision, Judge Spicer
      acknowledged the money sent by the sponsor to her father since 2010
      but found that it is more likely than not that the status quo
      continued.  That is, the appellants grandfather made all of the
      decisions in relation to the appellant's welfare.


  17. For reasons set out at paragraph [31] of her decision, Judge Spicer
      accepted that the appellants father has not played a role in the
      appellants lives.  At paragraph [32] she said:


         "I find that the sponsor's father took care of the appellants after
         the sponsor left Ghana in November 2003. At the time, the first
         appellant was only two months old, and the second appellant was
         just two years old. I find it more likely than not, given the very
         young age of the first appellant that he also had the support from
         other family members or friends."


  18. Judge Spicer accepted the sponsor herself was a child when she came to
      the United Kingdom and could not be expected to take any
      responsibility for the appellants from afar. She noted the sponsor was
      not in a position to provide any financial assistance to her father
      for the first seven years after her arrival in the UK. During that
      time it was the appellant's grandfather that made all of the decisions
      in relation to the appellants welfare. She accepted the sponsor began
      to send money to her father in 2010 but even so, it is more likely
      than not that the status quo continued and the appellant's grandfather
      continued to make all of the decisions in relation to their welfare.


  19. As to the deteriorating health of the appellants grandfather and the
      role played by Ms Dorcas Berfi, Judge Spicer said:


         "36. ... I find that Ms Dorcas Berfi has also played a significant
         role in the appellants' lives since at least 2016. It was
         acknowledged by the sponsor at the oral hearing that Ms Dorcas
         Berfi was in the picture for two years before her father's death,
         as his health began to decline. It was during that time that the
         sponsor started to send money transfers to Ms Dorcas Berfi. I find
         that, as the sponsor's father's health began to decline, Ms Dorcas
         Berfi began to take over the day-to-day care of the appellants."


  20. At paragraph [37], Judge Spicer acknowledged that a parent who has
      settled in the United Kingdom may retain sole responsibility where the
      day-to-day care or responsibility for that child is necessarily
      undertaken by a relative abroad.  At paragraph [38], she found the
      sponsor, through no fault of her own, did not have sole responsibility
      for the appellants between 2003 and 2010.  Judge Spicer went on to
      say:


         "38. ... I am not persuaded that she subsequently acquired sole
         responsibility for them, given that she has not provided any
         persuasive evidence that she has ever been consulted about or
         approved important decisions in their lives."


  21. Judge Spicer rejected the claim made by the sponsor that she and the
      appellants chose their schools together.  She also noted that the
      evidence of contact between the sponsor and the appellants all post-
      dates the death of the appellants grandfather in April 2018.  At
      paragraph [41] of her decision, Judge Spicer considered the letters
      from the schools that indicate that the sponsor is responsible for
      bills, but noted it was the appellants grandfather who was registered
      with the schools as their guardian and dealt with day-to-day matters.
      She noted, at paragraph [42], the absence of evidence of any direct
      correspondence between the schools and the sponsor.  At paragraph
      [44], Judge Spicer concluded:


         "I accept that the sponsor began to have more involvement with the
         appellants lives after her father's death. However the period
         between the death of her father and the appellant's application
         amounts to only nine months. During that period, I do not find that
         the sponsor acquired sole responsibility for the upbringing of the
         appellants. Money transfers were made to Ms Dorcas Berfi from 2017,
         and I find on all the evidence that Ms Dorcas Berfi gradually
         acquired responsibility for the welfare of the appellants from 2016
         onwards. When asked at the oral hearing about whether she had
         involvement in the appellants' medical treatment, the sponsor said
         that the appellants would tell Ms Dorcas Berfi if they had a
         problem and that the sponsor would pay the bill. This indicates
         that it was Ms Dorcas Berfi who made the decisions about any
         medical treatment. I have already noted that Ms Dorcas Berfi was
         also responsible for paying school fees. At its highest the
         evidence indicates that the sponsor shared responsibility with Ms
         Dorcas Berfi, for the care of the appellants following the death of
         her father, and the test in paragraph 297(1)(e) is not met."


  22. The issue of "sole responsibility" must depend upon the facts of each
      case. A central part of the notion of "sole responsibility" was the
      sponsor's continuing interest and involvement in the appellants lives,
      including making or being consulted about and approving important
      decisions about their upbringing.  In my judgement, it was open to
      Judge Spicer to conclude that the sponsor had not acquired sole
      responsibility for the appellants for the reasons set out at
      paragraphs [31] to [44] of her decision.  The findings and conclusions
      reached by Judge Spicer were neither irrational nor unreasonable in
      the Wednesbury sense, or findings and conclusions that were wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.  It follows that in my judgment there is
      no merit to the first and second grounds of appeal.


  23. In the third ground of appeal, the appellants refer to the decision of
      the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f)) UKUT 00088
      (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal said:


         "37. Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's
         welfare including emotional needs. 'Other considerations' come into
         play where there are other aspects of a child's life that are
         serious and compelling - for example where an applicant is living
         in an unacceptable social and economic environment. The focus needs
         to be on the circumstances of the child in the light of his or her
         age, social background and developmental history and will involve
         inquiry as to whether:-


          i) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;


         ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;


        iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.


         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances sufficiently serious and compelling to require
         admission.


         38.  As a starting point the best interests of a child are usually
         best served by being with both or at least one of their parents.
         Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the place of
         residence where a child has grown up for a number of years when
         socially aware is important: see also SG (child of a polygamous
         marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 939."


  24. The appellants claim that in considering the requirement under
      paragraph 297(i)(f) of the immigration rules and whether there are
      serious and compelling family or other considerations, the judge
      erroneously considered the appeal on the basis that the appellants are
      now aged 16 and 18, whereas they both remained children at the time of
      their application and must continue to be treated as children,
      particularly as even now, the first appellant is under the age of 18.
      Furthermore it is said the Judge failed to address the ill-health of
      Ms Dorcas Berfi and its impact upon the appellants, with the
      likelihood of further deterioration in her health, and there being no
      adult to care for the appellants in Ghana.  Finally, the appellants
      claim Judge Spicer failed to consider matters beyond the accommodation
      needs of the appellants.  They submit what was required was a deeper
      evaluation of the appellant's welfare including their emotional needs.


  25. Mr Ahmed submits the facts of the case speak for themselves.  He
      submits that Ms Berfi cannot maintain an adequate level of care for
      the children and the Judge erroneously treated the children as adults,
      rather than treating them as children.  He submits there is a lack of
      any proper consideration of the ill-health of Dorcas Berfi.


  26. I reject the claim that Judge Spicer erred in her assessment of
      whether there are serious and compelling family or other's
      considerations which make exclusion of the appellants undesirable, and
      whether suitable arrangements have been made for the appellants care.




  27. Judge Spicer accepted at paragraph [25] of her decision that there was
      evidence in the appeal bundle of money transfers made to Ms Dorcas
      Berfi from May 2017.  At paragraph [36] Judge Spicer found that Ms
      Dorcas Berfi has played a significant role in the appellant's lives
      since at least 2016.  She found that as the appellant's grandfather's
      health began to decline, Ms Dorcas Berfi began to take over the day-to-
      day care of the appellants.  Judge Spicer considered the claim made on
      behalf of the appellants that Ms Dorcas Berfi has temporary
      guardianship of the appellants and that she has health problems which
      prevent her from visiting them, and which affects her ability to care
      for them.  Judge Spicer found, at paragraph [46], that Ms Dorcas Berfi
      has a long-standing connection with the appellants and rejected the
      claim that this was a temporary arrangement precipitated by the death
      of the sponsor's father.  At paragraph [47], Judge Spicer said:


         "I also take into account the fact that the appellants are both at
         boarding school for at least three months at a time, and do not
         require day-to-day care. They do not return home at weekends, and
         only return home during holidays. Although Ms Dorcas Berfi may be
         elderly and have health problems, the appellants are now aged 16
         and 18 years old, and accordingly are capable of caring for
         themselves, and assisting Ms Dorcas Berfi where required. There is
         no indication that she is unable or unwilling to provide the
         appellants with accommodation during the school holidays."


  28. Judge Spicer does not in that paragraph treat the appellants at
      adults, but she has regard to their ages, background and the
      arrangements in place for their care and how they are met.  That
      paragraph in my judgement must be read in context.  At paragraph [48],
      Judge Spicer noted the appellant's lives have not been significantly
      disrupted and they continue to be educated. Furthermore, as Judge
      Spicer noted, there was no indication from the sponsor that her
      financial contributions would cease if the appellants were to remain
      in Ghana.


  29. I referred Mr Ahmed to paragraph [19] of the grounds of appeal in
      which the appellants claim there is no real finding regarding the
      seriousness and impact of Ms Dorcas Berfi's  ill health, with the
      likelihood of further health deterioration, leaving the appellants
      with no adult to care for them in Ghana.  He accepted there was no
      independent evidence to support the claim that there will be a further
      deterioration in her health.


  30. In Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f)), the Upper Tribunal said, at
      paragraph [34] that:


         In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than the
         parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain. 'Compelling'
         in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that considerations
         that are persuasive and powerful. 'Serious' read with 'compelling'
         together indicate that the family or other considerations render
         the exclusion of the child from the United Kingdom undesirable. The
         analysis is one of degree and kind.  Such an interpretation sets a
         high threshold that excludes cases where, without more, it is
         simply the wish of parties to be together however natural that
         ambition that may be.


  31. The focus of the decision of Judge Spicer was upon the social and
      economic environment in which the appellants are living and their
      circumstances in the light of their age, social background and
      developmental history. There was no evidence before the FtT of neglect
      or abuse, or of any unmet needs.  Judge Spicer was satisfied that
      there are stable arrangements for appellants physical care.  In my
      judgement, it was open to Judge Spicer to conclude that the appellants
      have not established that there are serious and compelling family or
      other considerations which make their exclusion undesirable and that
      suitable arrangements have been made for the appellants care.  The
      findings and conclusions reached by Judge Spicer were neither
      irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings and
      conclusions that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  It follows
      that in my judgment there is no merit to the third ground of appeal.


  32. The decision reached by Judge Spicer was one that was open to her on
      the evidence before the FtT.  The appeal is therefore dismissed and
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer promulgated on 24th
      April 2020 shall stand.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date; 8th October 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



