
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09242/2018
                                                               hu/09248/2018
                                                               hu/09250/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                         Ergul [D] (first appellant)
                        Salih [d] (second appellant)
                         adem [d] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Trussler, Counsel instructed by Kinas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Beg who in a determination  promulgated  on  15
    November 2018  dismissed  their  appeals  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant them leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

2.      The appellants are the wife and children of the sponsor, Sinan  [D],
    who was born in 1973 and having left Turkey became settled  in  Britain
    and is now a British citizen.  They entered Britain in  March  2015  as
    his dependants.   The  first  appellant  is  his  wife  and  the  other
    appellants are Adem, who was born on 12 December 2000 and  Salih,  born
    on 18 November 2011.  They have a third child [A] who was  born  on  12
    June 2018.  That child is British as he was born here when  his  father
    was British.

3.     The judge noted  that  the  reason  for  the  refusal  was  that  the
    appellants could not meet the financial requirements of the Rules.  The
    judge considered documentary evidence that had been submitted regarding
    the sponsor's finances and concluded that that evidence  did  not  show
    that the requirements of the Rules could be met either at the  date  of
    application or at the date of hearing.

4.   At  the  hearing  before  me  there  was  some  confusion  as  to  what
    documentation was exactly before the judge and whether or not the judge
    had  considered  additional  documentary   evidence   and   based   her
    conclusions thereon without having given the appellants the opportunity
    to answer her concerns.   Although  Mr  Trussler  had  represented  the
    appellants at the hearing he was unable to recall exactly what had been
    said at the hearing regarding the financial evidence and Mr Kotas,  who
    had taken over the file from a colleague but did not have a full set of
    papers, was unable to deal with this issue satisfactorily.

5.     In these circumstances, although I cannot criticise the judge in  any
    way whatsoever, I consider that the fairest course of action is for the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that the  financial
    evidence in this case  can  be  properly  assessed  in  line  with  the
    directions which I set out below as I consider that that evidence would
    have a direct relevance to the issue of the rights of these  appellants
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.    For  these  reasons  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge and issue these directions.

Notice of Decision

This decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

    1. The appellants' representatives will prepare a  bundle  of  documents
       setting out all relevant financial documents showing  the  income  of
       the sponsor and indeed any income of the appellant  together  with  a
       skeleton argument showing how the requirements of the Rules  are  now
       met.

    2. There shall also be served a statement from the sponsor detailing his
       gloss on the accounts which have been lodged.

Signed: [pic]          Date: 1 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
