
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09838/2017
                                                               HU/09837/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 14 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   Mr S S
                                   Mr H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Parkin, Counsel, instructed by Rayan Adams
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan and are brothers born respectively
on 31 August 1999 and 20 July 2002.  They applied for entry clearance to
join their father in the United Kingdom, where he is present and settled.
That application was made on 25 May 2017.  In decisions dated 11 August
2017 the applications were refused with reference to paragraph 297(i)(e),
(f) and (v) of the Immigration Rules.

The Appellants appealed against that decision and the appeals came before
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aziz for hearing on 25 June 2018.  In a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 9 July 2018, the judge dismissed the
appeals, finding that the evidence given was not credible and that the
requirements of the Rules were not met, nor were there any compelling or
exceptional circumstances to justify allowing the appeal outside the Rules
pursuant to Article 8.

Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that the judge had
erred materially in law, in that the judge had of his own volition
investigated the relationship between the Appellants' father and their
stepmother and thus significantly departed from the grounds in respect of
which the applications had been refused; secondly, that the judge failed to
engage with the alternative head of claim, i.e. paragraph 297(i)(f),
whether there were serious and compelling family or other considerations
making exclusion of the Appellants undesirable, and the judge had entirely
failed to engage with the best interests in an entry clearance application,
cf. Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC),
which provides as follows:

"(i) The exercise of the duty by the ECO to assess an application under the
Immigration Rules as to whether there are family or other considerations
making the child's exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment
of what the child's welfare and best interests require.

(ii) Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights due regard must
be had to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.  An entry clearance
decision for the admission of a child under 18 is an action concerning
children undertaken by administrative authorities and so by Article 3 the
best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.

(iii)    Although the statutory duty under Section 55 of the UK Borders Act
2009 only applies to children within the UK the broader duty doubtless
explains why the Secretary of State's IDI invites Entry Clearance Officers
to consider the statutory guidance issued under Section 55.

(iv) Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's welfare
including emotional needs.  Other considerations come in to play where
there are other aspects of a child's life that are serious and compelling,
for example where an applicant is living in an unacceptable social and
economic environment.  The focus needs to be on the circumstances of the
child in the light of his or her age, social backgrounds and developmental
history and will involve inquiry as to whether

(a)  there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

(b)  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

(c)  there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care;

The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination of
circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to require admission.


(v)  As a starting point the best interests of a child are usually best
served by being with both or at least one of their parents.  Continuity of
residence is another factor.  Change in the place of residence where a
child has grown up for a number of years when socially aware is important:
see also SG Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC)."

It was asserted that the judge's decision lacked consideration of any of
these plainly relevant factors.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane in a
decision dated 3 October 2018 in relation to the grounds of appeal, holding
as follows:

"The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law but for which the outcome of
the appeal might have been different.  First, although the judge was aware
of the guidance offered by the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 00088
(IAC) nowhere in the judge's decision did the judge embark upon an
appropriate assessment of the Appellants' welfare and their best interests.
 It was incumbent upon the judge to embark upon such an assessment and to
arrive at findings of fact.  The judge arguably failed to do so.  Secondly,
although the genuineness of the Sponsor's and Mrs Kaur's relationship had
not been put in issue by the Respondent in the notices of decision the
judge resolved to do so if paragraphs 27 to 31 inclusive of the judge's
decision were read.  If paragraph 30 in particular is read it is difficult
to avoid the impression that the judge embarked upon a line of persistent
questioning.  In time the judge arrived at a finding that the Appellant and
Mrs Kaur had fabricated an account as to the circumstances in which they
met and married, 75 of the decision.  The judge's conduct in introducing
the issue of the Sponsor's and Mrs Kaur's relationship, in circumstances
where the Respondent had not done so, arguably amounted to a procedural
irregularity capable of making a material difference to the outcome and the
fairness of the proceedings.  The application for permission is granted."

     Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Parkin sought to rely on the
grounds of appeal. In respect of the first ground of appeal, he referred to
[27] to [31] of the decision and asserted that the judge had engaged in
what was essentially a lengthy line of cross-examination as to how the
parties met and how the relationship was formed.  He submitted that it is
clear from [30] that it was quite apparent that this weighed heavily on his
mind and this was wrong, given that no criticism of the marriage had ever
been advanced by or on behalf of the Secretary of State and even if it were
it was not directly relevant, given that the appeal was in respect of
permission to enter the UK by the Sponsor's children. The genuineness of
the marriage or otherwise did not go to the issues of sole responsibility
or the circumstances in Pakistan and there was no logical basis for
questioning this as it was not a spouse application nor a point taken on
behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer and was essentially irrelevant.

Mr Parkin submitted that this was a significant error, given that it makes
up a substantial body of the decision in terms of the judge's reasoning.
He submitted that the judge was distracted by concerns about the
genuineness of the marriage and that this ultimately was the reasoning
behind his decision to dismiss the appeal despite the fact it was not
relevant nor a factor in the refusal.

Mr Parkin submitted in respect of the second ground of appeal that it is
clear from  [77] that the judge simply did not consider the alternative
head of claim, i.e. whether there were compelling family or other
considerations which would make exclusion undesirable.  No reason has been
provided, just a bare assertion.  He submitted that it is not known what
conclusion the Tribunal would have come to had the correct test been
properly applied, that they may have come to a different decision and thus
the errors are material.

Mr Parkin further sought to rely on the third ground of appeal and whilst
the judge at [47] noted the decision in Mundeba he simply failed to apply
it in practice nor provide any reasons for not engaging with Section 55 and
the guidance provided in Mundeba.

Ms Aboni submitted in response that there was a Rule 24 response dated 20
November 2018.  This provides as follows:

"The Respondent opposes the Appellants' appeal ...  The Respondent submits
that whilst the judge asked questions of the Sponsor and his wife about the
timing of their relationship and that this was not relevant to the entry
clearance application of the children this appears to have been something
that snowballed during the hearing because of the conflict in the evidence
between the witnesses rather than an impermissible attempt by the judge to
introduce another reason for refusal.  In any event, the judge gave cogent
reasons for finding the Sponsor did not have sole responsibility for the
Appellants nor that there were reasons that made their exclusion
undesirable.  It is clear the judge rejected the Sponsor's claim about the
children to be untrue and referred to contradictory and unsupported
evidence specifically on those points."

In respect of the first issue, she submitted that this was not an attempt
by the judge to introduce another reason for refusal but rather an attempt
to clarify the issues.  However, this snowballed due to the fact that there
was inconsistent evidence between the witnesses.  She submitted this did
not affect or impact on the judge's findings regarding the application for
entry clearance and the refusal other than that the Sponsor found the
witnesses were unreliable.  She pointed out that the judge did not make
findings as to the history of the Sponsor and his entry to the UK but did
focus on the issue of sole responsibility under the Rules and gave adequate
reasons for finding that the Sponsor did not have sole responsibility.

She submitted the judge was entitled to find that the evidence was weak and
unreliable, that the documents were inconsistent and that the evidence was
incredible and implausible as to the children's circumstances and their
relationship with their mother, particularly the claim that she had never
had any responsibility for the children despite living in the same
household.

Ms Aboni submitted there were also issues with the documentary evidence,
highlighted by the judge at [69] to [72], and that the judge gave adequate
reasons for finding that the Sponsor did not accept sole responsibility at
the date of refusal.  She submitted it was open to the judge to find there
were no compelling family or other considerations.

Ms Aboni further submitted as regards Article 8 and Section 55 whilst the
judge did not expressly cite Section 55 it is clear from [47] that he had
the judgment in Mundeba in mind and it was open to him to find that the
Appellants had lived in Pakistan all their lives.  She submitted there was
no material error and the decision should be upheld.

In reply, Mr Parkin submitted if one looks at [75] it simply cannot
rationally be said that the matter in relation to the genuineness of the
marriage or the lack thereof was irrelevant in respect of the judge's
considerations of the issues material to the appeal.  He submitted perhaps
more significant still, the judge failed to give reasons in respect of
paragraph 297(i)(f) and had failed to give proper consideration to that
subparagraph.

He submitted that there was clearly some confusion by the judge as to the
alternative heads of claim under (e) and (f) and that one of these had
received no consideration when the appeals could have succeeded on that
basis.  He submitted that the decision required setting aside and being
remitted for a hearing de novo.

I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and Reasons

I have concluded that the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Aziz does
not contain material errors of law and should be upheld.

My reasons for so finding are as follows:

18.1.    The Judge gave clear and sustainable reasons for finding the
    evidence of the Sponsor and his wife not to be credible. He made these
    findings not only in relation to their relationship and marriage, due
    to the multiple discrepancies in their evidence but also most
    pertinently in respect of the key issue of sole responsibility at [54]-
    [72]. Therefore, whether or not it was procedurally fair for the Judge
    to make findings in respect of the Sponsor's relationship, his findings
    in respect of sole responsibility have neither been challenged nor
    undermined by the grounds of appeal. For the avoidance of doubt, I find
    that the Judge did not act in a manner which was procedurally unfair as
    the numerous and substantial discrepancies that arose in respect of the
    relationship between the Sponsor and his British wife emerged as a
    consequence of their oral evidence and it was incumbent upon the Judge
    to address this in his findings.

18.2.    The grounds of appeal asserted that the Judge erred in failing to
    consider whether there were serious and compelling family or other
    considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable, pursuant
    to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules. I note that the Judge did in fact
    consider this sub-head of the Rule at [77] where he held:

         "I do not accept that the sponsor has ever exercised sole
         responsibility over the appellants at any point in his life. I
         agree entirely with the respondent when they argue that the current
         arrangements have been put in place in order to circumvent the
         Immigration Rules and to facilitate their travel to the United
         Kingdom. For the same reasons, I find that there are no serious and
         compelling family or other considerations that would make their
         exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable. I am not persuaded
         that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) have been met."

    Given that there has been no challenge to the manner in which the Judge
    reached this finding and given he did expressly consider this aspect of
    paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules, I find no error of law in this
    respect either.

18.3.    The remaining ground of appeal contains a challenge on the basis
    that the Judge failed to consider the best interests of the Appellants.
    The oldest Appellant is now an adult aged 19, thus technically given
    that this was a human rights appeal and the date of consideration is
    the date of hearing, his best interests are no longer in issues,
    however, his brother remains a minor aged 16. As Mr Parkin
    acknowledged, the Judge did direct himself with regard to the decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph 297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC), the headnote of which is set out at [3] above,
    however, his submission was that the Judge failed to apply it.

18.4.    I note that headnote (v) of Mundeba (op cit) provides:

         "As a starting point the best interests of a child are usually best
         served by being with both or at least one of their parents.
         Continuity of residence is another factor.  Change in the place of
         residence where a child has grown up for a number of years when
         socially aware is important: see also SG Nepal [2012] UKUT 265
         (IAC)."

    At [78] of his decision, the Judge considered Article 8 outside the
    Rules and found that there was no exceptional or compelling
    circumstances which would warrant consideration of the applications
    outside the Rules; that the Appellant live in Pakistan with their
    mother and attend school or college and there was nothing preventing
    this from continuing. I find that the Judge has, in effect, applied (v)
    of the headnote in Mundeba. The decision in Mundeba does not in any
    event mandate that a child's best interests operate as a trump card in
    an entry clearance appeal

18.5.    I further find that, whilst it is the case that the Judge did not
    go on to make a specific finding in respect of the Appellants' best
    interests, it is apparent from the nature and extent of the Judge's
    reasoned findings that this would not have made any material difference
    to the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

