

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/09922/2015

                                                  HU/09923/2015

                                                HU/09924/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 October  2017                   |        On 25 October 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                            ANITA DAMMARPAL THAPA
                             SURYA BAHADUR THAPA
                           KAMALA DAMMAR PAL THAPA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (New Delhi)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:     Mr R. Jesurum, of Counsel
For the Respondent:     Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION
   1. In a brief and wholly inadequate determination of this appeal,  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Majid said:
           "There was No Show and I had to  deal  with  the  case  on  that
           basis.
           I have dismissed the appeal due to lack of interest."
   2. That, of course, was no basis upon which to dismiss the  appeal.  This
      was an appeal  against  refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance  and  so,
      obviously, the appellants themselves could not attend. Unknown to  the
      judge, because it appears that nobody had told him, the  Tribunal  had
      received a number of communications explaining why,  unexpectedly,  no
      representative would be attending. Counsel who had been instructed had
      been taken ill overnight. His clerk sent a fax to the Tribunal at 9.17
      explaining that counsel could not attend. The  appellants'  solicitors
      then sent, at 9.27, a fax requesting an adjournment.  Having  received
      no response, they made 3 telephone calls to the  Tribunal.  Therefore,
      the Tribunal was well aware that there was  no  lack  of  interest  in
      pursuing this appeal and that an adjournment had been sought.

   3. It seems clear that none of this was communicated to Judge Majid. That
      is sufficient to establish that there has been  procedural  unfairness
      such as to amount to an error of law and for that reason alone, as was
      readily, and properly, conceded by Ms Ahmad, the decision of the judge
      cannot stand.


   4. Although Judge Majid cannot be held responsible for the fact  that  he
      was not informed of the reasons for counsel's  absence,  I  accept  Mr
      Jesurum's submission that it was, in any event, an error  of  law  for
      the judge to fail to engage  with  the  material  before  him  and  to
      dismiss the appeal simply upon the  basis  that  the  appellants  were
      unrepresented and no one had appeared to give support for the appeal.


   5. It was common ground between the parties that the only proper  outcome
      is to remit this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the
      appellants may have the hearing  of  their  case  to  which  they  are
      entitled.
   Summary of decision:
   6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid made errors of  law  material  to  the
      outcome of this appeal and his decision to allow  the  appeal  is  set
      aside.


   7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  afresh
      by a judge other than Judge Majid.
   Signed
   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
             Date: 25 October 2017

