

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/09302/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2019                    |On 30th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, of Counsel, instructed by Whitefields
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 11th  March  1985.  He
       arrived in the UK in May 1991 with his mother and siblings.  He  was
       then a dependent on his father's asylum claim, which was refused and
       dismissed, and also in further  representations.  The  claimant  was
       however granted leave to remain until January 1999 and then  granted
       indefinite leave to remain in June  2000.  He  applied  for  British
       citizenship in 2004, but the application was refused for non-payment
       of a fee.

    2. On 20th September 2002 the claimant was  convicted  of  robbery  and
       taking a vehicle without consent and sentenced to four  years  youth
       custody. On 19th October 2005 the claimant was convicted of damaging
       property and sentenced to a community punishment order and  made  to
       pay �600 of compensation. On  23rd  August  2006  the  claimant  was
       convicted of driving whilst disqualified and was sentenced  to  four
       months  imprisonment.  On  8th  September  2006  the  claimant   was
       convicted of driving whilst disqualified and sentenced to one  month
       imprisonment. On 21st September 2006 the claimant was  convicted  of
       resisting or obstructing a constable  and  sentenced  to  one  month
       imprisonment. On 8th July 2007 the appellant  was  stopped  entering
       the UK with his brother's passport and convicted in February 2008 of
       possessing another's identity document and sentenced to  six  months
       imprisonment. On 20th February 2009 the claimant  was  convicted  of
       robbery and sentenced to 32 months imprisonment.

    3. On  14th  June  2017  the  Secretary  of  State  issued  a  stage  1
       deportation letter.  On  9th  August  2017  the  claimant  responded
       raising a protection and human rights  claim,  although  in  October
       2017 he stated that he no longer wished to rely upon an asylum claim
       but just on Article 8 ECHR. On 5th April 2018 his human rights claim
       was refused, and a deportation order was signed against him. Further
       representations were refused in a decision dated  16th  April  2018.
       His appeal against the decision refusing his human rights claim  was
       allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 3rd May 2019.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Grant-Hutchinson on 30th May 2019 on the basis that it was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
       claimant did not have to show very  compelling  circumstances  under
       the Immigration Rules simply because his 4 year  sentence  to  youth
       custody was one he was given whilst he was  a  minor.  It  was  also
       found to be arguable that the  decision  that  he  would  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan could not simply be
       shown by the fact that he would be unfamiliar with  the  country  of
       deportation and had been in the UK for a  long  time.  It  was  also
       found to be arguable that his deportation would not be unduly  harsh
       to his child as he only sees his child at weekends and holidays  and
       there was no objective evidence his child  would  need  professional
       intervention if he were deported.

    5. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law & Remaking

    6. The Secretary of State argues in the grounds of appeal and orally in
       submissions from Ms Willocks-Briscoe that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in finding at paragraph 55 of the decision that the fact  that
       the claimant was under 18 years when he received his 4 year sentence
       means that he does not have to show  very  compelling  circumstances
       under the deportation scheme set  out  s.117C  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in the  deportation  Immigration
       Rules. The fact that the claimant was under the age of 18  years  at
       the time of that conviction simply means that he cannot  be  subject
       to automatic deportation for this offence. Reliance is  also  placed
       on Johnson (deportation - 4 years imprisonment)  [2016]  UKUT  00282
       (IAC) which held that an offence of  4  years  or  more  can  become
       relevant to a deportation appeal even if there has been  a  previous
       successful human rights appeal  if  the  appellant  commits  further
       offences and there is a new appeal against deportation.

    7. Further, it is argued that the conclusion that  the  claimant  would
       have very significant  obstacles  to  integration  was  not  reached
       properly as there is a high threshold for  this  test,  and  culture
       shock or unfamiliarity with the country  does  not  amount  to  very
       significant obstacles, see SSHD v Olarewaju 2018 EWCA Civ 557. There
       was too much focus on issues of employment and a  lack  of  evidence
       that he would not be able to obtain a job and reasoning  to  support
       this conclusion. There was a failure to consider the fact  that  the
       claimant had friends he visited  in  Pakistan,  as  is  set  out  at
       paragraph 16 of the decision. Ultimately the  evidence  showed  that
       the claimant could, perhaps with a  bit  of  struggle,  acquire  the
       knowledge within a reasonable period of time to remake  his  private
       life ties (see SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 where the Court  of
       Appeal referenced the need for an individual to understand how  life
       in that society is carried on and participate) as he has ties in the
       Pakistani community, and thus it was a  perverse  decision  that  he
       would have very significant obstacles to integration if returned  to
       Pakistan.

    8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe also argued for the Secretary of State  that  it
       was not properly concluded that it would be unduly harsh for NK, the
       claimant's son by a previous relationship, if he  were  deported  as
       his mother is his primary carer and he only  sees  the  claimant  at
       weekends and holidays and it cannot properly be said that he is at a
       crucial time in his development, see  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";
       offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), as there was  no
       expert evidence on this point or anything which  evidenced  that  he
       would need professional intervention if the claimant were  deported.
       The test of unduly harsh is a high one, see KO  (Nigeria)  &  Ors  v
       SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, requiring something severe or bleak. This  test
       had not been met on the  facts  of  this  case,  and  there  was  no
       evidence that the needs of NK could not be met by  support  provided
       from Social Services and medical services in the UK.

    9. Ms Iqbal accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in
       not applying the very compelling circumstances test for the  reasons
       set out below.

   10. Ms Iqbal argued however that that the conclusion of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the claimant would face very significant obstacles  to
       integration in Pakistan was not based simply  on  culture  shock  or
       unfamiliarity or issues of obtaining a job but instead came to  that
       conclusion as a result of a multitude of factors, which are set  out
       at paragraphs 57 to 60 of the decision and that this conclusion  was
       therefore rational and lawful.

   11. Ms Iqbal argued that the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh to
       the claimant's child, NK, if the claimant  were  deported  was  also
       properly reasoned by the First-tier Tribunal who had the benefit  of
       an  independent  social  worker's  report.  NK  was  found   to   be
       vulnerable; to have had an emotionally disturbed childhood and  need
       the input of a child psychologist and  Social  Services;  to  be  at
       vulnerable stage of his development; and that the  claimant  leaving
       the UK would negatively impact on  his  functioning,  education  and
       emotional development. The situation for this  child  was  extremely
       complex as due to  the  sensitivities  of  his  mother  it  was  not
       possible to tell him  about  the  claimant's  new  relationship  and
       child. It is therefore clear that  on  these  particular  facts  the
       conclusion that this was a crucial time  when  he  needed  a  father
       figure and the conclusion that the deportation of the claimant would
       be unduly harsh was rationally open to the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
       was clear that the appropriate high standard had been applied as the
       impact on the claimant's other child, RM-K, had not been found to be
       unduly harsh. Overall there was  a  holistic  consideration  of  the
       evidence which applied the correct test and did not err in law.

   12. At the end of the submissions on error of law I informed the parties
       that I found that there was an error of law in failing to apply  the
       very compelling circumstances case but the First-tier  Tribunal  had
       not erred in  the  "Exceptions"  tests  applied  nor  made  perverse
       decisions which were not rationally open to the First-tier  Tribunal
       on the evidence before them. I set out my reasons for that  decision
       below. Both parties were happy to proceed with the remaking  of  the
       decision on submissions immediately.

   13.  With respect to remaking Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  very
       compelling circumstances is a very  demanding  and  high  test,  see
       paragraphs 21 and 22 of RA  (S.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  seriousness)
       Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 citing NA (Pakistan) &  Anor  v  SSHD  [2016]
       EWCA Civ 662. The claimant needs to show matters over and above  the
       factors in the exceptions and cannot do so  on  the  facts  of  this
       case.  In  applying  this  test  it  is  necessary  to  balance  the
       seriousness of the offences. This claimant has 7 convictions for  13
       offences which include a four year sentence for robbery in 2002  and
       a 2 year six month sentence for a robbery in 2009, and so there is a
       very serious public  interest  in  his  deportation.  There  was  no
       culpable delay on the Secretary of State's part  in  bringing  these
       proceedings as there was a failure to tell him about the  conviction
       which meant things were not initiated for  over  8  years,  see  the
       findings of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 72 of the decision.

   14. Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that there was no evidence that there was
       anything over and above unduly harsh  to  NK  if  the  claimant  was
       deported. NK could be supported by Social Services, his  mother  and
       his wider family in the UK if the claimant were deported and for the
       other reasons set out in the error of law submissions this  was  not
       over and above unduly harsh. There was ultimately nothing more  than
       the splitting of a  family  which  was  the  normal  consequence  of
       deportation,  and  did  not  suffice  to  meet  this  test,  see  KO
       (Nigeria). She argued also that there was no extreme level  of  very
       significant obstacles to integration if the claimant had  to  return
       to Pakistan for the reasons she identified in her  submissions  with
       respect to error of law.

   15. With respect to remaking Ms Iqbal submitted that she relied upon her
       skeleton argument that had been before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
       her  oral  submissions.  She  argued  that   the   very   compelling
       circumstances test is a Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016] UKSC 60  balancing
       exercise. As a result, particularly with reference to  paragraph  38
       of that decision,  it is correct to balance in the claimant's favour
       the fact that his conviction is one as a child  and  at  the  lowest
       level (a four year conviction) to  which  this  high  test  applies.
       Further his conduct since he committed his criminal offences amounts
       to ten years of entirely law-abiding behaviour. She also relied upon
       the Home Office guidance "Criminality: Article 8  ECHR"  dated  31st
       January 2019 which accepts that family and private life ties can  be
       strengthened due any delay in taking deportation proceedings, as per
       EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008] UKHL 41. She contends that  it  is  clear
       that the claimant has become further integrated during  this  period
       of delay in initiating proceedings forming another relationship  and
       having another child. Also in this claimant's favour is his low risk
       of reoffending, as is clear from the long period in which he has had
       no convictions and has been working and his deeply expressed remorse
       for his previous criminality as set out in  his  witness  statement;
       and the fact that his criminal  behaviour  was  as  a  result  of  a
       difficult childhood.

   16. The best interests of both of his children are to have the  claimant
       remain in the UK. This has been found to  be  unduly  harsh  to  his
       older child NK, and it is argued that this would  be  extremely  so,
       and thus over and above this test,  as  NK  has  suffered  not  just
       because  of  the  claimant's  imprisonment  but  also  due  to   the
       difficulties between the claimant and his ex-partner which have  led
       to him being a very vulnerable child. The evidence  of  his  current
       partner is that she would  not  travel  with  him  to  Pakistan  for
       rational reasons (see her  witness  statement  at  page  28  of  the
       appellant's bundle) and thus his  deportation   would,  in  reality,
       deprive his younger  child  RM-K  of  his  father.  Further  in  the
       claimant's favour is the following: the  fact  that  the  claimant's
       immediate family are all in the UK; the  fact  that  the  claimant's
       wife has been matched as a kidney donor for her sister and will need
       the support of the claimant for herself and their child RM-K  during
       this time; the claimant's very significant obstacles to  integration
       in Pakistan; the fact of the claimant's very long residence:  he  is
       now 34 years old and he arrived when he was 6 years old and has been
       lawfully in the UK with indefinite leave to remain for most  of  his
       life, and so did not form his private and family  life  ties  whilst
       present with  precarious  leave;  the  fact  that  the  claimant  is
       financially independent due to his  wife's  work  as  an  antisocial
       behaviour officer and his demonstrated ability to obtain  work,  and
       the fact that he speaks good English.

   17. At the end of the remaking submissions I reserved my determination.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

   18. S.117D(2) defines foreign criminal for Part VA of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as someone who (a) is not a  British
       citizen and who (b)  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and  (i)
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months, or (ii)
       been convicted of an offence which has caused serious harm or  (iii)
       is a persistent offender. At s.117D(4)(c) a sentence of imprisonment
       includes: " a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or  order  or
       directed to be detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a  prison
       (including, in particular, a hospital or an  institution  for  young
       offenders) for that length of time. As a result it is clear that the
       test at  s.117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act,  requiring  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above the Exceptions at 1 and 2, applies to a
       person who has been given a sentence of four years  detention  in  a
       young offenders institution.

   19. As the First-tier Tribunal sets out at paragraph 55 of the  decision
       of the Secretary of State was made under s.32(5) of the  UK  Borders
       Act on the basis  that  he  is  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months and  his
       deportation is therefore conducive to the public good. It is correct
       to say that if the claimant's only offence had been the one  he  was
       convicted of  as a  child  then  he  would  been  exempt  from  such
       proceedings under s.33(3) of the UK Borders Act 2007. However it  is
       notable that the offence was listed at paragraph 10 of the  decision
       as part of the criminal history relevant and relied upon  in  making
       the decision, and the test applied by the  Secretary  of  State  was
       whether there were very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
       those described in the exceptions to deportation  at  s.117C(4)  and
       (5) of the 2002 Act.

   20. The grounds of appeal  argue that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
       law in excluding this offence as being is material in assessing  the
       criteria for deportation of the claimant under s.117C  of  the  2002
       Act. The Secretary of State argues that it is  clear  that  offences
       which do not trigger the proceedings can be material in setting  the
       statutory parameters for the appeal, as was  done  in  the  case  of
       Johnson (deportation -  4  years  imprisonment)  [2016]  UKUT  00282
       (IAC).

   21. Given that it is clear that a past conviction that has not  resulted
       in deportation can be relied upon in a deportation appeal and  given
       that s.117D(4)(c) of  the  2002  Act  clearly  provides  that  youth
       custody counts equally as a sentence of imprisonment I find that the
       First-tier Tribunal erred in law at paragraphs  55  and  56  of  the
       decision in not applying  a  test  as  to  whether  there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   the   Exceptions   to
       deportation. This was accepted as correct by Ms Iqbal.

   22. With respect to Exception  1  at  s.117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act  the
       Secretary of State accepts  that  the  claimant  has  been  lawfully
       resident in the UK for most of his life and does not  challenge  the
       finding that he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK, see
       paragraphs 57 and 58 of the decision. It is clear  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal applied the correct definition of integration,  as  "a
       broad evaluative judgment" which is set out in full at paragraph  49
       of the decision, particularly as there is also  reference  to  being
       able to understand the cultural and social mores and  build  private
       life relationships within a reasonable period of time again when the
       facts of the case are considered at paragraph 60. In coming  to  the
       conclusion that this test is met weight is  properly  given  to  the
       findings that he had no known family  in  Pakistan;  his  period  of
       residence in the UK since the age of 6 years; and his education  and
       work all being in the UK. The context of the claimant being fit  and
       healthy  and  having  made  three  short  trips  to   Pakistan   was
       considered. I conclude that there are detailed and rational findings
       at paragraph 60 with respect to the claimant having very significant
       obstacles to integration on return to Pakistan which  were  open  to
       First-tier Tribunal on the evidence  before  it  and  there  was  no
       failure to consider anything material.

   23. Likewise, I find that the finding that it would be unduly  harsh  to
       the claimant's child, NK, to have to remain in the UK whilst  he  is
       deported was rationally and properly open to the First-tier Tribunal
       on the evidence. The First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directs  itself
       with respect to the high test  in  "unduly  harsh"  setting  out  at
       paragraph 48 of the decision an  extract  from  NA  (Pakistan)  that
       separation of children from  their  parents  was  a  consequence  of
       criminal conduct, and the simply desirability of children being with
       their parents not  normally  being  a  compelling  circumstances  to
       outweigh the  high  public  interest  in  deporting  criminals;  and
       further at paragraph 50 an extract from  KO  (Nigeria)  that  unduly
       harsh is a high degree of harshness which  goes  beyond  what  would
       necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  being  faced  with   the
       deportation of a parent. As Ms Iqbal has  argued  that  the  correct
       understanding of the high level of the test led to the conclusion at
       paragraph 69 of  the  decision  the  that  the  deportation  of  the
       claimant whilst his younger child, RM-K, and partner remained in the
       UK would not be unduly harsh to them.

   24. The deportation of the claimant was found by the First-tier Tribunal
       to be unduly harsh to NK, who is 12 years  old  and  the  claimant's
       older child by a previous relationship, because expert evidence from
       an independent social worker, found to have the requisite  expertise
       at paragraph 61, was  that  there  was  a  genuine,  subsisting  and
       positive relationship between NK and the claimant, and that  it  was
       view of NK that he would be devastated by his deportation  and  that
       in  the  context  of  his  emotionally  disturbed  childhood,  which
       required the input of a child psychologist and Social Services, that
       the claimant  being  deported  would  impact  on  NK's  functioning,
       education and emotional development with a real risk  of  harm.  The
       First-tier Tribunal concluded at paragraphs 64 to 67 of the decision
       that  NK  had  particular  vulnerabilities  due  to  his   difficult
       childhood, and that, reliant on the expert evidence he was at a very
       vulnerable stage of his development and that the deportation of  the
       claimant could well  lead  to  the  need  for  further  professional
       interventions, as had previously been needed, to address this  harm,
       and as a result it was found to be unduly harsh. I find  that  there
       was proper  reliance  on  expert  evidence  and  findings  that  the
       consequences of deportation of the claimant for NK went well  beyond
       the normal consequences of deportation for a child of a family,  and
       that a sufficient level of severe harshness and bleakness existed on
       the facts of this case to meet this test.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   25. As indicated above the test for remaking in  this  case  is  whether
       s.117C(6) can be met: and thus whether  there  are  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2
       (at s.117C(4) and (5)), which the preserved findings of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal find are met. This is best determined, as  per  Hesham
       Ali, by a balancing exercise. In the same  case  the  Supreme  Court
       also held as follows that: " a custodial sentence of four  years  or
       more represents such a serious level of offending  that  the  public
       interest in  the  offender's  deportation  almost  always  outweighs
       countervailing considerations of private or family life;"  Similarly
       in NA (Pakistan) it was noted that to meet this test there would  be
       need to features of the case which were of the kind in Exceptions  1
       or 2 or features falling outside  those  exceptions  which  made  an
       especially strong Article 8 ECHR case.

   26. As per the Court of Appeal in AJ (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ
       1012 I must firstly fully recognise the very powerful weight  to  be
       given to the strong public interest in deporting foreign  criminals.
       This public interest has three  facets:  the  need  to  deter  other
       foreign criminals from committing crime; the need to maintain public
       confidence in the immigration system; and protection of the  public.
       For reasons I set out below  I  do  not  find  that  the  claimant's
       deportation is needed to protect the public but  the  other  aspects
       must be given full weight against the appellant succeeding  in  this
       appeal. The claimant has seven convictions for 13 offences, the most
       serious being two convictions for robbery which is a  serious  crime
       involving fear of violence or actual  violence  towards  law-abiding
       citizens and financial/ property loss for  the  victim.  However,  I
       recognise that there is some force in the  submission  of  Ms  Iqbal
       that the claimant is at the lowest end of sentence needed to  engage
       this highest test and  that  this  should  be  borne  in  mind  when
       considering the proportionality of his deportation, whilst of course
       still adhering to the very compelling circumstances test and bearing
       in mind that it will  be  unusual  for  the  claimant's  family  and
       private life to outweigh the public interest.

   27. I find that the claimant does not represent a risk of reoffending as
       he has not committed any further offences since  the  robbery  which
       led to his conviction at Snaresbrook Crown Court  on  20th  February
       2009. This is now over ten years ago. It has been found by the First-
       tier Tribunal in an unchallenged finding that he is  culturally  and
       socially integrated into the UK due to his not having committed  any
       offences and having assumed a lawful existence in the UK with  work,
       family and friends. In his evidence to the Tribunal he has expressed
       a great deal of remorse for his  behaviour,  and  explained  how  in
       prison in 2009  he  did  a  victim  awareness  course  and  acquired
       qualifications which enabled him to turn his life  around.  He   now
       has a loving family, with a wife and two sons to provide for  and  a
       good income from  work  as  a  HGV  driver  for  Redbridge  Builders
       Merchant. I stress that I fully appreciate that  this  means  simply
       that one of the three key aspects of the public  interest  does  not
       require the claimant's deportation. It is notable that in Johnson at
       paragraph 27  consideration  is  given  to  circumstances  where  an
       offence is committed as a young  man  and  a  long  period  of  non-
       offending then elapses, and it is concluded that  this  could  be  a
       "very compelling circumstances" which  could  protect  an  appellant
       against expulsion.  However, I find that the  need  to  deter  other
       foreign criminals from committing crime and  the  need  to  maintain
       public confidence in the immigration system still represent  a  very
       considerable public interest in the claimant's deportation.

   28. Neutral matters in this balancing exercise  are  that  the  claimant
       speaks English and is financially independent as  both  he  and  his
       partner are in employment.

   29. On the claimant's side of the balance there is firstly the fact that
       he has met both of the Exceptions under s.117C(4)  and  (5)  of  the
       2002 Act. The test is of course that there must  be  something  over
       and above those Exceptions so this alone does not suffice but I find
       that it is an important first step. With respect to the private life
       Exception I do not find that he has shown anything  over  and  above
       very significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan on  the  facts
       of this case, but this is a matter which may combine with others  to
       make the case very compelling. Within the findings that led  to  his
       meeting this Exception are his long and lawful residence starting as
       a 6 year old child, and his private life ties (which  include  those
       with extended family in the UK for both  himself  and  his  partner)
       which led to a conclusion that he was integrated in the UK  as  well
       as a finding that he has no known family in Pakistan.  It  is  clear
       that the delay in commencing deportation proceedings, albeit  not  a
       culpable error by the Secretary of State, has led to  this  claimant
       having deeper family and private life ties with the UK.

   30. With respect to the "unduly harsh" Exception I am persuaded  however
       that the facts of this  case  can  properly  described  as  strongly
       unduly harsh to the claimant's son  NK.  The  social  work  evidence
       (based on interviews with NK himself, NK's mother and the  claimant)
       is that NK is "without doubt a vulnerable child"  who  has  suffered
       emotional harm in the past necessitating Social Services and  mental
       health services involvement, and particularly at this point of  time
       in early adolescence needs a father figure and stable positive  male
       role model in his life, and  thus  regular  on-going  face  to  face
       contact with his father. It is  the  social  worker's  opinion  that
       there is a  real  risk  that  separation  from  the  claimant  would
       undermine his emotional stability,  cause  him  great  distress  and
       trauma, and harm his educational development.  I  accept  that  were
       this harm caused to NK on the  claimant's  deportation  that  Social
       Services and CAMHS would be available to him in the  UK,  but  these
       services can only do their best to try to address the  harm  caused,
       and are not in a position to prevent it happening. I find  that  the
       deportation of the claimant would be beyond bleak and severely harsh
       for NK even with the support from state services to  assist  him  in
       his damaged state.

   31. I also accept the submissions of  Ms  Iqbal  that  there  are  other
       positive elements on the claimant's side of the balance on the facts
       of this case. The best interests of the claimant's other  son,  RM-K
       are to have the claimant present in his life.  As  set  out  by  the
       social worker the claimant is one of his secure  attachment  figures
       and it will be emotionally harmful to remove him from  RM-K  (now  a
       baby of ten months old), particular as this will be emotionally  and
       practically stressful for his mother.  Even  though  the  claimant's
       deportation is not found to be unduly harsh to him and  his  mother/
       the claimant's current partner, this is of relevance as  those  best
       interests could not be met by RM-K and his mother  accompanying  the
       claimant to Pakistan as it was found by the First-tier Tribunal that
       it would be unduly harsh to expect them to live with the claimant in
       Pakistan due to her levels of anxiety and being of Indian  heritage,
       and in the context of the claimant having been found  to  have  very
       significant obstacles of his own to integration in Pakistan.  It  is
       of relevance here that the claimant and his British  partner  formed
       their  family  life  relationship  when  he  was  lawfully  and  not
       precariously present in the UK  with  indefinite  leave  to  remain.



   32. For these reasons I conclude on the totality of the evidence  before
       me that this is an exceptional case and there  are  very  compelling
       circumstances (primary the over and above  unduly  harsh  impact  of
       deportation on NK but additionally the meeting of the  private  life
       Exception  to  deportation  which  included  a   finding   of   very
       significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan  for  the  claimant
       and the fact of his deportation being contrary to the best interests
       of his younger child RM-K) that mean in  a  case  where  the  public
       interest in deportation whilst still very strong lacks  any  element
       of public protection  that  the  claimant's  deportation  is  not  a
       proportionate interference with his Article 8 ECHR rights.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on Article 8  ECHR
      grounds.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the claimant's  older  child  who  has  been
    found to be particularly vulnerable.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   22nd July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

