
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09477/2018
                                                               HU/09479/2018
                                                               HU/09481/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2019                           |On 06 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   MD [A]
                               nurannahar [j]
                                    [a j]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In September 2011 the first appellant, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  was
    granted leave to remain as a student and was granted further extensions
    in the same capacity until 5 June 2016.  (Although his wife  and  child
    are also appellants, it is common ground that their appeals  depend  on
    his so I shall refer hereafter simply to "the appellant").   His  leave
    was curtailed on 6 October 2015 as it was determined that he had used a
    false document to obtain his leave to remain.  It was stated  that  for
    the purposes of his application dated February 2013 he had submitted  a
    certificate from ETS to his sponsor in order for them  to  provide  him
    with a CAS.  The respondent had undertaken a check on his ETS list  and
    found  that  there  was  significant  evidence  his   certificate   was
    fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test  taker  for  the  test
    taken on 18 September 2012 at London College of Media  and  Technology.
    The appellant made Section 120 representations which were  refused  and
    certified, but when he challenged these decisions by  way  of  judicial
    review the respondent agreed to reconsider his case.  When on  5  April
    2018 the respondent refused his and his  dependants'  applications,  he
    appealed.  His appeal  came  before  Judge  Anstis  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT).  By this time, as Judge Anstis records at paragraph  5,
    the respondent no longer relied on the allegation of deception:

         "5.  Although it appears that earlier the Respondent was relying on
             the  Appellant  having   fraudulently   obtained   his   TOEIC
             qualification, this allegation does not appear anywhere on the
             current decision and no  longer  appears  to  be  relied  upon
             against the Appellant by the  Respondent.   (Para  32  of  the
             decision letter appears to  make  indirect  reference  to  it,
             albeit only in the context of considering  whether  there  are
             exceptional circumstances requiring a consideration  of  leave
             to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   There  is   no
             reference to it as a reason for refusal in  the  substance  of
             the decision)".

    The judge went on to find that the appellant  did  not  use  deception;
    stating at paragraphs 46-47:

         "46. By the time of the decision now under  appeal  the  Respondent
             had abandoned any  reliance  on  the  first  Appellant  having
             cheated at his TOEIC test.  That is not part of  the  decision
             currently under appeal.

         47.  As Mr  Sharma  says,  the  Respondent  has  not  supplied  any
             material in support of its allegation of deception or cheating
             and so has not gone anywhere towards discharging  the  initial
             burden on the Respondent.  There is no evidence before me that
             the first Appellant has cheated in his test, and I  find  that
             the first Appellant did not cheat  or  use  deception  in  his
             TOEIC test".

2.   The only grounds of appeal being human rights, the  judge  went  on  to
    assess whether the decisions were a breach of Article 8.  The principal
    basis on which the appellant brought his appeal  was  reliance  on  the
    decision in Khan and Others [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 which in turn drew  on
    the earlier Court of Appeal decision in Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.

3.   The judge set out his understanding of the Khan case as follows:

         "41. The essence of the decision or agreement recorded in  Khan  is
             that judicial review applications challenging  curtailment  on
             the basis of deception in  TOEIC  tests  should  be  aside  in
             favour of individuals being able to make human  rights  claims
             for leave which, if refused, would result in  the  opportunity
             for an in-country right of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
             at which 'the FTT would be able to determine  whether  or  not
             the Appellant committed a TOEIC fraud' (para 23, 27 & 28).

         42.  At para 37 of Khan, the Respondent's position was recorded  as
             follows:

                  '... the SSHD confirms that:

                  (i)  For those individuals whose leave was curtailed,  and
                      where that leave would still have time to run  as  at
                      the date of an FTT determination that  there  was  no
                      deception, subject to any further appeal to  the  UT,
                      the curtailment decision would be withdrawn  and  the
                      effect ... would be that leave would continue and the
                      individuals would not be disadvantaged in any  future
                      application those chose to make;

                  (ii) For those whose leave has been curtailed,  and  where
                      the leave would in any event have expired without any
                      further application being made, the  Respondent  will
                      provide a further opportunity for the individuals  to
                      obtain leave with the safeguards in  paragraph  (iii)
                      below.

                  For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an  in
                  time application for further leave  to  remain  which  was
                  refused on ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination
                  that there was no deception  would  be  that  the  refusal
                  would be withdrawn.  The applicant in question would still
                  have an outstanding application for leave  to  remain  and
                  the  Respondent  will  provide  them  with  a   reasonable
                  opportunity  to  make  any  further   changes   to   their
                  application which would be considered on the basis of them
                  not having employed any  deception  in  the  obtaining  of
                  their TOEIC certificate, and  they  would  in  no  way  be
                  disadvantaged in any  future  application  they  chose  to
                  make.

                  (iii)    In all cases, the  Respondent  confirms  that  in
                      making any future  decision  he  will  not  hold  any
                      previous  gap  in  leave  caused  by  any   erroneous
                      decision in relation  to  ETS  against  the  relevant
                      applicant, and will have to take into account all the
                      circumstances of each case.

                  However, the Respondent does not accept that it  would  be
                  appropriate for the Court  now  to  bind  him  as  to  the
                  approach  that  he  would  take  towards   still   further
                  applications in the future, for example  by  stating  that
                  each applicant has already accrued  a  certain  period  of
                  lawful leave.  The potential factual permutations  of  the
                  cases that may need to be considered are many and various.
                   In some cases, for example, it  will  be  apparent  that,
                  whilst  on  the  facts  as  presented  at  the  appeal  an
                  appellant's human rights claim is successful, he would not
                  have been able to obtain leave at previous dates.   Again,
                  this issue will have to be dealt with on a  case  by  case
                  basis.'

         43.  It appears that this position, and the agreements  reached  in
             Khan and associated cases, where intended  to  be  of  broader
             application than simply those individual cases and  were  seen
             by the Respondent and the Court of Appeal in Khan as being the
             appropriate  way  of  resolving  outstanding  cases  involving
             allegations of cheating in TOEIC tests.

         44.  Accordingly, it is that which I have to apply  in  considering
             this case".

4.   However, for the judge the correct application of Khan meant  that  the
    appellant could not succeed because:

         "[T]he appellants have effectively had the further  opportunity  of
         the further application set out  in  (ii)  of  para  37,  yet  that
         application has failed in its own right.   Albeit  by  an  indirect
         route, they have come to what seems to be envisaged  as  the  final
         stage of the process in Khan".

    The judge concluded:

         "49. On the facts of this case:

             (i)  the first Appellant did not use deception  in  his  TOEIC
                  test, but,

             (ii) the Appellants' underlying  human  rights  claim  is  not
                  sufficiently  strong  to  succeed  irrespective   of   any
                  question of deception.

         50.   Mr  Sharma's  answer  to  that  is  that  the  appeal  should
             nevertheless succeed on human rights grounds on account of the
             'historic injustice' that the Appellants have been subject  to
             arising  from  the  unjustified  curtailment  of   the   first
             Appellant's leave.

         51.  While arguments framed as 'historic injustice' have  succeeded
             in certain cases (notably in respect of Ghurkha dependents)  I
             do not consider that there is any  underlying  principle  that
             previous unlawful or incorrect  behaviour  by  the  Respondent
             makes a human rights claim bound to succeed or a  decision  to
             refuse an application disproportionate.  It also seems  to  me
             that it must have been in the mind of the parties to the  Khan
             case and the Court of Appeal that there could be  cases  where
             deception is not shown but where nevertheless the appeal  does
             not succeed on human rights grounds.  A finding that there  is
             no deception does not mean that an appeal is bound to succeed.
              The ultimate outcome of Khan is that the best  an  individual
             can hope for is  a  consideration  of  a  human  rights  claim
             without the allegation of deception hanging over it.  That  is
             what the Appellants have had in this case.

         Conclusion

         52.  This is not an outcome that I find particularly  satisfactory,
             but it appears to me inevitable in the  limitation  of  appeal
             rights to human rights grounds that there will  be  appellants
             who have been wrongly dealt with by the Respondent  but  whose
             appeals must ultimately be dismissed because the decision does
             not amount to a breach of their human rights, and this is such
             a case.  The fact that  the  prior  curtailment  decision  was
             wrong  does  not  make  this   decision   a   disproportionate
             interference  with  the  Appellants'  human  rights,   whether
             considered alone or together with the best  interests  of  the
             children.

         53.  The appeals are dismissed".

5.   The appellant was successful in being granted permission  to  challenge
    the decision of the judge  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  given
    insufficient consideration to the impact of the  curtailment  decision.
    Mr Karim put matters  more  directly  in  his  submissions  before  me,
    maintaining that the judge had misunderstood the effect of Khan.

6.   I agree.  Paragraph 37(ii) of Khan stated that for  those  whose  leave
    was curtailed "a further opportunity  for  the  individuals  to  obtain
    leave" would be  provided  "with  the  safeguards  in  paragraph  (iii)
    below".  Paragraph (iii) confirmed that in making any  future  decision
    the Respondent would "not hold any previous gap in leave caused  by  an
    erroneous decision in relation to ETS against the  relevant  applicant,
    and will have to take into account all the circumstances of each case".
     Further, whilst paragraph 37 records  the  respondent's  undertakings,
    the clear ratio of both Khan and Ahsan is that a person  who  has  been
    subject to an erroneous decision in relation to an  ETS  decision  must
    not be put in a worse position than if the adverse decision -  in  this
    case a curtailment decision - had  not  been  made.   If  that  binding
    authority were followed by the respondent in the  appellant's  case  he
    would have to be given a period of leave and in that  period  it  would
    clearly be open to him to make a further application for  extension  of
    leave as a student (if not also on some other basis).  Contrary to what
    the judge states at  paragraph  48,  the  appellant  has  not  had  the
    opportunity of such a further application; nor  can  it  be  said  that
    "that application has failed in its own right".  The judge  appears  to
    have falsely reasoned that because the appellant was fighting  a  human
    rights appeal his only application  could  have  been  a  human  rights
    application.  That was simply incorrect.

7.   The judge's error was plainly material because it led him to attach  no
    significance when conducting the Article 8  proportionality  assessment
    to the legal significance (following Ahsan and Khan) of  the  erroneous
    decision to curtail the appellant's leave.  Accordingly,  I  set  aside
    the decision of the judge.

8.   I consider I am in a position to re-make the decision  without  further
    ado.

9.   The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on Article  8
    grounds.  Applying the five-step approach set out in Razgar I  consider
    that the respondent's decision falls foul of principle (3) in  that  it
    was not in accordance with the law.  The judge rejected the possibility
    of a breach  of  principle  (3)  because  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules.  But in  the  context  of
    this case the "law" should have been taken to include binding  judicial
    authority - which was foreseeable and accessible to the parties.

10.  In any event, even  if  I  am  wrong  to  find  that  the  respondent's
    decision is contrary to Razgar's third principle, I am fully  satisfied
    it is contrary to  the  fifth  principle,  since  the  failure  of  the
    respondent to implement a binding decision of the Court of Appeal  most
    certainly constitutes a very compelling circumstance going directly  to
    the issue of the public interest consideration.  It cannot  be  in  the
    public interest  for  the  respondent  to  fail  to  implement  binding
    judicial authority.

11.  Whilst I therefore allow the appeal, it will be clear  from  the  terms
    in which I have done so, that, pursuant  to  section  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998, the appropriate remedy is for the respondent to  grant
    a short period of further leave to  remain,  not  less  than  60  days,
    together with confirmation that previous gaps will not be held  against
    him. Such a remedy would  be  consonant  with  what  was  envisaged  as
    appropriate in Ahsan and Khan.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 28 February 2019

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

