
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09645/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd December 2017                        |On 21st February 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                              MR NAVEED MEHMOOD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.



2.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 11 December 1990.  His
    appeal against the refusal of entry clearance as a spouse  was  allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Asjad on 9 January 2017 on human rights grounds.



3.   The judge found: "Even if it is  accepted  that  the  English  language
    test certificate is not a recognised qualification at the time  of  the
    application, the public interest in 117B is that those who come to  the
    UK should speak English so that they are better able to integrate  into
    society and are less of a burden to the taxpayer. The fact remains that
    the Appellant has an English language qualification and passed  such  a
    test as demonstrated by his  results  shown  on  his  City  and  Guilds
    certificate. The Appellant is able to speak English to a standard  that
    was recognised by the Home Office up to November 2015." The judge found
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting and that  the  refusal
    of entry clearance breached Article 8.

4.   The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  sought  permission  to
    appeal on the following grounds:

         "2.  A sought to rely on a City and Guilds certificate as  evidence
             to demonstrate an ability to speak to the requisite level. The
             Respondent does not take issue with the educational  institute
             City and Guilds per se - the application  was  made  before  5
             November 2015 and the test was taken prior  to  5  April  2015
             therefore A can rely on  a  qualification  from  this  source.
             However, it was incumbent on A to submit  the  certificate  as
             well as a notification of the candidate  results  sheet.  This
             was the only point advanced in the ECO's decision:

                  You are not exempt from the English  language  requirement
                  under paragraph E-ECP.4.2. In support of your  application
                  you have provided City & Guilds certificates for listening
                  and speaking; however  you  have  failed  to  provide  the
                  corroborating  'notification  of  candidate  results'.   I
                  therefore refuse  your  application  under  paragraph  EC-
                  P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  (E-
                  ECP.4.1.)

         3.   As  such  without  the  corresponding  notification  A  cannot
             satisfy the requirements of the Rules. It is unclear from [11]
             and [17] whether the FTTJ fully grasped the  need  to  satisfy
             the Rules in their entirety - indeed there appears  to  be  no
             explicit finding whether A did or did not meet Appendix FM and
             thus whether any compelling circumstances  exist  to  consider
             'Article 8 outside of the Rules'.

         4.   The Appellant appears to assert that City and  Guilds  do  not
             provide the relevant notification  -  see  [8].  The  FTTJ  is
             silent on this.  However, the evidence relied  upon  does  not
             support the proposition that  successful  candidates  are  not
             given such a document only that  unsuccessful  candidates  are
             given performance feedback.

         5.   It is submitted that without all of the required evidence  the
             Appellant  has  not,  contrary  to  the  conclusion  in  [17],
             demonstrated they speak English to a  standard  recognised  by
             the Respondent.

         6.   The Respondent asserts that the failure  to  consider  whether
             there are compelling circumstances coupled with a  failure  to
             engage with the requisite Immigration Rules (and thus the need
             for effective immigration control) renders the proportionality
             assessment erroneous."

5.   Permission was granted by Resident Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Zucker on the grounds that: "It was arguable that the judge  failed  to
    make any or any sufficient findings as to  whether  the  Appellant  had
    provided any sufficient notification of his results as  required  under
    the rules and that without any such finding the finding with respect to
    the application of the wider application of article 8 ECHR was flawed."

6.   In submissions Mr Tufan relied on home office guidance and pointed  out
    that, in relation to listening and  speaking,  the  documents  required
    were International Speaking and Listening IESOL Diploma Certificate  or
    ISESOL Certificate plus  IESOL  Listening  A1  Certificate.  For  tests
    booked or taken before 6 April 2013 one of the  following  combinations
    of  documents  were  required  -  the  Diploma  Certificate  plus   the
    notification of candidate results sheet.

7.   Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal. No one appeared on behalf  of
    the Appellant and therefore no submissions were made on his behalf.

8.   The application was refused by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  [ECO]  on
    the ground that the Appellant had  failed  to  submit  notification  of
    candidate results. The application was  refused  under  EC-P.1.1(d)  of
    Appendix FM (E-ECP.4.1). EC-P.1.1(d) states  that  the  applicant  must
    meet all the requirements of E-ECP: Eligibility for entry clearance  as
    a partner and E-ECP.4.1 states that in relation to the English language
    requirement the applicant must provide specified evidence that -

    (a)  they are a national of a majority English speaking country  listed
         in paragraph GEN 1.6;

    (b)  have passed an English language test in speaking and listening  at
         a  minimum  of  level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
         References for Languages with a provider approved by the  Secretary
         of State;

    (c)  have an academic  qualification  recognised  by  UK  NARIC  to  be
         equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or  Master's  degree  or
         PhD in the UK which was taught in English or;

    (d)  are exempt from the English language requirement under paragraph E-
         ECP.4.2.

9.   There is no requirement under the Immigration Rules that the  Appellant
    provide notification of candidate results. That phrase appears  in  the
    Respondent's  guidance  and  I  was  not  made  aware  or   shown   any
    corresponding requirement under any of the Appendices.

10.  Appendix O deals with a list of English language tests that  have  been
    approved by the Home Office. Part of Appendix O which deals  with  City
    and Guilds states that in relation to speaking and listening, only  the
    certificate is required, but for tests booked or taken before  6  April
    2013, both the certificate and the notification  of  candidate  results
    are required. For A1 tests booked and taken online on or after 6  April
    2013 only the certificate is required, but for other categories of test
    the IESOL diploma certificate is  required  or  a  combination  of  the
    ISESOL certificate, the IESOL  certificate  plus  the  notification  of
    results sheets is required.

11.  An argument was made before the First-tier Tribunal that the  City  and
    Guilds test taken by the Appellant was not recognised.  However,  after
    hearing argument on the point, the judge found that  test  certificates
    up 6 April 2015 could be used for UK  applications  and  there  was  no
    beginning date. There was no objection raised by the ECO about the type
    of qualification the Appellant had submitted and if any issue was to be
    raised it should have been done at that point. The  argument  that  the
    Appellant could not  rely  on  his  certificate  was  rejected  and  no
    challenge was made to that in the Respondent's grounds of appeal.

12.   The  Appellant  in  this  case  was  relying  on  a  City  and  Guilds
    certificate for listening and speaking and Appendix  O  suggested  that
    was  sufficient.  Accordingly,  there  was  no  error  in  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant  could  rely  on  his  City  and  Guild's
    certificate, and since there was no requirement, the failure to  submit
    notification of results was not fatal to the application. The judge was
    well aware at paragraph 5 that this was the basis of refusal.  However,
    it is apparent from the Respondent's guidance and Appendix O  that  the
    requirement to submit  a  notification  sheet  did  not  apply  in  the
    Appellant's case.

13.  The Appellant had submitted an English  language  certificate  and  was
    able to speak English to a standard that was  recognised  by  the  Home
    Office up to November 2015. That was enough to satisfy the  substantive
    English language requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge
    assessed proportionality in accordance with Section 117B.

14.  I find that there was no error of law in  the  judge's  decision  of  9
    January 2017 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 16 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
