
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/09956/2017
                                                HU/09962/2017, HU/09971/2017
                                                HU/09973/2017, HU/09978/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 12 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  MEMON + 4
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband, wife and three daughters, all  citizens  of
    Pakistan. They appeal to the UT  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge
    McGavin, dated 8 August 2018, dismissing their appeals on human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The grounds of appeal are set out in the appellants' application  dated
    23 August 2018.

 3. The grounds say at 2(a) that the FtT's conclusion at 53 that it  is  in
    the best interests of the three  children  to  return  to  Pakistan  is
    "perverse", and at 2(b) in relation to the two older children that  the
    FtT at 54 "misapplied the reasonableness test".

 4. The first specification of alleged error is at 2.1.1 (i), first  bullet
    point, where it is  said  that  from  28-47  the  FtT  begins  "not  by
    examining what is in the best interests of each child, but by examining
    potentially negative considerations".

 5.  That  misrepresents  the  decision,  which  thoroughly  rehearses  all
    relevant factors.  It does not begin with negatives,  and  it  includes
    them along with the positives.  It is hard  to  see  how  an  appraisal
    could otherwise be carried out.  The bullet points which follow, second
    to fifth, are all flawed in the same way.   They  do  not  support  the
    sixth and final bullet point, which says  that  rather  than  carefully
    examining all relevant factors, the FtT misbalanced the scales in a way
    "bound to lead to only one result".

 6. At 2.1.2(ii) the grounds assert that the  FtT's  conclusions  were  not
    open to it.

 7. The first bullet  point  hereunder  refers  to  the  FtT  at  38  being
    concerned by a psychological  report  being  based  on  the  children's
    "health problems" when there was no diagnosis and no  medical  evidence
    that a move to Pakistan  would  adversely  affect  their  health.   The
    grounds do not show any error in the FtT's observation, or that it  led
    the FtT astray.  The FtT's further development of this theme  at  39-40
    is not challenged.  There are sound reasons there for  not  giving  the
    report of Dr Tagg as much weight as the appellants sought.

 8. The second bullet point under this heading asserts that a letter from a
    depute head teacher about the oldest child "is not referred to at all",
    and that "considerable weight" should have been given to it as  showing
    that interruption of studies at this stage would have a serious  effect
    on her.  Mr Govan in his submissions pointed out  that  the  letter  is
    referred to at 30.  Mr McGlashan in his reply declined to  accept  that
    the ground is inaccurate.  He said that the FtT  cited  only  that  the
    child is about to sit her "national  5  qualifications",  but  not  the
    significant part of the letter.

 9. This ground is not well founded.   The  judge  noted  in  the  previous
    sentence that the child wanted to qualify in medicine  and  had  chosen
    her subjects accordingly.  Detailed consideration follows in  the  next
    paragraph, noting that the girls "have all  received  excellent  school
    reports and are considered by their teachers here to be intelligent and
    able".  Not only is the letter cited, its substance  is  plainly  taken
    into account.  The judge goes on to  find  that  fears  expressed  over
    educational difficulties are mitigated.  No error  has  been  shown  in
    that finding.

10. The grounds finally, under heading 2.2, refer to MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705, and say that "powerful reasons" had to be found  for  not
    granting leave to the two older children, having been  in  the  UK  for
    more than 7 years, and that test was not met.

11. Mr McGlashan submitted that JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072  dealt  with  a  situation  analogous  to  the
    present case, laid down a new rule on how to approach such  cases,  and
    established error in the FtT's decision.  Summing up, he said  that  on
    applying s.117B(6) to the facts, the decision of  the  FtT  had  to  be
    reversed.

12. Mr Govan said that JG  deals  with  a  different  situation,  and  says
    nothing new about the reasonableness test which bears  on  the  present
    case.  In reply, Mr McGlashan maintained his position on JG.

13. In JG the appellant faced return to Turkey,  in  which  event  her  two
    children would continue living in the UK with their father and paternal
    grandparents.  The question for the UT  (the  President  and  UT  Judge
    Gill) was whether the tribunal nevertheless  had  to  hypothesise  that
    they would leave and ask whether that would be reasonable.  The UT held
    that it did.  That is why the case is reported.  I cannot see that  the
    decision otherwise  seeks  to  add  to  the  jurisprudence  on  section
    117B(6).  The reality in the present case is that the  five  appellants
    leave or remain together.  No unrealistic hypothesis arises.

14. The essential question for the FtT was whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the children to  leave  the  UK  (with  their  parents),  taking
    account of  their  best  interests  as  a  primary  but  not  paramount
    consideration.  The appellants' grounds and submissions  fail  to  show
    that question only to have  one  rational  answer.   It  was  open  for
    decision either  way.   The  grounds  and  submissions  do  not  fairly
    represent the decision.  It is detailed, thorough,  and  not  shown  to
    have prioritised negatives  over  positives.   The  reasons  given  for
    coming down on the side it did withstand all challenges made.

15. The making of the FtT's decision is not  shown  to  have  involved  the
    making of error on any point of law, so that decision shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      8 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




