
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 13748 2018
                                                             & HU 09424 2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th April 2019                   |On 23rd April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                   mr mahafuj ahmed and mrs shanjida ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing. The appellants appeal the decision  of
    the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Carroll) (FtT) promulgated on  31.1.2019
    in which the appellants human rights claims were dismissed.



Background

2.    The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh.   The  appellants  had
    appealed  two  separate  decisions  dated   14.6.2018   and   13.4.2018
    respectively. The first appellant had applied for ILR on the  basis  of
    10 years residence and the second appellant, his wife applied  to  vary
    her application as  a  dependent  pursuant  to  the  first  appellant's
    application for ILR on human rights  grounds.  The  second  appellant's
    application was refused on the grounds that she had used a proxy  taker
    in  her  TOIEC  test,  although  this  was  never  relied  on  in   any
    application.

Grounds of appeal

3.   In grounds of appeal the appellants argued that the FtT  erred  in  the
    assessment of the claims under the Immigration Rules and under  Article
    8 ECHR. The FTT decided both appeals together  under  paragraph  276ADE
    Immigration Rules [17-19]. The FTT made  no  findings  or  decision  in
    respect of the ETS language matter which was relied on as  reasons  for
    refusing Suitability requirements.

4.   The FTT failed to consider paragraph 276B 10 years residence at all  or
    with reference to Paragraph 39E and the respondent's policy guidance re
    out of time application.

5.   The appellants argued that they had been poorly advised by their  legal
    representatives (Visa Inn) to request a hearing on the papers and  have
    commenced complaint proceedings.

Permission to appeal

6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted by  FTJ  ID
    Boyle on 8.3.2019.  In granting permission the FTJ stated, "It  appears
    that the Judge has not properly  grasped  the  claims  made  i.e.  long
    residence."

Submissions

7.   At the hearing before me Mr  Lewis  acknowledged  that  the  ground  of
    appeal as to long residence was not arguable in the light of R (on  the
    application of Ahmed)  v  SSHD  (paragraph  276B  -  ten  years  lawful
    residence) [2019] UKUT 000010.  He argued that the appellants had  been
    deprived of a fair hearing  (so  as  to  amount  to  procedural  error)
    because of poor advice from their legal representatives in  respect  of
    which a formal complaint had been made.  There  had  been  no  response
    from  the  solicitors  to  the  complaint,  although   there   was   no
    correspondence from the current solicitors to confirm that.

8.    In  response  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  BT  (former  solicitors'  alleged
    misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311 and  contended  that  the  correct
    procedure had not been followed as there  must  be  evidence  that  the
    allegations had been put to the former representative and the  response
    or correspondence that there was no  response  must  be  shown  to  the
    Tribunal. There was no error of law on the part of the FTT.



Discussion and conclusion

9.   There is no valid argument in respect  of  the  long  residence  point,
    which was correctly conceded by Mr Lewis  (R  (on  the  application  of
    Ahmed)).

10.  I have considered the arguments put to me and whilst I accept that  the
    appellants have made a complaint against their former solicitors as  to
    the advice given to them, I do not have any evidence of  correspondence
    confirming that they have in fact failed to respond as claimed.  In any
    event I am concerned  with  the  decision  made  by  the  FTT  and  the
    existence of errors of law therein.  The FTT determined the  appeal  on
    the papers following the request to do so by the appellants  via  their
    representatives.  There was no error in the FTT taking that  course  of
    action, which was entirely proper.  However, it seems to me  that  when
    faced with that situation the FTT must ensure "that  the  determination
    fairly  reflects  the  input  that  both  parties  have  made  to   the
    proceedings so far" ( BT).  In this instance the FTT had  before  it  a
    skeleton argument and detailed witness statements [2] responding to the
    respondent's decision including the TOIEC issue.   The  FTT  failed  to
    determine that matter at all and made no reference to  the  appellant's
    evidence or arguments set out in.  The FTT simply stated that there was
    insufficient evidence from  the  respondent  and  took  the  matter  no
    further [16].  The FTT ought to have gone on  to  make  a  finding  and
    decision on that issue which was  relevant  to  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim.  If the FTT found that there  was  insufficient  evidence
    (there  were  two  generic  witness  statements  from  Millington   and
    Collings) then it should have made findings accordingly having  applied
    the burden of proof required in such cases.  The FTT  made  no  further
    reference to that issue but it was relied  on  by  the  respondent  and
    accordingly should have been determined.  It  is  for  that  reason  as
    argued in the grounds of appeal that I have decided that the FTT erred.
     The FTT made its decision  concluding  that  there  was  a  dearth  of
    evidence to show that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their
    integration  in  Bangladesh,  and  to  that  extent  the  question   of
    materiality is relevant.  I have decided  that  the  appellants  should
    have  the  opportunity  to  have  the  issue  of  Suitability  properly
    determined.

Decision

11.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside. The matter shall be remitted for oral hearing  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding FTJ Carroll).




                               Signed   Date 17.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


