
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09506/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal Liverpool  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17.9.18                                    |On 03.10.18                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                  SUHAG [M]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel, instructed by J.S. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  Judge  of  the
      First tier  Tribunal  McCall  dated  13  January  2018,  allowing  the
      applicant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      dated 16 August 2017 refusing the applicant's human  rights  claim.  I
      will retain the designation of the parties as  they  were  before  the
      First tier.

2     The appellant  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh.  On  6  May  2017  the
      appellant had made an application for leave to remain on the basis  of
      Appendix FM and his right to family life under  Article  8  ECHR.  The
      appellant is married to a  British  national,  MB,  and  they  have  a
      daughter, AB, born in October 2017 and who was two months old  at  the
      date of the hearing on 10 January 2018. AB is also a British national.

3     The appellant had previously made applications  for  leave,  one  such
      application resulting in a decision of 13 August 2015  refusing  leave
      to remain. The appellant appealed against that decision,  such  appeal
      coming before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik, resulting in her
      decision of 16 June 2016. The appellant relied upon  his  family  life
      with MB, but Judge Malik dismissed the appeal on the grounds that  the
      decision did not amount to a disproportionate interference with  their
      family life. This was of course before AB was born.

4     However in the decision of 13 August 2015,  the  respondent  had  also
      alleged that in an application  for  further  leave  remain  that  the
      appellant had made on 31 October 2012, he  had  relied  upon  a  TOEIC
      English language test result from ETS which  was  said  to  have  been
      obtained fraudulently, by the appellant using a proxy test  taker.  In
      her decision, Judge Malik  stated  as  follows  in  relation  to  that
      matter:

           '25 Regarding the refusal under the suitability requirements  of
           the rules, there is no evidence from the  respondent  before  me
           regarding   their   contention   the   appellant   submitted   a
           fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate from ETS. In the absence
           of any evidence regarding this limb of the refusal, I have found
           it without basis."

5     The respondent raised the same issue in the  present  decision  of  16
      August 2017.

6     In deciding the subsequent appeal, Judge McCall  directed  himself  in
      relation to SM Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of proof)  [2016]
      UKUT 00227 at [23]. Given that the matter had already been  considered
      by judge of the first-tier tribunal  on  a  previous  occasion,  Judge
      McCall also directed himself  as  to  the  application  of  Devaseelan
      [2002] UKIAT 00702*. The judge ultimately found at [35], applying  the
      principles in Devaseelan, that the appellant did not use a proxy  test
      taker to obtain the ETS certificate, and it followed that he  did  not
      use deception when making his application for further leave to  remain
      in his application of October 2012

7     The judge then considered at [36] onwards  the  potential  application
      of Appendix FM to the appellant's application for leave to remain. The
      judge accepted at [43] that MB met the definition of 'partner' for the
      purposes of Appendix FM, but  held  that  as  the  appellant  did  not
      satisfy the immigration  status  requirements,  it  was  necessary  to
      consider the application of section Ex1(b)  of  Appendix  I  FM.   The
      judge held that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life
      continuing outside of the UK [47].

8      However,  the  judge  considered  the  position  of  the  appellant's
      daughter AB. Notwithstanding the fact that the judge was of  the  view
      that the child, being very  young,  was  able  to  adapt  to  life  in
      Bangladesh the judge considered the  application  of  section  117B(6)
      NIAA 2002, and whether it would be reasonable to expect  AB  to  leave
      the United Kingdom. The judge referred to the respondent's Immigration
      Directorate Instruction - Family  Migration  -  Appendix  FM,  Section
      1.0(B) 'Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life,  10  year
      routes'.  There was no dispute before  me  today  that  that  was  the
      relevant policy for the judge to have considered.  The judge sets  out
      the terms of paragraph 11.2.3 of the policy at [57]:

           "11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  British  Citizen
           child to leave the UK?

           Where a decision to  refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.

           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

           It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
           child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
           primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

           The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

           *     criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
                 paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

           *     a very poor immigration history, such as where the  person
                 has repeatedly and deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
                 Rules."

9     The judge concluded the decision as follows:

           "58 The appellant in this appeal has not been convicted  of  any
           crimes  does  not  have  a  criminal  record.  The   appellant's
           immigration history is poor and  had  I  found  against  him  in
           regard to the deception allegation it would have been  found  to
           be 'very' poor. One of the questions in this case is whether the
           appellant's conduct gives rise to considerations of such  weight
           to justify separation and following my findings of fact  I  find
           that it does not. In SF and others [2017] UKUT 00120  (IAC)  the
           Tribunal said at paragraph 12:

                 "On occasion, perhaps where it has  more  information  than
                 the Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if
                 a case is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a  reason  for
                 departing from such guidance.  But  where  there  is  clear
                 guidance which covers a case where an assessment has to  be
                 made, and where the guidance clearly demonstrates what  the
                 outcome of the assessment  would  have  been  made  by  the
                 Secretary of State, it  would,  we  think,  be  the  normal
                 practice for  the  Tribunal  to  take  such  guidance  into
                 account and to apply it in assessing the same consideration
                 in a case that came before it."

           59 Having regard to the IDI in my findings  of  fact  I  am  not
           satisfied that it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           UK and in those circumstances I am not satisfied that it  is  in
           the public interest to remove the appellant.  Under  article  8,
           and adopting the test referred to by Lord Bingham in  Razgar,  I
           find the respondent's decision is not  proportionate  and  would
           therefore be Article 8"

10    The judge therefore allowed the appeal.

11    In grounds of appeal dated 6 February 2018 the  respondent  challenges
      the judge's decision on two grounds:

      (i)   Failing to resolve a conflict of fact or opinion on  a  material
           matter.

           It was argued in this ground  inter  alia  that  the  judge  had
           failed to make a clear finding on whether the respondent had met
           the initial evidential burden of proof in line with cases SM and
           Qadir.

      (ii)  Failing to give adequate reasons findings on a material matter

           It was argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
           reasoning for accepting that the appellant had not use deception
           (Grounds, para 9). The judge erred  in  law  in  giving  certain
           factors too much or too little weight (Grounds, para 9 and 10).

           Further, in light in particular of the  judge's  claimed  errors
           (above) regarding the appellant's use of deception, the  judge's
           article 8 assessment was flawed (Grounds, paragraph 12-14).

12    Permission to appeal was initially  refused  but  granted  on  renewed
      application, by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 26 July 2018.

      Discussion

13    I heard submissions from Mr. Whitwell for the respondent. He  informed
      me that he did not seek to rely upon the first  ground  of  appeal.  I
      find that this is appropriate position to take.

14    I had observed to Mr. Whitwell that  the  way  that  the  respondent's
      first ground of appeal was framed (indeed the whole document) pays  no
      attention at all to the history of this  particular  appeal,  and  the
      finding that had been made by Judge McCall that the starting point  in
      his assessment of whether the appellant  had  used  deception  in  his
      application of October 2012 had been Judge Malik's finding  from  2016
      that the respondent had not made out that allegation.

15     Given  that  history,  and  Judge  McCall's  careful   reference   to
      Davaseelan  (see further below), I find that the judge was not obliged
      to make discreet findings on the three stages as set  out  in  SM  and
      Qadir, determining (i) whether the respondent has met  the  evidential
      burden to adduce sufficient evidence to raise the issue of  deception;
      (ii) whether the  appellant  then  discharges  the  evidential  burden
      falling on him to raise an innocent explanation as to the  matters  in
      dispute, and (iii) whether the respondent has ultimately satisfied the
      burden  to  establish  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that   the
      appellant's prima facie innocent explanation is to  be  rejected.  The
      respondent's first ground is also largely generic.

16    In considering the respondent's second ground of  appeal,  I  set  out
      here the evidence that  was  before  Judge  McCall  on  the  issue  of
      deception: a witness statement from  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
      Leslie Singh; a report from Professor  Peter  French  dated  20  April
      2016; and the standard witness statements  from  Rebecca  Collins  and
      Peter Millington which are  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  in  ETS
      appeals of this nature.

17    Mr. Whitwell argued that in applying the Devaseelan principle  and  in
      finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  employed  deception  in   his
      application of 31 October 2012, Judge  McCall  had  erred  in  law  in
      failing to acknowledge that he had been unclear what evidence had been
      relied upon by the respondent in the previous proceedings before Judge
      Malik. Judge McCall had stated at [24] that he did  not  know  whether
      the witness statement of Leslie Singh was before Judge Malik  or  not,
      and suggested that it would be unfair for him to speculate on  exactly
      what evidence was or was not before Judge Malik [35].

18    However, these references in Judge McCall's decision do  not  disclose
      any error of law. Firstly,  the  respondent  has  not  argued  in  the
      grounds of appeal that a lack of clarity on Judge McCall's part as  to
      what evidence on deception was before  Judge  Malik,  amounted  to  an
      error  of  law.  Secondly,  and  in  any  event,  Judge  McCall   held
      specifically at [34] that:

           "I do find that there is no  evidence  from  the  respondent  in
           regard to the ETS and the TOEIC before me that was not available
           to the respondent at the first appeal  and  it  could  therefore
           have been before IJ Malik ...".

      And see further at [35]:

           "The respondent must be aware that it is open to  her  to  argue
           that IJ Malik had reached  his  findings  on  evidence  that  is
           different to the evidence that has been placed before  me,  but,
           however she did not adopt  that  approach.  Taking  all  of  the
           evidence in the round I  find  it  will  be  unfair  for  me  to
           speculate on exactly what evidence was  or  was  not  before  IJ
           Malik. As I have said I do know from the dates that the evidence
           before me was available at the first hearing so it may well have
           been relied upon."

19    Therefore, Judge McCall noted that the Presenting Officer  before  him
      did not make out a case that the evidence relied upon in  this  appeal
      was in some way different from the evidence relied upon  before  Judge
      Malik. I find that if a finding of fact has been made on a  particular
      issue in previous proceedings, and a party to a second  appeal  wishes
      to invite the second Tribunal to arrive at a different finding of fact
      on that issue, then the application  of  the  principles  set  out  in
      Devaseelan would require that party to make clear  what  new  evidence
      there was, not considered by the first Tribunal, which spoke  to  that
      issue. This was not done.

20    Further, I note that  para  39(4)  of  Devaseelan  suggests  that  new
      evidence which could have been relied upon  in  previous  proceedings,
      but which was not, ought to be treated  with  circumspection.  I  find
      that some explanation would be needed to explain  why  such  evidence,
      which could have been placed before the  first  Judge,  was  only  now
      being relied upon. No such explanation was provided to Judge McCall in
      this appeal.

21    In any event, as I observe above, the respondent's written grounds  of
      appeal do not  seek  to  argue  a  misapplication  of  the  Devaseelan
      principles in any event.

22    The remaining paragraphs of the respondent's second  ground  are  with
      respect somewhat generic, and represent a mere disagreement with Judge
      McCall's decision.

23    Mr. Whitwell also accepted that the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal
      did not successfully raise any discrete  arguments  challenging  Judge
      McCall's decision on article 8 ECHR, aside from  the  suggestion  that
      the judge had erred in law on the deception point;  a  point  which  I
      have rejected.

24    I therefore find  that  there  is  no  material  error  in  the  judge
      decision.

      Decision

      The judge's decision did not involve the making of any material  error
of law

      I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed:                                            Date: 18.9.18
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

