
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/09077/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 May 2019                            |On 25 June 2019                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS CHENG YI TEH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lewis Moore, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Neil Garrod, Counsel for David Tang & Co
Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born  on  30  April  2000.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  10  August  2017
    refusing her application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of her private life pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  HC395
    as amended.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Sweet on 12 February 2019.   Her  appeal  was  allowed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 February 2019.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged by the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and permission was granted  by  Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Macdonald on 3 April 2019.  The grounds contend
    that the Judge made a material misdirection of law by appearing to have
    used Article 8 as a general dispensing power contrary to  Patel.   They
    go on to state that the findings that it would be disproportionate  for
    the  appellant  to  have  to  return  to  Malaysia  and  make  a  fresh
    application were not adequately reasoned.  The Judge also  stated  that
    it would be disproportionate for the appellant to return to Malaysia to
    make  a  fresh  application  now  that  she  is   an   adult   but   no
    proportionality assessment was undertaken.   Public  interest  was  not
    weighed against the appellant's Article 8 rights.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. There were no preliminary issues.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that he is relying on the grounds for permission  to  appeal  dated  28
    February 2019.  Permission was granted on 3 April 2019.   He  submitted
    that the Judge has erred materially  as  there  is  no  proportionality
    exercise in his decision and yet the  appeal  has  been  allowed  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  I was referred to  paragraph  27  of  the
    First-Tier Judge's decision which states that  the  application  cannot
    meet the terms of the Immigration Rules, in particular relating to  the
    appellant's mother  having  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing.  The Judge goes on to state that there are no  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make her exclusion from
    the United Kingdom undesirable.  The Judge states that he  is  allowing
    the appeal to succeed under Article 8  of  ECHR  because  it  would  be
    disproportionate for the appellant to have to return  to  Malaysia  and
    make a fresh application now that she  is  an  adult.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    his decision.

 6. I was referred to paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  and  it  was
    submitted that its terms cannot be satisfied either at the date of  the
    application or at today's date.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that
    the  appellant's  mother  cannot  satisfy   the   sole   responsibility
    requirement in the Rules as there is no evidence of her having had such
    responsibility since 2015.  He submitted that the Chikwamba test cannot
    be satisfied and I was referred  to  paragraph  27  of  the  First-Tier
    decision.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that  there  would  be  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences if the appellant did not gain entry to
    the United Kingdom.  When the Judge made his  decision,  there  was  no
    proportionality exercise carried out.  The Judge did  not  balance  the
    need for effective immigration control against the appellant's  Article
    8 rights and her family's Article 8  rights.   He  submitted  that  the
    Judge made no reference to Section 117B of Part 5 of the 2002 Act.  The
    Presenting Officer accepted that he did refer to Section 55 of the 2009
    Act, the appellant's best interests, and the fact that the appellant is
    in full time education in the UK.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant  has  family  life  with  her  mother   but   as   the   sole
    responsibility request cannot  be  satisfied,  the  respondent  in  the
    refusal letter could not have come to a different decision from the one
    he did.  I was referred to the case of Patel & Others [2013] 3WLR  1517
    UKSC, paragraph 57 which  states  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power.  This is not the same as  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion to grant leave to remain outside the Rules.  The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the First-Tier Judge has used  Article  8  as  a
    general dispensing power and I was asked to find that this  must  be  a
    material error of law.  I was asked  to  set  the  decision  aside  and
    remake it.

 8. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the starting  point  for  this
    hearing must be paragraph 27 of  the  First-Tier  Judge's  decision  in
    which the Judge deals with Article 8 of ECHR and Section 55.

 9. He submitted that the case of Patel is not relevant  as  in  Patel  the
    appellant's application is based on her education and the fact that she
    was near to qualifying whereas in this case the appellant  is  applying
    as her mother's child and her mother has indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

10. He submitted that the First-Tier Judge has stated that  the  appeal  is
    allowed although not under the Immigration Rules and he submitted  that
    Section 55 is different from Article 8 and  the  First-Tier  Judge  was
    able to reach the decision he did under Section 55.  He submitted  that
    the Judge has explained his reasons for his decision and no  issue  has
    been taken with these.

11. Counsel submitted that in the case of Patel at  paragraph  56  a  "near
    miss" is referred to and he submitted that that is not the case here.

12. Counsel submitted that Chikwamba is  not  relevant  as  it  deals  with
    family life under Article  8  and  not  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Section 55.

13. Counsel submitted that Section 55 does not apply  to  children  outside
    the United Kingdom but in this case the  appellant  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom and Section 55 does apply.  He submitted that Section 55 rights
    are therefore available to this appellant. He referred to the case of T
    (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).  A paragraph 30 thereof it is stated
    that compliance with Section 55 is a matter of  substance  rather  than
    form and if the decision maker's mind is directed to the  situation  of
    the child under the Rules or Article 8 of ECHR or under Section 55,  it
    is difficult to contend that there has been  no  consideration  of  his
    statutory duty.  He submitted that the Judge was entitled to reach  the
    decision he did and that the Judge has given  proper  reasons  for  his
    findings.

14. Counsel submitted that although a proportionality exercise has not been
    carried out the Judge has considered the Section  55  test,  being  the
    best interests of the child, as a primary obligation and has  made  his
    decision based on what is best for the appellant.  He finds that it  is
    best for the child to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  although  the
    respondent states that  the  Judge's  reasoning  is  insufficient,  his
    reasoning under Section 55 has to be given considerable weight  and  no
    challenge should be made to the outcome.

15. He submitted that if I find that there is insufficient reasoning  there
    must be a requirement for new evidence and  in  that  case  the  appeal
    should be remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal.

16. The Presenting Officer made further submissions  referring  to  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act. He submitted that
    Section 55 is not a ground of appeal under Section 82(1).

17. He submitted that the case of T (Jamaica) applies.  At headnote (v)  it
    is stated "In this case it is difficult to contemplate a scenario where
    Section 55 duty is material to an immigration decision and indicates  a
    certain outcome but Article 8 does not."  I was asked to  consider  the
    Immigration Rules and the statutory guidance and find that  the  spirit
    of Section 55 has to be looked at but it is Article 8 that is  relevant
    in the decision.  He  submitted  that  inadequate  reasoning  has  been
    provided as to why the First-Tier Judge came to the conclusion he did.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant  has  a  father  in
    Malaysia who has contact with  the  appellant.   The  First-Tier  Judge
    accepts that the appellant had lived with her father, but also  accepts
    that the appellant's mother wishes her to be in the United  Kingdom  to
    further her education.

19. He submitted that  the  Judge  has  accepted  that  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied.   The   Presenting   Officer
    submitted that at the date of the hearing the appellant  was  aged  19.
    He submitted that this appellant could never have met the terms of  the
    Immigration Rules even if she had been under 18  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

20. I was asked to consider paragraph 298 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    submitted that indefinite leave to remain for a child  under  paragraph
    298(vi) depends on an appellant having had limited leave to  remain  to
    enter the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 298 therefore cannot be satisfied.
     Neither can paragraph 297 as the appellant is already  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

21. With regard to the Judge's credibility findings the Presenting  Officer
    submitted that these have not been criticised but he submitted there is
    a material error of law in the Judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

22. The Judge's decision is clear up to paragraph 27 of his decision.   The
    Judge has accepted that the terms of the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied but  has  carried  out  no  proportionality  assessment  when
    considering Article 8  of  ECHR.   The  first  thing  that  has  to  be
    considered in the balancing exercise is the fact that the terms of  the
    Rules cannot be satisfied.  It is accepted that the appellant's  mother
    does not have sole responsibility for the appellant and it is  accepted
    that there are no serious or compelling family or other  considerations
    which make her exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.

23. I find that the said case of Patel is relevant.  The Judge states "I am
    persuaded that she should succeed under Article 8 ECHR because it would
    be disproportionate for her to have to return to Malaysia  and  make  a
    fresh application now that she is an adult and no longer under the  age
    of 18."  This was reached without  proper  reasoning  and  without  any
    proportionality assessment.  There is no mention  in  the  decision  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Public interest has  to  be  considered.
    This appellant has no right to be in the United Kingdom.  The terms  of
    the Rules at no time could be or can be satisfied.   This  was  pointed
    out in detail by the Presenting Officer at the hearing.  It is  correct
    that Section 55 of the 2009 Act has  to  be  considered  but  when  the
    proportionality assessment is carried  out  and  effective  immigration
    control is considered, effective immigration control must succeed  over
    the appellant's and her mother's human rights.

24. The Judge made a material misdirection of law as he used Article 8 as a
    general dispensing power contrary to  the  said  case  of  Patel.   The
    reasoning in the decision is inadequate.  Public interest must  succeed
    over the appellant's and her mother's Article 8 rights.

25. There is therefore a material error of law in  the  First-Tier  Judge's
    decision and I am remaking the decision  as  I  find  that  no  further
    evidence is required.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Sweet  promulgated  on  20
February 2019 is set aside.

I dismiss the appeal of Miss Cheng Yi Teh.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 21 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
