
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09579/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                           Appellant
                                    -and-
                                 OLUSEUN [O]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                             Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Bandegani of Counsel for the Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Nigeria.  He initially arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 3 November 1997 and applied for asylum.   He  was  15
    years old at that time. His application was refused and his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 8 October  2003.



2.   Meanwhile, he had married his wife on 1 February  2003  and  they  have
    children who were born on 26 May 2004, 30 July 2007, 18  December  2009
    and 10 July 2011.  The Appellant has also taken  responsibility  for  a
    niece who was born on 30 April 1997 and a nephew, who was  born  on  19
    October 2002. On 19 August 2010 the Respondent was  granted  indefinite
    leave    to    remain    outside    of    the    Immigration     Rules.



3.   On  24  August  2016,  the  Respondent  was  sentenced  to  four  years
    imprisonment on one count of conspiracy to dishonestly and one count of
    possession of an article for  use  in  fraud.   The  Appellant  made  a
    decision  to  make  a   deportation   order   on   31   October   2016.
    Representations were made on his behalf, but his human rights claim was
    refused on 12 April 2018. He appealed and his  appeal  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Black  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  26
    September 2019. The Appellant appealed against this decision and First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted  her  permission  to  appeal  on  18
    December 2019. The Appellant filed and served a Rule 24 Response and  a
    Rule 15 notice on 12 February 2020.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   At the start of the hearing the Home Office Presenting  Officer  handed
    up a number of authorities.     The Home Office Presenting Officer  and
    Counsel for the Respondent  both  made  oral  submissions  and  I  have
    referred to them below, where relevant.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   As noted by Counsel, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black  gave  a  short
    summary of the relevant statute provision, Immigration Rules  and  some
    of the appropriate case law  in  paragraph  13  of  her  decision.  The
    Respondent had been sentenced to four years in prison  and,  therefore,
    she particularly noted that Jackson LJ  held  in  paragraph  37  of  NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    662 that:

         "In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible first
         to  see  whether  his  case  involves  circumstances  of  the  kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because of the  circumstances
         so described set out particularly significant factors bearing  upon
         the respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect  for  family
         life (Exception 2) and because that may provide a helpful basis  on
         which an assessment can be made whether there are "very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2" as is required under section 117C(6). It will then be  necessary
         to look to see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions
         1 and 2 are of such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
         conjunction with any other relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the
         circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy  the
         test in section 117C(6)".

6.   The Respondent had not relied on  Exceptions  1  and,  in  relation  to
    Exception 2, the judge concentrated on the effect of his deportation on
    the children in his family unit. When addressing whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to accompany the Appellant to Nigeria  or
    remain here without  him,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black  had
    referred to KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53  in passing in paragraph 13 of her decision but she  did
    not direct herself of paragraph 27 of that decision where Lord Carnwath
    found that:

         "Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in this
         context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President  and
         UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46,  a
         decision given on 15 April 2015. They referred to  the  "evaluative
         assessment" required of the tribunal:


             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
             severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'
             raises an already elevated standard still higher." "

7.   At best, in paragraph 17 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Black  found  that
    "the evidence including the expert SW report in  my  view  reaches  the
    threshold for "unduly harsh" as the consequences for the children would
    be severe".

8.   In addition, she did not identify  which  the  particular  consequences
    that would be harsh in any particularity. In paragraphs 14  and  15  of
    her decision she had noted various findings by the  independent  social
    worker. However, the report went no further than concluding  that  "the
    emotional and practical interests of the children would  be  harmed  in
    the event of the appellant being  deported".   The  independent  social
    worker concentrated on the effect on the Appellant's son,  O,  and  his
    nephew, M, and noted that it has  not  been  feasible  to  prolong  the
    interview with the three young girls given the level of upset that they
    had displayed. As a consequence, there  was  no  evidence  about  these
    letter children which could reasonably be  said  to  have  reached  the
    "unduly harsh" threshold.

9.   In relation to O, it was noted that the Appellant took him to  football
    coaching and matches and generally encouraged him.  There  was  also  a
    letter from O's football coach, which confirmed that the Appellant  had
    a very positive effect on O. However, again there was no evidence which
    was capable of reaching the "unduly harsh" threshold.  In  relation  to
    M,  the  independent's  social  worker's  report  confirmed  that   his
    behaviour at school had improved since the Appellant  returned  to  the
    family home. She also noted that M's best friend had been  stabbed  and
    that this had also affected his stability whilst the Appellant  was  in
    prison. This was not mentioned by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Black  in
    her decision. She concluded that M was at risk of emotional harm if the
    Appellant was deported but failed to identify how this would  meet  the
    elevated threshold of being "unduly" harsh.

10.  At paragraph 17, First-tier Tribunal Judge Black also stated  that  she
    was  "further  satisfied  that  for  these  children  there  are   very
    compelling circumstances. I find that these are circumstances which  go
    beyond those envisaged in the exceptions in the  Rules".  However,  her
    exercise  in  relation  to   whether   there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances was dependent upon her  making  a  lawful  assessment  of
    whether expecting the children to remain here would  be  unduly  harsh,
    which she had not.

11.  Her findings also did not correlate with  her  self-direction  that  in
    paragraph 38 of NA Jackson LJ found that:

         "The  best  interests  of  children  certainly  carry   weight   as
         identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor  of  the  Italian
         Republic [2012] UKSC 25, [2013] I AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it
         is  a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that  offenders  may  be
         separated from their children for many years, contrary to the  best
         interests of these children. The  desirability  of  children  being
         with both parents is a commonplace of  family  life.  That  is  not
         usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high
         public interest in deporting foreign criminals..."

12.  In addition, the further factors which First-tier Tribunal Judge  Black
    took into account in paragraph 16 of her decision were not  ones  which
    could not be addressed if  the  Appellant  were  to  be  deported.  The
    Appellant had told the independent social worker that his wife had done
    a marvellous job when he was in prison. It would also be  possible  for
    her to seek alternative employment. There was no  evidence  to  suggest
    that the family were presently at risk of  homelessness.  The  evidence
    also suggested that the Appellant's wife and family were close  to  his
    wife's mother and sibling and there was no medical evidence  about  the
    Appellant's wife's current or prospective mental health.

13.  For all of these reasons, I find that  there  were  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Black's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black's  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety, as it will be necessary for the  evidence  to  be  considered
    again.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Black or Holmes.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 25 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
