
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09273/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th March 2019                   |On 03 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                BLESSING [E]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Lay, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She has visited the United
    Kingdom on a number of occasions. Most recently she was granted a
    multiple entry visit visa that was valid until 3rd April 2015. On 20th
    January 2015, the appellant entered the UK lawfully, but remained in
    the UK unlawfully, when her multiple entry visit visa expired in April
    2015.  In November 2016, the appellant applied for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom on Article 8 grounds.  The application was refused
    by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 15th August
    2017.  The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge O'Hagan, and dismissed for the reasons set
    out in a decision promulgated on 22 May 2018. It is the decision of the
    FtT Judge that is the subject of the appeal before me.

 2. The FtT Judge sets out the background to the appeal at paragraphs [3]
    and [4] of his decision.  At paragraph [5] of the decision, he
    summarises the matters referred to by the respondent in the decision of
    15th August 2017. At paragraphs [7] to [9] of his decision, the Judge
    summarises the case advanced on behalf of the appellant.  The
    appellant's case is a simple one. She remained in the United Kingdom
    following her arrival in January 2015 because of the significant role
    that she has played in the care of her grandchildren.  She claimed that
    in any assessment of an application for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom, she should be treated as having a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with her two grandchildren, both of whom were
    born in the United Kingdom, and both of whom are British citizens. In
    the alternative, she claims that it would not be reasonable to expect
    her to return to Nigeria, because of the health of her daughter and the
    impact that is capable of having upon the care of her grandchildren.

 3. The Judge sets out at paragraphs [11] to [17] of the decision, the
    evidence given by the appellant and he sets out at paragraphs [18] to
    [25] of the decision, the evidence given by the appellant's daughter.

 4. At paragraph [34], the FtT Judge correctly noted that the appellant's
    ability to satisfy the immigration rules is not the question to be
    determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a weighty, though
    not determinative factor, when deciding whether such refusal is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.
    The Judge's analysis of the evidence, his findings, and conclusions are
    to be found at paragraphs [36] to [72] of the decision.

 5. In considering whether the respondent's decision is unlawful  under  s6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998 on Article 8 grounds,  the  Judge  adopted
    the step by step approach referred to by Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar  -v-
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.   At paragraphs [39] to [41], the  Judge  referred
    to the evidence and found that the appellant enjoys  family  life  with
    her daughter and grandchildren.  The Judge found that the  decision  to
    refuse the appellant leave to remain  may  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8(1).   At
    paragraph [42] of his decision, the Judge found that  the  interference
    is in accordance with the  law,  and  pursues  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining proper and firm immigration control.

 6. The issue in the  appeal,  as  is  often  the  case,  was  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  At paragraph [44] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  considered
    whether the application for leave to remain  could  succeed  under  the
    rules since that is a relevant factor in assessing proportionality. The
    Judge noted the submission made on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the
    requirements set out in the paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  are  met  by
    the appellant.  The Judge set out the test at paragraphs  [45]  of  the
    decision.  At paragraph [46], the Judges states:

         "It is not in dispute that the appellant's grandchildren are  under
         the age of 18, in the United Kingdom and are British citizens.  The
         issue is  whether  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with them. If, and only if, she does, then  I
         must consider whether or not it would be reasonable to expect  them
         to leave the United Kingdom."

 7. At paragraph [47], the Judge records that he has considered whether the
    appellant has a parental relationship with the  children.  He  accepted
    that it is not necessary for an individual to be a parent, in order  to
    enjoy parental relationship. He noted  that  there  is  no  reason,  in
    principle, why a grandparent cannot have a parental  relationship  with
    his or her grandchild. The Judge goes on to state as follows:

         "47. ... That said, the starting point has to be to recognise  that
         it is not unusual for a grandparent to play an important part in  a
         child's upbringing, including supporting  the  child's  parents  in
         meeting the child's physical, emotional and educational  needs.  It
         does not happen in every family, but  it  happens  with  sufficient
         regularity in many families for it to be regarded as a normal  part
         of a grandparental relationship. To treat that as giving rise to  a
         parental relationship would, in my view, be to  distort  our  basic
         understanding of normal familial relationships."

 8. At paragraph [48] of his decision, the Judge notes  that  the  question
    whether or not there is a parental relationship, is a matter of fact to
    be determined having regard to all the circumstances of the  case.  The
    Judge states:

         "48. ... the argument rests, in brief, on  the  following  factors:
         the appellant lives in the same  household  as  the  children,  she
         takes them to school, she provides leisure activities for them such
         as going swimming and to the park, she feeds them, and she provides
         them with love and emotional support. I  acknowledge  that  all  of
         these things  are  true.  The  appellant  has,  in  my  view,  been
         commendable in the love and care  that  she  has  afforded  to  her
         grandchildren. I do not wish to diminish the importance of that  to
         her, to her daughter and, most importantly,  to  the  grandchildren
         themselves."

 9. At paragraph [49] the Judge considers the significant countervailing
    factors and at paragraph [50], he states:

         "50. Whilst I recognise that the appellant lives in the same
         household as the children, that household is not her household, but
         her daughter's. I am mindful of the fact that, prior to the
         appellant's arrival in 2015, Ms Cahill cared for the children
         without any input from her. More significant still, in my view, is
         to consider what would happen if the appellant were to return to
         Nigeria. There is no suggestion that the children would do other
         than remain in the care of their mother. She retains both the legal
         responsibility for them, and, in the final analysis, the practical
         responsibility for their welfare and upbringing. The evidence does
         not support finding that she has relinquished the role, or that her
         mother has assumed it, whether exclusively or jointly with her. It
         is not uncommon for a grandparent to live with her child and
         grandchildren. In such circumstances, a grandparent will,
         understandably, be more involved than would otherwise be the case.
         So it is here. The appellant has been actively involved in meeting
         her grandchildren's' needs. Whilst I acknowledge that is so, having
         regard to all the circumstances of the case, I do not consider that
         I should characterise the relationship by treating it as a parental
         relationship. In my judgement, it is not. It is a close and loving
         grandparental relationship."

10. The Judge states, at [51], that "..For the same reasons, I do not
    accept that this case can succeed under s117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) ("the 2002 Act").  For the
    reasons set out by the Judge at paragraph [52] of his decision, the
    Judge considered, but was not satisfied that the private life
    requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE(1) (vi) can be met by the
    appellant.

11. Having found that the requirements of the rules cannot be met, the
    Judge continued in his assessment of whether the refusal of leave to
    remain is proportionate to the legitimate aim sought to be achieved.
    He kept in mind throughout, as he was required to, the public interest
    considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act.

12. At paragraph [57], the Judge states that he has had regard to what is
    said about the appellant's daughter.  The Judge refers to the
    psychological difficulties that the appellant's daughter has
    experienced because of an abusive relationship.  The Judge refers to
    the evidence set out in the report of Dr Hull, and in the report of the
    Independent Social Worker at paragraphs [57] to [64] of his decision.
    At paragraphs [66] to [67] of his decision, the Judge considered the
    evidence of Dr Markantonakis.  At paragraphs [68] to [69] of his
    decision, the Judge states:

         "68. Looked at in the round an element of the appellant's wish to
         remain with her daughter and grandchildren is the desire to stay
         with them for the simple reason that they love one another, and do
         not want to be apart. That is an entirely understandable and
         natural desire. I do not doubt that the appellant would miss them,
         and they her, but that is something which many, if not most,
         families have to deal with at some stage in their lives when they
         relocate because of their relationships, work or any of the
         multitude of reasons for which people do relocate. In the
         alternative, Ms Cahill and her children could choose to move to
         Nigeria so as to enjoy her life with the appellant there. Article 8
         does not confer upon individuals the right to insist that they
         should be allowed to enjoy their family life in one country rather
         than another. Again in the alternative, they can continue to enjoy
         their relationship through visits with telephone calls in between.

         69.  I have noted the practical issue of the support that the
         appellant gives in caring for the children. I was told that she
         helps with homework, cooking meals, and taking the children to
         school and collecting them from there. I recognise that such help
         is valuable to Ms Cahill and the children. She is, I accept, a much
         loved grandmother. It is not sufficient to lead to the conclusion
         that she should be allowed to remain. Other sources of support are
         available, however. It may well not be the same as that is provided
         by the appellant, but most families do not have a live-in
         grandmother to help, but manage nevertheless."

13. Having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the FtT Judge
    concluded that the public interest outweighs the private interests of
    the appellant, and he dismissed the appeal.

The appeal before me.

14. Four grounds of appeal are set out in the grounds of appeal dated 5th
    June 2018.  First, the Judge erred in his approach as to whether there
    is a parental relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren.
    Second, in reaching his decision, the Judge failed to consider the best
    interests of the children and the duty under s55 Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Third, the Judge erred in his approach to
    the consideration of the evidence of the independent social worker, and
    the weight attached to that evidence. Fourth, the Judge failed to have
    regard to the impact the appellant's removal from the UK would have
    upon the family, as referred to in the report of Elizabeth Stevens.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Mailer on 23rd July 2018.
    In granting permission, the Judge observed that:

         "It is arguable that there may have been contradictory findings as
         to whether there is a parental relationship regarding the
         appellant's grandchildren.  It is also arguable that their best
         interests have not been properly considered."

16. In his submissions before me, Mr Lay did not seek to persuade me that
    the Judge erroneously concluded that the applicant does not have a
    genuine and subsisting 'parental relationship' with her grandchildren.
    There can in my judgement be no doubt that the Judge very carefully
    considered the nature of the relationship between the appellant and her
    grandchildren in particular, and that following a careful analysis of
    the evidence, was entitled to conclude that he should not characterise
    the relationship by treating it as a parental relationship.  It was
    open to the Judge to find that it is not a parental relationship but a
    close and loving grandparental relationship, in circumstances where the
    appellant lives in her daughter's household, and provides support.

17. There is in my judgement, no inconsistency between a finding that there
    is an element of dependency such that there exists family life, and a
    finding that the appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting
    'parental relationship' with the children.  The two findings address
    two separate issues.  In addressing whether the appellant has a genuine
    and subsisting 'parental relationship' with the children, the Judge was
    addressing the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and
    s117B of the 2002 Act.  The question for the Judge under each of those
    provisions was whether there is a 'parental relationship'.  When
    considering whether the modest threshold was met to establish a 'family
    life' for the purposes of Article 8, the Judge was not constrained to
    considering whether there is a 'parental relationship'.  Where, as
    here, there is undoubtedly a close relationship between the children
    and their grandmother, the modest threshold for establishing an Article
    8 claim based upon family life between children and grandparent, is
    capable of being overcome notwithstanding the lack of a 'parental
    relationship'.  A finding that there is family life, is not to elevate
    that relationship to a 'parental relationship'.

18. Mr Lay submits that it is far from clear whether the Judge found there
    to be a 'family life' between the appellant and her grandchildren so as
    to engage Article 8.  The Judge addresses the issue at paragraphs [39]
    to [41] of his decision.  I am quite satisfied that the Judge found
    there to be a family life not only between the appellant and her
    daughter, but also between the appellant and her grandchildren.  At
    paragraph [39] of his decision the Judge states "It is not in dispute
    that the appellant and her daughter and grandchildren are biologically
    related, and nor is it in dispute that they love each other".  At
    paragraph [40], the Judge noted that before the appellant last came to
    the United Kingdom ".. She and her daughter and grandchildren had lived
    apart in separate countries...".  The Judge noted in the same paragraph
    that the position had changed when the appellant returned to the UK in
    January 2015, noting that since then the appellant ".. has lived with
    her daughter and grandchildren..". The Judge accepted that the
    appellant has become part of their household and lives.  At paragraph
    [41] of his decision, the Judge found that the situation which
    developed after the appellant arrived in January 2015 has been ".. such
    as to give rise to the "something more" described by Sir Stanley
    Burnton in Singh -v- SSHD.".  It is in my judgement clear that in
    reaching his decision, the Judge had in mind throughout, not only the
    relationship between the appellant and her daughter, but also the
    relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren.  The
    "something more" applied as much to the relationship between the
    appellant and her grandchildren as it did to the relationship between
    the appellant and her daughter.

19. The focus of Mr Lay's submissions before me, was the second ground of
    appeal. That is, the failure to consider the best interests of the
    children.  He submits that the Judge erroneously focused upon the
    question of whether there is a parental relationship between the
    appellant and her grandchildren, and having rejected the 'parental
    relationship', the Judge failed to consider the best interests of the
    children, in the wider context. He submits that there was evidence from
    the Independent Social Worker, the psychologist, Dr Hull, and Elizabeth
    Stevens, the HIV specialist occupational therapist that highlighted the
    vulnerability of the appellant's daughter.  He submits the Judge failed
    to adequately address that evidence of vulnerability, and how that
    would impact upon the care of the appellant's grandchildren in the
    absence of the appellant.

20. Mr Clarke submits that a careful reading of the decision establishes
    that in reaching his decision, the Judge had in mind all the evidence
    before him, including the evidence of Ms Stevens, and the weight to be
    attached to that evidence, was in the end, a matter for the Judge.  He
    accepts, however, that the judge did not consider the best interests of
    the children in the context of the diagnosis that the appellant's
    daughter has a mental illness of moderate severity. To that extent, the
    respondent concedes that there is an error of law in the decision of
    the FtT Judge that was capable of affecting the outcome.  Mr Clarke
    accepts that the error was capable of impacting upon the overall
    assessment of proportionality.

21. In light of the concession made by the respondent, I find that the
    decision of the FtT is infected by a material error or law, limited to
    the Judge's consideration of the best interests of the children, and
    whether the removal of the appellant is proportionate to the legitimate
    aim of immigration control.

22. Directions were issued to the parties in advance of the hearing before
    me requiring the parties to prepare for the hearing on the basis that,
    if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal, any further evidence, including supplementary oral
    evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it decides to
    re-make the decision, can be so considered at that hearing. No further
    evidence was relied upon by the appellant and there was no application
    made pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  That is unfortunate as Mr Lay submits that the assessment
    of a human rights claim such as this is always a highly fact sensitive
    task and that the remaking of the decision should be completed with the
    most up to date evidence.  Mr Clarke accepts that it would only be fair
    and appropriate, once the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside, to
    have up to date evidence, particularly with regard to the best
    interests of the children.

23. As to disposal, notwithstanding the failure to prepare for the hearing
    as directed, with some reluctance, because the issue is concerned with
    the bests interests of the children and an assessment of
    proportionality, it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT
    for hearing afresh, having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The
    nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be
    extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in due course.

24. I have carefully considered the decision of FtT Judge O'Hagan and it is
    appropriate to preserve the following findings:

      a. The appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with her grandchildren for the purposes of Appendix FM
         of the Immigration Rules and s117B(6) of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

      b. The appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM and
         paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.

      c. The appellant has established a family and private life with her
         daughter and grandchildren such that Article 8 ECHR is engaged;

      d. The refusal of leave to remain in the UK interferes with the
         appellant's Article 8 sufficient to engage Article 8;

      e. The respondent's decision is in accordance with the law;

      f. The respondent's decision pursues the legitimate aim of maintaining
         proper and firm immigration control.

25. It should be sufficiently clear from the matters set out above that the
    issue before the FtT will be whether the decision to refuse the
    appellant leave to remain in the UK, is disproportionate to the
    legitimate aim, having regard to the best interests of the children.

Notice of Decision

26. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge O'Hagan promulgated
    on 22nd May 2018 is set aside, and I remit the matter for re-hearing in
    the First-tier Tribunal, with the findings set out at paragraph [24]
    above, preserved.



Signed                                  Date     1st April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

27. I make no fee award as I have remitted the matter to the FtT for
    hearing afresh.



Signed                                  Date     1st April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
