
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09303/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2019                              |On 17 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                 VP (INDIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ishrat Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Bassi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department ("the Department") to refuse to grant her leave
    to remain on the grounds of family and private life established in  the
    UK.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction,  but
    as the central issue in  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the
    sustainability of the Judge's findings on the extent of  dependency  of
    other  members  of  the  appellant's  household,  I  consider  that  an
    anonymity direction is appropriate.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of birth  is  20  June
    1946.  She last entered the UK on 5 December  2003,  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  Her visit visa ran until 28 May 2004,  and  on
    13 May 2004 she applied to extend it.  Her application was refused with
    no right of appeal.   The appellant overstayed.  She  first  sought  to
    regularise her status on 25 June 2015 when she  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family and private life established in  the  UK.
    The application was rejected on 10 August 2015.  On  11  November  2015
    the appellant made a further application, which was refused on 19 March
    2016 with an out of country right of appeal.  The appellant applied for
    judicial review, and the outcome was a consent order made  on  19  July
    2017 under which the Department agreed to withdraw the decision  of  19
    March 2016 and to issue the appellant with  a  new  decision  within  3
    months.

 3. On 14 August 2017 the Department gave their reasons for re-refusing the
    application of 19 March 2016.  She claimed  to  provide  care  for  her
    daughter, 'R', and for her mother-in-law, 'S'.   She  had  submitted  a
    medical report from a professor at Oxford University Hospital who  said
    that S suffered from severe rheumatoid arthritis; that the disease  had
    left S with very restricted mobility and considerable ongoing pain; and
    that the appellant provided help with S's day-to-day activities such as
    washing, going to the toilet and getting  out  of  bed.   However,  the
    appellant had provided no evidence that no one else  was  available  to
    care for R or S in the UK.

 4. She also stated that she was currently caring  for  her  granddaughter,
    'M', because she had been  diagnosed  with  learning  difficulties,  an
    incomplete  third  nerve   palsy,   and   an   ongoing   condition   of
    "Micrencephaly."  However, she did not have parental responsibility for
    M, as M resided in the UK with her birth parents.  So, if the appellant
    had to leave the UK, M would continue to reside in the UK.  The refusal
    of the application would not separate any  children  from  their  birth
    parents, and it would not obligate M to leave the UK.

The Hearing before, and the Decision, of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Fowell sitting at Priory Court
    in  Birmingham  on  2  October  2018.   Both   parties   were   legally
    represented.  The appellant's solicitors filed a  bundle  of  documents
    containing the medical  evidence  that  had  been  submitted  with  the
    application.  In  addition,  they  served  a  report  from  Dr  Martine
    Stoffels, Consultant General Adult and Old Age Psychiatrist,  contained
    in a letter dated 13 August 2018.  Dr Stoffels said that she had seen R
    on 10 August 2018 for confirmation of her diagnosis and current  mental
    state.  R had been accompanied by her husband and her mother.   Neither
    she nor her mother (the appellant)  was  fluent  in  English,  but  R's
    husband was fluent in both English and his mother language.

 6. Dr Stoffels understood that R had become unwell following the birth  of
    her children.  She  had  developed  a  combination  of  depressive  and
    psychotic symptoms.  In essence, the combination of  her  symptoms  had
    remained unchanged over the past 30 years.  R continued  to  experience
    fluctuating periods of mood instability and psychosis.  Over  the  past
    30 years she had been under the care of  the  Mental  Health  Trust  in
    Oxford, and had been followed up for long periods  of  time.   She  had
    various combinations of medications - usually a combination of an anti-
    depressant and an anti-psychotic.  She had received care in  her  home,
    but the various packages were not successful, with  barriers  including
    cultural differences as well as the language barrier.

 7. Although R had been discharged back to her GP,  it  was  clear  that  a
    number of negative symptoms of psychosis remained  prominent,  and  she
    continued to suffer from her schizo-affective  disorder.   R  struggled
    mainly from lack of drive, initiation and motivation, to such an extent
    that she was unable to self-care and was highly reliant upon direct 24-
    hour care, provided by her immediate family members.

 8. R and her husband's home situation was  one  of  high-level  dependency
    from the husband and his mother-in-law (the appellant).  In the past 14
    years or so, R had become highly reliant on her mother to  provide  her
    with daily structure, to ensure adherence to medication and to maintain
    her current level of physical health.   Without the  care  provided  by
    her family, R would be liable to require 24-hour in-patient care.   R's
    husband had become  increasingly  reliant  upon  his  mother-in-law  to
    provide support to his wife.  He described how,  over  the  years,  his
    ability to provide care had been compromised by his  wife's  delusional
    and  paranoid  beliefs.   He  also  described  periods  of   agitation,
    irritability,  verbal  aggression  and  threats   during   periods   of
    unsettledness.  He had suffered a heart attack a year-or-two ago, which
    led to his retirement.  This had further  compromised  his  ability  to
    provide input into his wife's care.

 9. In summary, R's treatment included medication  as  well  as  very  high
    levels of care, provided mainly by her mother.  Without  this  support,
    it was highly likely that R would become liable for  24-hour  inpatient
    care, which would have a detrimental effect on her mental health.

10. In his subsequent decision, the Judge characterised the thrust  of  the
    appellant's claim as being that  she  was  an  essential  part  of  the
    household,  providing  care  for  her  daughter,  R,   aged   52,   her
    granddaughter, M, aged 26, and the mother of her son-in-law, S aged 77.

11. The Judge summarised and  commented  upon  the  oral  evidence  he  had
    received from the appellant and her son-in-law, 'K', in paragraphs  [9]
    to [19] of his decision.  The appellant was  asked  if  her  son-in-law
    could manage without her.  She answered that he had to go out to  work.



12. In contrast, K said that he had had a heart attack last May, and so had
    retired. The Judge commented: "Despite this, he said that he could  not
    take over full-time care.  I was not able to get any real understanding
    of why not."

13. In closing submissions on behalf  of  the  Department,  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that most of the medical evidence was  over  2  years
    old - the exception being the letter from Dr  Stoffels.   However,  she
    was not R's GP or consultant, and there was nothing  to  indicate  that
    she had seen R's medical records.  Nor was there any evidence from  the
    local authority to confirm the support given to the family.  The family
    did not appear to  have  engaged  with  the  authorities  at  all.  She
    referred the Judge to the Home Office Guidance on Carers, which was  to
    the effect that entry clearance was not to be granted to provide  long-
    term care, but only for a 3-month period, and she  submitted  that  the
    same approach should be adopted here.  R had the support of her husband
    who had been able to  manage  on  his  own  before  the  appellant  had
    returned to the UK from India in 2003.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Counsel submitted that the  rights  of  all
    the family  members  should  be  considered.   It  was  clear  from  Dr
    Stoffel's report that R needed 24 / 7 care, otherwise she might have to
    be an inpatient. Although the appellant had been in  the  UK  illegally
    for a long period of time, there were compelling factors  which  should
    be given some weight.   The  care  that  the  appellant  was  providing
    reduced the burden on the state, and hence reduced the public  interest
    in her removal.

15. In his findings, the Judge began with a detailed consideration  of  the
    report of Dr Stoffels.  The Judge commented  as  follows  at  paragraph
    [32]:

         "This report  therefore  shows  that  [R]  as  withdrawn  and  very
         passive, but at  the  same  time  she  is  no  longer  in  need  of
         specialist care or support, is under the treatment of  her  GP  and
         her condition is stable on medication.  This has not quite  matched
         the picture presented of someone who will let the food fall out  of
         their mouth and will not cook a meal or leave the sofa.   Even  the
         appellant's witness statement did not suggest that [R]  needed  any
         personal care, so [she] is clearly able to dress and  wash  herself
         without prompting.  Equally,  she  does  not  appear  to  have  any
         mobility problems."

16. The Judge went on to discuss the previous  medical  reports,  which  he
    considered were "sparse" given the  length  of  treatment.   The  Judge
    noted a letter dated 9 July 2014 which the family's GP had  written  to
    the solicitors at their request.  The GP said that they had  seen  very
    little of M over the last few years, so was unable to  comment  on  M's
    level of mobility or assistance from another  care-giver.   M  had  not
    taken any regular medication and had recently been well.  R was  a  48-
    year-old woman with a history of depression for which she had  received
    medication at the time.  She was currently taking  medication  for  low
    mood.  She had a history of deficient anaemia, but had not been seen in
    their practice since March 2013.  There was no mention on her notes  of
    any physical disability or any requirement for care.

17. The Judge's conclusion  at  paragraph  [36]  was  that  an  exaggerated
    picture of  the  situation  had  been  put  forward.   M  had  learning
    difficulties, but there was no evidence that  she  required  any  care.
    Her school report from Year 7 said that she could count from  1-20  and
    was an enthusiastic participant, with good  relations  with  staff  and
    other pupils.  Of more significance, according to  the  representations
    made with the application, was that M was  now  working  as  a  Nursery
    Assistant - "a fact entirely unmentioned in the evidence presented."

18. At paragraph [37], the Judge said that the exaggeration  made  it  very
    difficult to place any weight on  the  information  provided  about  R.
    Putting to one side what had been said by her husband to Dr Stoffels, R
    was receiving medication and her condition  was  stable.   The  medical
    care she required was provided by her GP, whom  she  saw  rarely.   The
    Judge accepted that she did not speak English and  was  dependent  upon
    her husband to take her to appointments and on  other  excursions,  but
    there  was  no  medical  explanation  for  the  paralysing  degree   of
    inactivity attributed to her.  If this  were  the  case,  a  much  more
    active  psychological  intervention   would   be   called   for.    The
    accompanying support given to her  by  the  appellant  may  well  be  a
    considerable help to her, but the Judge did not accept that she  needed
    24-hour care as suggested,  or  anything  approaching  that  degree  of
    support.

19. The Judge said that this view was  borne  out  by  the  contents  of  a
    Registrar's letter from July 2015, which he  went  on  to  quote.   The
    Judge commented at paragraph [39] as follows:

         "Even that information, relayed by [K], indicates that his  mother-
         in-law was playing a supporting role to his care.  The reference to
         him struggling to  manage  on  his  own  makes  very  little  sense
         otherwise, especially given that the appellant  had  by  that  time
         been living in the family for 12  years.   Since  then  his  wife's
         condition had improved and she is not now in need of any  treatment
         beyond her medication."

20. At paragraph [42], the Judge held that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    also not free from "this sort of exaggeration", as when  she  had  said
    that K had to go out to work every day and so K could not  provide  any
    care to R: "This is plainly untrue and has been so for months."

21. The Judge went on to reach the following conclusion at paragraph [42]:

         "All that can be said with any confidence therefore, (and I find on
         balance) is that the appellant has been living with her  daughter's
         family for 15 years, mostly illegally, and she helps  and  supports
         her daughter and [S].  This does not seem to me to go beyond normal
         emotional ties in any respect and so I do not find  that  there  is
         family life, for the purposes of Article 8, with  her  daughter  or
         granddaughter, or  [S],  who  of  course  is  only  a  relative  by
         marriage.  Support could be provided by Social Services."

22. At paragraph [43], the Judge said that for the same reasons he did  not
    accept that the appellant's son in India was abusive to  the  appellant
    or would not allow her to return.  She clearly still owned  the  family
    farm there, and there was nothing to show that her house in  India  had
    changed hands.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

23. Counsel settled the application for permission to appeal.   He  pleaded
    that various findings of fact made by the Judge between paragraphs [36]
    and [42] were irrational or unsustainable.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

24. On 28 December 2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Feeney  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on all grounds raised.

Discussion

25. Although a number of grounds of appeal are advanced, all of them relate
    to the Judge's findings on the extent to which M and R  were  dependent
    on the appellant, with the exception of the last one, which relates  to
    his finding on family life.

The finding on family life

26. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the Judge's finding on  family  life  was
    "surprising".  But he did not concede that it was a  perverse  finding,
    and he did not accept that the finding was material to the  outcome  of
    the proportionality assessment.

27. I consider it is strongly arguable that, on  the  facts  found  by  the
    Judge, the appellant should be treated  as  having  established  family
    life with the other members of the household  in  which  she  has  been
    living for the last 15 years.  On the other hand, the  Judge's  finding
    to the contrary has to be understood in  the  context  of  his  earlier
    finding that the appellant was not the main carer for R, M  or  S,  but
    only played a supporting role. The Judge's clear finding was  that  the
    other members of the household were principally dependent on K.

28. But even if the Judge ought to  have  characterised  the  appellant  as
    having established family life on the facts found by him  in  paragraph
    [42], I do not consider that this error was material to the outcome  of
    the proportionality assessment.

29. As recognised by Ms Mahmud in her skeleton  argument,  the  outcome  of
    this appeal turned entirely upon the question  of  whether  there  were
    sufficiently compelling reasons for the appellant being granted Article
    8 relief outside the Rules,  "namely  the  detrimental  effect  on  the
    health conditions of [R] and [M], if the support  which  the  appellant
    had been providing was withdrawn."

The findings on dependency

30. The findings of fact made by  the  Judge  in  the  section  immediately
    preceding his conclusion at paragraph [42] have a common  theme,  which
    is that the appellant's continued presence  in  the  household  is  not
    essential to maintaining the health of either R or M, whose  respective
    conditions have been exaggerated by the appellant or by her son-in-law.
    K.

31. Having reviewed the  evidence,  I  consider  that  the  allegations  of
    irrationality or unsustainability in respect of the  findings  made  in
    paragraphs [36] to [41] are no more than an expression of  disagreement
    with findings that were reasonably open to the Judge  for  the  reasons
    which he gave.

32. It was open to the Judge to attach considerable weight to the fact that
    M was now working as a  Nursery  Assistant  -  a  fact  which  had  not
    featured in the evidence given by the appellant.  The Judge did not add
    the caveat that M was limited in what she could do  in  this  capacity,
    but his failure to add this caveat does not deprive  the  fact  of  her
    working as a Nursery Assistant of its evidential significance.

33. It is pleaded that the Judge misdirected himself in law in rejecting Dr
    Stoffel's conclusions about R, when he is not himself a  mental  health
    expert.  However, the Judge was not purporting to reject  Dr  Stoffel's
    conclusions on the basis of superior  medical  knowledge,  but  on  the
    basis that Dr Stoffel's assessment was in part based  upon  matters  of
    which Dr Stoffels did not have personal  knowledge.   Dr  Stoffels  was
    entirely reliant on K as her source of information as to  the  family's
    domestic situation.

34.  In  addition,  the  Judge  engaged  in  the  legitimate  exercise   of
    juxtaposing the opinion  formed  by  Dr  Stoffels  following  a  single
    consultation, with information from other  medical  sources,  including
    from the family's GP, who had been treating R and M over a long period.



35. It was thus open to the Judge  to  disagree  with  the  opinion  of  Dr
    Stoffels that the appellant's absence from the household would have the
    dire consequences envisaged by Dr Stoffels, which was that R would need
    to become an inpatient.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




