
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09329/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2019                      |On 01 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  A. I. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Chirico (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW-DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant who is a citizen  of  Sierra  Leone.
    He appeals against the decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    O'Keeffe) (FtT) who dismissed his human rights  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 13 November 2018.

Background

2.   The appellant applied for further leave to remain on the basis that  he
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his child, in respect of
    whom he had a parental responsibility agreement and in respect of  whom
    he had instructed  solicitors  to  make  an  application  for  the  re-
    introduction of contact.

3.     The FtT heard the appeal on 7 November 2018.  The appellant  was  not
    represented and did not attend  the  hearing.   The  FtT  proceeded  to
    determine the appeal by way of a hearing in absence of  the  appellant.
    It found no evidence of any genuine parental relationship  between  the
    appellant and his child.  It found that "the  most  that  the  evidence
    demonstrates is that the appellant is the child's  biological  father."
    It concluded that the decision would have no  impact  on  the  existing
    arrangements for the child.

Grounds of appeal

4.   The grounds of appeal argued that the FtT failed to have regard to  the
    evidence before it which showed that the appellant had  a  relationship
    with his child and was seeking to resume contact with his child (SSHD v
    AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661).

5.   Secondly, it was argued that the FtT had  no  evidence  or  explanation
    for the appellant's absence and in considering whether  to  proceed  to
    hear in absence failed to consider the best  interests  of  the  child.
    The FtT failed to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant  had  been
    unrepresented, that the address given  to  the  Tribunal  was  for  his
    previous solicitors and that the appellant had thus  far  shown  little
    participation in the appeal.  All of which ought  to  have  highlighted
    for the FtT that the appellant was either unaware or unable  to  attend
    the hearing.  Unbeknown to the FtT the appellant suffered from a mental
    health illness at the date of hearing had been  hospitalised.  At  that
    time he had lost contact with his family and his legal representatives.

6.   It was further argued that the FtT failed to consider the  question  of
    what private life and family life the appellant had established in  the
    UK.

Permission to appeal

7.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    essentially  on  the  grounds  that  there  was  a  fairness  issue  in
    particular having regard to the evidence that had now been produced  to
    show that the appellant had been in hospital from 13 October 2018 to  5
    December 2018.

Submissions

8.   At the hearing before  me  Mr  Tarlow  conceded  that  objectively  the
    decision was unfair to the appellant given his  circumstances  and  the
    Respondent was not therefore opposing the application.   There  was  no
    Rule 24 notice provided.

9.   Mr Chirico submitted that not only was the decision objectively  unfair
    but  also  the  legal  position  as  regards  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationships had moved on citing AB (Jamaica).

Decision

10.  I decided to set aside the decision given that there was  no  challenge
    to the grounds to appeal. It was clearly  unfair  objectively  for  the
    determination to stand in light of the evidence now produced as to  the
    reasons for the appellant's failure to attend.  The appellant  provided
    evidence to show that he had been in hospital due to severe  depression
    and psychosis at the time of the hearing.  There was also evidence from
    his brother and former partner to confirm that at that time he was  not
    in touch  with  members  of  his  family  and  had  not  contacted  his
    solicitors.

11.  I take the view that all of the grounds of appeal were made out in  any
    event.  The FtT did not consider where the best interests of the  child
    lay in its assessment of whether or not it was fair to proceed  with  a
    hearing in absence, or at all.  There was evidence before  the  FtT  to
    show that the appellant had a parental  responsibility  agreement  with
    regard to his child and evidence  of  an  e-mail  sent  in  March  2018
    instructing solicitors to make an application  to  court  for  the  re-
    introduction of access.  Although the  FtT  relied  on  SR  (subsisting
    parental relationship-Section 117B(6)) [2018], it  applied  a  somewhat
    restricted definition of  what  is  considered  to  be  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

12.  Accordingly I have decided  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo.  Mr Chirico requested that  the  appeal
    be reheard  in  Taylor  House  as  the  appellant  had  now  instructed
    solicitors from Wilson & Co.  I concurred with that request.

Decision

13.  There is material error of  law.   The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    rehearing (excluding Judge O'Keeffe).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 31.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed                                  Date 31.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


