
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09711/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2020                      |On 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                               mr Idrees Javed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Royal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fowell  dated  23  August  2019.   The
    Appellant had appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  20
    May 2019 to refuse leave to remain and to refuse a human rights  claim.
    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, contrary to the reference made
    in the first paragraph of the decision suggesting that the Appellant is
    a national of India.

2.   The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom in August of 2012  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student and had leave to remain until 10  April  2014.
    An in time application for leave to remain was made as  a  student  and
    was granted until 2 July 2015.  A further  application  was  made  for
    leave to remain on 30 June 2015 for leave outside of  the  Rules  which
    was refused in a decision of 5 November 2015.

3.   The further background of this matter is that the Appellant is  married
    by an Islamic marriage ceremony to Ms Tanveer Akhtar, a fellow national
    of Pakistan who is now also naturalised  as  a  British  citizen.   The
    couple had known each other in Pakistan, being related to one  another.
    There had been a proposal of marriage on the part  of  the  Appellant's
    family to Ms Akhtar's family in 2010 which had been declined.

4.   However when the Appellant was present in the United  Kingdom  in  2015
    the couple are said to have met  again  at  another  mutual  relative's
    wedding.  That is said to have taken place in April 2015.  It  is  said
    that the couple entered  into  a  relationship,  and  entered  into  an
    Islamic marriage on 29 August 2015.

5.   After the  Appellant  became  an  overstayer  (the  date  of  which  is
    discussed  further  below),  various  applications  were  made  by  the
    Appellant for leave to remain including  an  asylum  application  on  8
    October 2017 (which is as yet undecided). The present decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 20 May 2019 was in  relation  to  an  application  for
    leave to remain dated 23 December 2017 in which  the  Appellant  relied
    upon his relationship with Ms Akhtar.  In  refusing  that  application,
    the Respondent held that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  immigration
    status requirement set out in Appendix FM, as being an  overstayer  and
    on bail [8]. It was also further held by the Respondent that there were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside of the UK
    [10]; that under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  there  were
    no very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  into
    Pakistan were he to return [11-15]; and that there were no  exceptional
    circumstances demonstrating that the refusal of the human rights  claim
    resulted  in  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private and family life in the UK [17-33].

6.   It is to  be  noted  that  in  the  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain outside of the Rules at  [17]  onwards,
    the Respondent noted at [20] that  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Akhtar  had
    asserted that their families did not approve of their marriage and that
    there was a risk of harm to them both if they were to return to live in
    Pakistan.  The Respondent noted at [26] that  this  fear  of  harm  was
    being considered in the appellant's asylum application and would not be
    addressed further in the present decision.

7.   The Appellant  appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision  and  the
    matter came before the judge at the Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  on  19
    August 2019.  Both the Appellant and Ms Akhtar gave evidence.

8.   At  [13]-[17]  of  the  judge's  subsequent  decision,  seemingly  when
    considering whether there were any insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the UK, the judge proceeded to consider whether
    any risk of harm arose  for  either  the  Appellant  or  Ms  Akhtar  in
    Pakistan, notwithstanding that  the  Respondent  had  declined  in  the
    decision to consider the Appellant's arguments regarding risk of  harm.
    The judge held, directing himself at [13] and [15] that the standard of
    proof in the human rights appeal was on  a  balance  of  probabilities,
    that the Appellant had not established any such risk [15], [17], [30].

9.   Under the hearing 'Are the rules met?' at [18],  the  judge  held  that
    'In the circumstances there appears to be no real obstacles to a return
    to Pakistan, either together or by Mr Javed  to  seek  entry  clearance
    ...'.

10.  From the third  sentence  in  [18],  to  [21],  the  judge  appears  to
    consider whether the immigration rules might be met  by  the  appellant
    upon an application for  entry  clearance  if  made  from  abroad,  and
    whether there was any 'sensible reason' to require him to make such  an
    application. The judge expressed reservations in this passage that  the
    immigration rules would be met, in particular regarding  the  specified
    evidence required to satisfy the financial requirements of appendix FM,
    and held at [21] that there did appear to  be  a  sensible  reason  for
    requiring such an application.

11.  In considering the question of the proportionality of the  respondent's
    decision at [22] onwards,  the  judge  considered  the  application  of
    s.117B NIAA 2002. The judge held at [27] as follows:

         "The fourth and fifth  points  (ie  s.117B(4)  and  (5))  are  very
         similar.  They are in slightly different  terms  for  someone  here
         unlawfully and someone whose leave is precarious.   Precarious  for
         this purpose means anything short of indefinite leave to remain but
         the short point is that little weight should  be  given  to  family
         life when established whilst here unlawfully, as here.  Mr  Javed's
         leave to remain expired on 2 July 2015 and their religious  wedding
         took place just under three  months  later.   Those  considerations
         therefore leave matters very much as they were under the Rules".

12.  The judge ultimately dismissed the appeal.

13.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal, making  an  application
    to the First-tier Tribunal in the first instance.  Those grounds  dated
    3 September 2019, argue that the judge erred in  law,  in  summary,  as
    follows:

    (i)  when assessing whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
         family life continuing outside of the UK, by failing to  take  into
         consideration certain relevant factors; failing to make findings on
         the credibility of the appellant's wife's evidence; erring  in  law
         in proceeding on the basis that certain facts had been admitted  by
         the appellant, which was  denied;  failing  to  take  into  account
         certain objective evidence; and

    (ii) in relation to the judge's approach to the considerations set  out
         in s.117B NIAA  2002,  by  proceeding  unfairly,  by  querying  the
         details of  Ms  Akhtar's  employment  in  the  UK;  erring  in  the
         assessment of the appellant's financial independence,  and  in  the
         assessment of the application of the Chikwamba principal.

14.  In 'Supplementary  Grounds  of  Appeal'  dated  24  October  2019,  the
    Appellant also asserts that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    consider the issue of the reasonableness of expecting  the  Appellant's
    British partner to leave the United Kingdom, and referred to the recent
    authority of GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 0630.

15.  The Appellant also prepared 'Additional Grounds  of  Appeal'  dated  21
    November 2019, arguing that the judge erred in law in failing  to  take
    into consideration  as  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment  the
    material fact that the appellant had been lawfully resident  in  United
    Kingdom at the time that the appellant and  his  partner  entered  into
    their relationship, and referred to the further recent authority of Lal
    v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.

16.  Permission was refused in  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Froom dated 18 November 2019, finding that the judge had  been
    plainly entitled find that the Appellant had not established  his  case
    of risk on return to the applicable civil  standard,  and  was  plainly
    entitled to find that the Chikwamba principal did not apply,  and  that
    family life could continue abroad.

17.  Renewed grounds of appeal were made to the Upper Tribunal  directly  in
    an application dated 3 December 2019. The appellant  stated  at  [7(a)]
    that he relied upon the original grounds of appeal, and set  out  [7(b)
    and 7(c)(i)-(ix)] certain  points  which  were  in  essence  a  further
    elaboration of the points raised in the Supplementary Grounds of Appeal
    of 24 October 2019 and Additional Grounds  of  appeal  of  21  November
    2019.

18.  In a decision  dated  12  December  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum
    granted permission to appeal in the following terms

         "Renewed application for permission to appeal  on  grounds  already
         rejected by the First-tier Tribunal is granted only in  respect  of
         the  First-tier  Judge's   application   of   the   proportionality
         assessment and not in respect of his factual findings."   (Emphasis
         in the original)

19.  Under the heading 'Reasons', Judge Blum provides:

         "1.  The judge properly considered the evidence relating to whether
             the Appellant and his partner would face any risk of harm from
             their families on account of their marriage in accordance with
             the balance of probabilities test given that the Appellant was
             only  relying  on  Article  8  and  had  had  an   outstanding
             protection claim and the judge was clearly aware that she  had
             suffered abuse during her previous marriage [6].  The  factual
             findings in relation to whether  the  partner's  family  would
             have  any  continuing  objection  to  the  marriage  was   one
             rationally open to the judge for the reasons  given  ([14]  to
             [17]).   In  reaching  his  findings  the  judge  specifically
             considered that the partner had not returned to Pakistan.

         2.    Although  the  judge  considered  the  s.117B  factors   when
             assessing proportionality  and  that  a  temporary  separation
             would not breach the Chikwamba ([2008] UKHL 40) principle,  it
             is arguable that the judge failed  to  consider  or  make  any
             finding as to whether it was 'reasonable' for the  Appellant's
             partner to leave the UK by reference to GM (Sri Lanka)  v  The
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
             1630,  a  relevant  factor  to  the  overall   proportionality
             assessment".

    Submissions

20.  Before me Mr Ahmed of Counsel sought to adopt the  Appellant's  grounds
    of appeal.  However at an early juncture within Mr Ahmed's  submissions
    he argued that the Judge had erred in law at [27] by proceeding under a
    mistake of fact. It was argued that the Appellant's leave to remain had
    not expired on 2 July 2015 as asserted by the judge at [27]; rather, it
    expired on 5 November 2015 at the earliest. This was on the basis  that
    although his last grant of leave to remain was  to  expire  on  2  July
    2015, the appellant made an in time application for leave to remain  on
    30 June 2015 which was only refused on 5 November 2015. The Appellant's
    leave to remain had thus been automatically extended by operation of s.
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971 until 5 November 2015.

21.  Mr Ahmed argued that the judge having proceeded under that  mistake  of
    fact was a matter which had been raised in the Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal renewed before the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 7(c) (vii)  which
    reads as follows:

         "At paragraph 27 of the determination the FtTJ has erred in failing
         to  take  into  consideration  as  part  of   the   proportionality
         assessment the  material  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  lawfully
         resident in the UK at the time that the Appellant and  his  partner
         entered into their relationship. This was materially relevant under
         the provisions relating to the consideration of the Section 117B(5)
         NIAA 2002.  The FtTJ wrongly determined that appeal  on  the  basis
         that the family life had been established whilst the Appellant  was
         in the UK unlawfully which was contrary to  the  position  in  this
         case".

22.  I heard submissions from the both parties as to:

    (i)  whether the alleged 'mistake of fact'  point  was  one  which  was
         actually raised within the appellant's grounds of appeal;

    (ii) if not, whether the point was Robinson obvious ([1998] QB 929);

    (iii)    if Robinson obvious, whether proceeding under such  a  mistake
         of fact represented a material error of law  on  the  part  of  the
         judge.

23.  For his part, Mr Bates appeared to accept that the judge had,  at  [27]
    appeared to proceed under a mistake of fact, although  did  not  accept
    that the point was raised in that way in  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal; that the point was not Robinson obvious,  and  would  not  have
    made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.




    Discussion

24.  I find that the judge did proceed under a  mistake  of  fact  regarding
    the date on which the appellant became  an  overstayer  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Once one considers the  Appellant's  immigration  history  and
    observes that he made an in  time  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain before the expiry of his leave to remain on 2 July 2015,  it  is
    clear as a matter of law that the Appellant's leave to remain  did  not
    expire on 2 July 2015 as held by the judge at [27]  but  rather,  on  5
    November 2015.

25.  The sequence of events in relation to the relationship was said  to  be
    that the couple had always  known  each  other;  there  was  a  refused
    proposal of marriage in Pakistan in 2010; they both left Pakistan; they
    met again in April 2015 (see decision at [6]); and  they  underwent  an
    Islamic marriage on 29 August 2015. The couple had therefore met again,
    formed a relationship, and were married under Islamic law,  all  before
    the Appellant's leave expired.

26.  However, it is clear that the judge has  given  little  weight  to  the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife, directing himself at [27]  that
    '... little weight should be given to family life is established whilst
    he unlawfully, as here' (emphasis added). The basis on which  has  done
    so appears to be directly related the  judge's  misapprehension  as  to
    when the appellant became unlawfully present in the United Kingdom.

27.  I find that the wording of the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal  at  set
    out at paragraph 7(c)(vii) of those grounds, set out  above,  does  not
    raise the above point clearly. The  grounds  do  not  assert  with  any
    particularity how the judge erred, for example, by making assertions as
    to the date on which the appellant ceased to be lawfully present United
    Kingdom, or the date on which it was said  that  the  relationship  was
    entered into.

28.  However, when the point is set out as I have  at  [24]-[27]  above,  it
    becomes obvious that the judge proceeded under a mistake of  fact  that
    amounted to an error of law. At [22] onwards in the decision, the judge
    was considering the proportionality of the respondent's  decision,  and
    in particular, the application of the mandatory considerations set  out
    in s.117B NIAA 2002. The judge erred by giving the relationship  little
    weight, when he was under no obligation under s.117B NIAA  2002  to  do
    so.  The  judge's  approach  to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's relationship, a key element to the  appeal,  was  therefore
    erroneous.

29.  I find that it is not inevitable that judge would have arrived  at  the
    same overall conclusion as he did, in  finding  that  the  Respondent's
    decision refusing the human rights claim  was  proportionate,  had  the
    judge not erred in law on the application of s.117B(4) NIAA 2002. It is
    arguable that a different outcome may have prevailed if the  judge  had
    proceeded without the misapprehension of a  fact  under  which  he  was
    labouring.

30.  I therefore find that the judge's  overall  decision  was  made  having
    made a material error of law and I set the decision aside.

31.  I do not therefore find it necessary to consider the remainder  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal. When this decision is  remade,  it  will
    have to be remade in accordance with the legal principles  set  out  in
    any relevant authority, including in accordance  with  the  two  recent
    Court of Appeal authorities referred to by the appellant.

32.  Due to the extent of the  findings  of  fact  which  need  to  be  made
    regarding the appellant's relationship, and the weight to  be  attached
    to it, I find that it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the  First
    tier Tribunal.

33.  However, in the rehearing of this appeal, it is to be noted that  there
    has been no successful challenge to the Tribunal's finding  that  there
    is no risk of harm to the Appellant or his partner in Pakistan.  The re
    making of the  decision  should  be  made  on  that  basis.  A  Mirpuri
    interpreter will be arranged. If any other interpreter is required, the
    Appellant should make the appropriate request.




    Decision

    The making of the decision involved the making of a material  error  of
    law.

    I set the decision aside.

    I remit the appeal to the First tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12.3.20
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

