

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/09958/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Court 7, Royal Courts of       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Justice,                                |                                   |
|The Strand, London                      |On 01 October 2018                 |
|On 13 August 2018                       |                                   |
|                                        |                                   |

     Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H L
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER Made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Nahid Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Smart Law
Solicitors
                  Limited

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order in this appeal.  The claimant will be referred  to
in these proceedings only as H L.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court
directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any   form   of
publication  thereof  shall  identify  the  claimant,  whether  directly  or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
   decision to make a deportation order pursuant to section 3(5)(a)  of  the
   Immigration Act 1971 (as amended).  The claimant  is  a  citizen  of  the
   People's Republic of China.

2. No  anonymity  order  was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  have
   considered whether anonymity is appropriate having regard to rule  14  of
   the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as  amended)  and  to
   the Presidential Guidance given by the President of the Ft-TIAC  in  2011
   that all asylum appeals  should  be  anonymised  at  case  creation.   In
   addition, the claimant's children are entitled to anonymity.


3. It is appropriate to anonymise this appeal and I make that order.


Background

4. The claimant is 31 years old, having been born  in  China  in  1987.   He
   entered the United Kingdom aged 20, on or about 28 May 2007,  with  false
   documents provided by a snakehead people trafficker,  on  the  basis  (he
   claimed) that he would work without an income in the United Kingdom until
   his snakehead debt was repaid. The claimant sought asylum at the port  of
   entry and a screening interview was  conducted,  at  which  the  claimant
   could not produce any immigration documents for himself.

5. On 10 May 2007, the  claimant  was  convicted  at  Uxbridge  Magistrates'
   Court of an immigration documentation offence, contrary to section  2  of
   the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004  and
   sentenced to 16 weeks' imprisonment.  That is an offence  of  dishonesty.
   On 15 June 2007, the Secretary of State decided not to pursue deportation
   as the claimant did not then meet the criteria for a deportation order.

6. The claimant has never attended an asylum interview and his asylum  claim
   was refused on 22 August 2007 for failure to  attend  an  interview,  and
   because he  absconded  and  failed  to  report.   The  claimant  did  not
   challenge that decision. He absconded from 6 August 2007 but  surfaced  3
   years later, on 21 September 2010.  However, he  soon  failed  to  report
   again and on 11 October 2010, he was treated as having absconded for  the
   second time.   The claimant's former wife is the mother of his  children,
   who saw the offence committed and who are very young (3 and 6 years old).
   She is not settled in the United Kingdom and no member of the  family  is
   other than a Chinese citizen.

7. The claimant was convicted on  13  September  2017  at  Chelmsford  Crown
   Court of two offences against his then wife, one of assault, and  one  of
   assault occasioning actual bodily harm.  The claimant was sentenced to  6
   months' imprisonment in total.  The sentencing Judge said this:

         "You have pleaded guilty to two  counts,  one  assault  occasioning
         actual bodily harm, and another of common assault, and let me  tell
         you, it is wholly unacceptable for you to behave in a  violent  way
         towards your wife, and you know that it's morally wrong as well  as
         being legally wrong.  No matter  how  difficult  your  relationship
         might be, there is no excuse to resorting to  violence.   The  most
         serious of these offences was committed on the 11th of August  when
         I accept that you both punched and kicked your wife  and  that  you
         undoubtedly will have caused huge distress to your young  children,
         who were in the building at the time. ...this was a serious assault
         which, in my judgment, comfortably passes the custody threshold and
         can only be met by a sentence of  imprisonment  ...in  relation  to
         harm, [your wife] was a vulnerable victim and [it was] a  sustained
         assault, in relation to culpability, you kicked  her  with  a  shod
         foot. ..."

   The Judge considered the appropriate  starting  point  to  be  9  months'
   imprisonment, reduced to 6 months for an early guilty plea.

8. The relationship of the claimant and his former wife is at  an  end.   He
   does not see his children and has had no  contact  with  them  since  the
   offence in August 2017.

9. In the OASys report, which the Judge had before him, it records that  the
   claimant  was  habitually  violent  towards  his   former   partner   and
   represented an enhanced risk of  reoffending.   The  assessor  considered
   that there were concerns in relation to  the  children  and  that  social
   services should be contacted if he were to try to seek contact  with  his
   children.

10. COS documents highlighted that there were  further  allegations  against
   the claimant, 'which were not progressed but should  be  considered  when
   assessing risk'.  The  offence  details  in  the  OASys  report  were  as
   follows:

         "The victim...and [the claimant] have been together for 7 years and
         have 2 young children together. ...On the  11/08/2017,  the  victim
         states that she had been back home for a few days and  states  that
         [the claimant] was angry with her and accused  her  for  having  an
         affair.  Victim states  that  the  day  before  this  assault  [he]
         demanded her new passcode for her telephone so he could  check  her
         telephone, which she refused, and  [he]  proceeded  to  'smash  the
         place up'.  The victim states that this is normally a precursor  to
         his physical violence.  Victim states that she took the children to
         another room where there were other workers so that [the  claimant]
         would not attack her or her children.

         The following morning, the victim states that  [the  claimant]  was
         still angry with her and  started  to  smash  up  the  room  again,
         including the children's iPad.  The victim said she was scared,  as
         she knew the suspect would start to attack her and the children, so
         she grabbed the children and ran downstairs.  [The claimant] chased
         after her and caught up with her.   The  victim  stated  that  [the
         claimant] started a frenzied attack on her,  punching  her  to  the
         head several times, causing her to fall to the ground.  She  states
         that his blows caused her great pain  as  [the  claimant]  is  very
         strong and goes to the gym...[the claimant's] work colleagues tried
         to stop him and grabbed his arms, however [the  claimant  continued
         to attack her with his feet and delivered several kicks to her head
         whilst she was still on the  floor.   [The  claimant's]  colleagues
         managed to pull him off and he shouted at the victim, 'I  AM  GOING
         TO KILL YOU!  IF I CAN'T KILL YOU TODAY I  WILL  KILL  YOU  IN  THE
         FUTURE.'

         Between 7/8/2017 and 11/8/2017, the victim states that, a few  days
         prior to the first assault, she cannot remember the exact date  but
         it was the day after she returned from her friend's  address,  that
         [the claimant] was still angry at her for running  away  from  him.
         The victim states that he started smashing up the  room  again,  he
         opened the window and threatened to throw ..the two year old  child
         out of the window.  The victim states that she was genuinely scared
         he would do this and told the children to run, they were crying and
         screaming.  The children only went  as  far  as  the  landing,  not
         knowing what to do, the victim stood in the doorway  to  stop  [the
         claimant]  reaching  the  children.  [The  claimant]  then  started
         attacking her, by grabbing her hair, and rained down blows  on  her
         head and arms.  The victim stated she had bruises on her  arms  but
         they have now [gone].  The victim states that [the claimant's] work
         colleagues intervened and he was  stopped.   The  victim  took  the
         children away to the park and states [the claimant] came and begged
         her to come [home] and she did."

11. The conclusion of the officer who prepared the OASys  was  that  'it  is
   evident that these incidents were more frequent than recorded with police
   and therefore it is my assessment that  [the  claimant's]  behaviour  was
   triggered by means of him wishing to gain control of his partner and used
   violence as a means to gain said control'.   The  report  concludes  that
   there is a risk of serious harm, not just to the ex-partner  but  to  the
   children.  There were also 'allegations made around [the claimant]  being
   physically and emotionally abusive to the children,  however  these  were
   not progressed at Court'.

12. If the claimant were to be granted bail,  the  officer  considered  that
   the children should be referred for social services to become involved in
   their protection.  The risk was likely to be  greatest  if  the  claimant
   wanted to exert control over his partner or their children, if he was  in
   a state of heightened emotional arousal, or in conflict with  his  former
   partner, such as when he was in  conflict  with  his  partner,  when  the
   relationship broke down, or if he went  back  to  live  with  his  former
   partner and their children.  He should not be permitted to return to  the
   family home 'unless assessed as suitable by Children's Social Care'.

13. The claimant was assessed as presenting a medium risk  of  serious  harm
   to partners and children he resides with, the risk being 'in relation  to
   violence, threats of violence, threatening  and  intimidating  behaviour,
   and/or emotional or psychological harm through experiencing or witnessing
   domestic abuse'. If he were released to the community, a complete  review
   of circumstances, needs and risk would be required,  including  assessing
   the accommodation needs and suitability of any proposed address, referral
   to Children Social Care to assess safeguarding  concerns,  a  minimum  of
   once-weekly reporting for at least 12 weeks,  1:1  case  management  work
   around domestic violence / abuse, and if he  rekindled  the  relationship
   with the children's mother, regular liaison with police around any police
   callouts, to assist with risk assessments.  If the risk increased,  there
   should be  discussions  with  the  manage,  risk  reviews,  liaison  with
   relevant services involved, and risk escalation to the National Probation
   Service.

14. On 25 January 2018, the Secretary of  State  made  a  deportation  order
   against the claimant, on the basis that it was conducive  to  the  public
   good for him to  be  removed,  based  on  his  criminality,  pursuant  to
   paragraphs 398, 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
   amended).   The claimant was served with a section 120 notice but did not
   raise any new matter within the 10 working days allotted.

15. On  19  March  2018,  the  claimant  submitted  a  human  rights  claim,
   challenging the decision to deport him.  He relied  on  his  relationship
   with his children but provided no evidence of their  best  interests,  of
   their domestic circumstances, or of the nature of his  relationship  with
   them.  He gave no reason why it was  not  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
   provide evidence about his children.  He simply asserted  that  as  their
   father, he should not be removed.

16. The Secretary of State found that the relationship between the  claimant
   and his former partner was no longer subsisting; that he  had  not  shown
   very significant obstacles to reintegration in China; and that to  remove
   him would not breach the United Kingdom's international obligations under
   Article 8 ECHR.

First-tier Tribunal decision

17. The claimant told the First-tier Tribunal he  had  no  family  in  China
   now.  In the United Kingdom, he has his ex-partner,  whom  he  assaulted,
   and two children, aged 6 and 3, who he does not see. The partner did  not
   attend or give evidence to the First-tier Tribunal. The claimant told the
   Judge that his former partner had exaggerated  her  account  to  distance
   herself from the claimant and strengthen her bond with her  new  partner,
   who is lawfully present in the United Kingdom, unlike the claimant.

18. The Judge accepted the claimant's evidence that  this  was  an  isolated
   incident, exaggerated by the claimant's former partner,  and  also  found
   that as the  documents  offence  was  a  strict  liability  offence,  the
   claimant's use of travel documents to which he was not entitled  did  not
   amount to an offence  of  dishonesty.   The  Judge  considered  that  the
   offence was a single, one-off incident  and  that  deportation  would  be
   disproportionate.

19. The Judge found there was a lack of substance  in  the  public  interest
   argument and that the balance did not lie in favour of  deportation.   He
   allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

20. The Secretary of State appealed.  He  observed  that  the  Family  Court
   proceedings had not yet begun, and that, applying GD (Ghana) v  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1126  at  [51],  in  any
   event, the Secretary of State was not bound by any order  of  the  Family
   Court in deportation proceedings.

21. The Secretary of State  argued  that  the  claimant's  presence  in  the
   United Kingdom for the last 11 years had always been precarious:  he  has
   never had leave to enter or remain.  The First-tier Judge had  failed  to
   have regard to part VA of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002 (as amended) and there was no evidence  of  any  meaningful  contact
   between the claimant and his children, nor that it would be in  his  best
   interests for him to remain.

22. The best interests  of  a  child  could  be  outweighed  by  the  United
   Kingdom's right to control immigration (see MA Pakistan  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705).  The Judge had failed
   to give sufficient weight to the public interest,  as  section  117A  and
   117B of that Act required.

23. Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
   that the grounds of appeal identified arguable challenges to  the  First-
   tier Judge's decision.

Rule 24 Reply

24. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the claimant.

25. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

26. A skeleton argument was produced on behalf of the claimant at the  Upper
   Tribunal. The claimant continued to assert that there were pending  Court
   proceedings in the Family Court for which he should be allowed to  remain
   in the United Kingdom. However, at [12] in the skeleton argument, that is
   plainly inaccurate.

27. The claimant's new solicitors had written recently to his former  wife's
   solicitors to commence contact proceedings.  He  had  been  granted  some
   telephone contact with the children and had  proposed  a  day  every  two
   weeks and overnight weekend contact on the same night.  That had not  yet
   occurred.  The claimant's case was that his former partner was willing to
   try contact. There was nothing from her to confirm that assertion.

28. In oral submissions, Ms Ahmad said  that  there  were  still  no  family
   proceedings.  The claimant had not much money and  preferred  to  try  to
   reach an agreement, though he still  had  the  intention  of  instituting
   contact proceedings.  He had a right to contact with his children (see MS
   (Ivory Coast)). She accepted that there was no family  life  between  the
   claimant and his children at the date of hearing,  and  argued  that  the
   failure to deal with section 117B was not fatal. The claimant should have
   been removed administratively, not deported, which would create a 10-year
   bar on return.

29. The solicitors who now represent the claimant were not involved  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal hearing and Ms Ahmad was forced into the position  of
   taking instructions 'on the wing' during the hearing. The case  had  been
   prepared late, with the skeleton argument and new bundles only being  put
   together shortly before the hearing.  The claimant denied having seen the
   OASys report (which was plainly incorrect).  There was  no  intention  on
   the part of the claimant to begin contact proceedings and  the  statement
   that there were pending proceedings, made in the skeleton  argument,  was
   inaccurate.   She accepted that there were no submissions in the skeleton
   argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  about  the  children's  best
   interests.

Discussion

30. The decision in MS (Ivory Coast) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2007] EWCA Civ 133 is not of assistance in these proceedings.
    It relates to a mother remaining in the United Kingdom while her contact
   application to see her children is before the Family Court.   That is not
   the position here: the claimant has had all of  this  year  to  move  the
   Family Court, but there is still no application and we only have his word
   for it that his former wife is willing to let him contact the children.

31. The evidence before the First-tier Judge was not such  as  to  enable  a
   rational decision that this was a one-off offence, still less (given  his
   guilty plea) that his former wife was exaggerating in order to stay  with
   her new, settled, partner and distance herself from  the  claimant.   The
   OASys report, which the claimant clearly  had  seen,  recorded  appalling
   violence to his wife and threats to his children.  The  Judge's  decision
   is perverse and I set it aside.

32. I then proceed to remake the decision.  On  the  evidence,  although  he
   hopes to have a relationship with his children in  future,  the  claimant
   has not had any relationship with them since the incident in August 2017,
   and is said to have threatened, frightened, and controlled them while  he
   was living with their mother.

33. Section  117B(1)  requires  me  to  consider  that  the  maintenance  of
   effective immigration controls is in the public interest.   The  claimant
   has always been in the United Kingdom unlawfully so little weight can  be
   given to  his  private  life  (section  117B(4)).  There  was  more  than
   sufficient evidence to support the  Secretary  of  State's  consideration
   that this claimant, who has never had leave to remain, and whose wife and
   children also were not settled in the United Kingdom or British citizens,
   cannot bring himself within section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

34. Section 117C is not applicable,  as  the  claimant  does  not  meet  the
   definition of 'foreign criminal' at section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007
   (the sentence was less than a year and the offence was not a  section  72
   'serious crime').

35. Nor can the claimant bring himself within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the
   Rules, for the same reasons already given in relation to section 117B.

36. I therefore substitute a decision dismissing this appeal.

DECISION

37. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing
   the appeal.



Date:         24 September 2018              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


