
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09828/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2020                 |On 28 September 2020                 |
|At a remote hearing via Skype        |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Meredith, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge S  Aziz,  sent  on  19  September
         2019, allowing his appeal on Article 8, ECHR grounds.



Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His immigration status  is
         not in dispute: although he arrived lawfully as a student in  2012,
         he was an overstayer when he made his human rights  application  on
         15 January 2019.  This turned upon his relationship with his  child
         ('A'), who was born in January 2014.  The following matters are  no
         longer in dispute:  A lives with her mother ('M'), the  appellant's
         ex-wife, in the UK; A and M  are  Pakistani  citizens  without  any
         right to reside  in  the  UK;  they  do  not  have  an  outstanding
         application before the Home Office and there has  been  no  removal
         action being taken against them; relations  between  the  appellant
         and A have not been amicable; after family court  proceedings  were
         initiated in 2018 the appellant has  been  having  regular  contact
         with A pursuant to a court order; this includes  overnight  contact
         every other weekend and during the school holidays.

      3. The FTT accepted that the appellant has a  very  strong  and  close
         bond with A, and accepted the evidence in support  of  this  in  an
         independent  social  worker's  report.   The  FTT  noted  that  the
         appellant was unable to meet the Immigration  Rules  but  concluded
         that to remove him from the UK would be a  disproportionate  breach
         of his family life with A.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      4. The SSHD  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the  FTT's
         decision in succinct grounds of appeal.  These make two key points:

          i) When conducting the balancing  exercise,  the  FTT  failed  to
             attach weight to the public interest as outlined at s. 117B of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, particularly
             when the appellant, A and B were all in the UK unlawfully.

         ii) The FTT failed to address whether it would be reasonable for A
             to leave the UK with her mother in order to live in  Pakistan,
             where the appellant could also reside.

      5. FTT Judge Pooler granted permission to appeal in a decision dated 2
         April 2020.

      6. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mrs Pettersen agreed with
         my summary of the grounds of  appeal  above  and  made  brief  oral
         submissions in support of these.  I invited Ms Meredith to take  me
         to the aspects of the  decision  that  addressed  the  position  in
         Pakistan, if the  appellant  was  removed.   She  took  me  to  the
         evidence accepted by the FTT without any exception.

      7. After hearing from both representatives, I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.

Legal framework

      8. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:

             "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

Error of law discussion

      9. This is a straightforward case in many respects: a foreign national
         father with no leave to remain has been found to have a very strong
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his child, also a
         foreign national with no leave to remain;  the  child's  mother  is
         also a foreign national with no leave to remain.  The child  spends
         considerable time with her father but lives with her mother.  Prima
         facie the family life  between  this  father  and  child  could  be
         enjoyed in Pakistan.

     10. Although the FTT accepted that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with A,  she  was  clearly  not  a
         qualifying child.  She is  not  a  British  citizen  and  has  been
         resident in the UK for (just) under seven years.  The FTT expressly
         directed itself to the fact that A was not a  qualifying  child  at
         [44] and [54], and the contrary submission in the grounds of appeal
         is without any merit.  Similarly, the FTT was  well  aware  of  the
         undisputed immigration status of each family member: they  were  in
         the UK unlawfully.  The FTT specifically addressed s. 117B at  [49]
         and found the public  interest  factor  to  be  engaged  from  [50]
         onwards.  The appellant was unable to meet the  Immigration  Rules,
         primarily because all the family members were in the UK  unlawfully
         - see [44] to [47].

     11. The FTT nonetheless found that there were exceptional circumstances
         in the case and a refusal to grant the appellant leave would result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences for A.   The  authorities  make
         it clear that it is important for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
         'real life scenario'.  That is precisely what the FTT did.  The FTT
         noted that the appellant and M were  not  on  amicable  terms.   He
         spent time with  A  pursuant  to  a  court  order.   There  was  no
         indication that M was prepared to voluntarily return  to  Pakistan,
         far less reside in a part of Pakistan near to  the  appellant,  far
         less agree to contact in Pakistan, beyond the reach  of  the  court
         order.  The real life scenario from the perspective  of  the  child
         was this: although she could in principle reasonably be expected to
         leave the UK to live in Pakistan with  her  mother,  there  was  no
         realistic prospect of M facilitating this.   M has  seemingly  been
         in the UK unlawfully for some time.  Her family are settled in  the
         UK as British citizens.  She is not facing any removal action.   If
         removal directions are set, the practical reality is that these may
         well take place beyond January 2020, when A  becomes  a  qualifying
         child.  This would give M the potential to  rely  upon  s.  117B(6)
         herself.   Although the FTT may not have spelt these  matters  out,
         they are obvious from the recitation of the evidence  and  findings
         of fact.

     12. When granting permission Judge Pooler consider it arguable that the
         FTT failed to assess or take into account whether A and M could  or
         would return to Pakistan.  The FTT was clearly aware of this  as  a
         possibility and could have particularised the reasons why this  was
         not possible with greater care.  However, when the decision is read
         as a whole I am satisfied  that  the  FTT  was  of  the  clear  and
         reasonable view that M would not return to Pakistan  or  facilitate
         contact there voluntarily.  The fact that she could return did  not
         affect the likelihood that she would not be willing to  do  so  and
         was not being compelled to do so by the respondent.   The  FTT  was
         clearly aware that the respondent needed to resolve the immigration
         status of A and M, and this was likely to  take  some  time  -  see
         [58].  In all these circumstances the FTT was entitled to  conclude
         that to remove the appellant "at this stage" would be  contrary  to
         A's best interests and a disproportionate breach of  Article  8  in
         the light of the serious adverse hardship A  would  face  if  their
         current contact arrangements were disrupted.  As Peter  Jackson  LJ
         pointed out at [154] to [159] of HA (Iraq) and others v SSHD [2020]
         EWCA Civ 1176, one must be careful to consider the circumstances of
         the child from her point of view and focus must  be  given  to  the
         reality of the child's actual situation  including  the  impact  of
         emotional harm.  This guidance was provided in the context  of  the
         children of foreign criminals caught by s. 117C of the 2002 Act but
         applies mutatis mutandis to other children.

     13. When the decision is read  as  a  whole,  I  accept  Ms  Meredith's
         submission that the FTT was fully aware of the practical reality  -
         A was unlikely to return  to  Pakistan  with  her  mother  for  the
         foreseeable future and even if she did, her  mother  would  not  be
         willing to facilitate contact.  After all,  the  FTT  accepted  the
         appellant's evidence in its entirety.  Those factual findings  have
         not been the subject of any cross-appeal.  Although the FTT did not
         say so expressly, I am satisfied that when the decision is read  as
         a whole, the FTT accepted the appellant's case  (as  summarised  at
         [9] - [10]) that the appellant's removal would mean  that  he  lost
         contact with A.  In the circumstances, the FTT was entitled to find
         that the practical reality for A engendered by her father's removal
         would be a separation between them for an  uncertain  but  probably
         prolonged  period  of  time,  and  given  the  strength  of   their
         relationship and  her  best  interests,  this  would  result  in  a
         disproportionate breach of Article 8.



Notice of decision

The FTT decision does not contain an error of  law  and  I  do  not  set  it
aside.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Melanie Plimmer                  Dated:

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     23 September 2020

