
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09599/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd February 2019                |On 11th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and by the consent of the parties, the following order is made:

      i) Upon the parties' agreement that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal promulgated on 5th October 2018 discloses a material error
         of law, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law in relation to the
         complaints made in the first Ground of Appeal drafted on behalf  of
         the Secretary of State in the following respects as agreed  between
         the parties today:

          a) In considering the new matter  of  the  Appellant's  Christian
             faith as raised previously by the Appellant's  representatives
             which resulted in the adjournment  of  the  previously  listed
             hearing on 20th June 2018  and  resulted  in  the  Appellant's
             solicitors' letter sent to the Respondent  on  3rd  July  2018
             seeking consent for that matter to be considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal pursuant to Section 85(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and further to the Presenting
             Officer's  stance  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  26th
             September 2018 that consent was withheld, it is agreed by  the
             parties that the judge erred in  considering  the  new  matter
             under Section 85(5) and Section 85(6)  of  the  2002  Act  as;
             whether or not there were special circumstances, and,  whether
             or not it was unreasonable of the Secretary of State to refuse
             consent for this new  matter  to  be  considered,  whilst  the
             Secretary of State had indicated that he refused  consent  for
             the matter to be considered, as observed by the Upper Tribunal
             in Mahmud (s..85 NIAA 2002 - new matters:  Iran)  [2017]  UKUT
             488 (IAC), specifically at [40], the reasonableness or not  of
             the Secretary of State in withholding consent for  the  First-
             tier Tribunal to consider a new matter can only be  challenged
             by way of judicial review proceedings.

          b) There is no power for the First-tier Tribunal,  or  the  Upper
             Tribunal to determine whether the Respondent has appropriately
             or fairly withheld consent, which is a matter that is open  to
             an Appellant to challenge by way of a judicial review claim on
             public law grounds.  Albeit the construction of Section  85(5)
             and (6) may result in scenarios whereby  the  Tribunal  cannot
             consider new matters because the Secretary of  State  has  not
             given consent to do so, which may be relevant  or  germane  to
             the proportionality of a human rights appeal (as was the  case
             here), this is a matter which is beyond the remit of the First-
             tier  Tribunal  and  Upper   Tribunal   given   the   peculiar
             construction of the 2002  Act  and  the  power  given  to  the
             Secretary of State to withhold consent to a new  matter  being
             considered by the Tribunal, even though this may give rise  to
             unreasonableness or unfairness or irrationality, as  the  case
             may be.

          c) Mr Walker was not without sympathy  for  the  Appellant  given
             that the Respondent had an explicit opportunity and the matter
             had been adjourned so that the Respondent could  consider  the
             new matter raised by the Appellant in terms of  his  Christian
             faith and the viability of  his  return  to  Afghanistan,  and
             quite rightly so.

          d) As a consequence, the parties invited me to make  a  direction
             in respect of the need for the  Secretary  of  State  to  give
             attention to this matter and to reach a firm written  view  as
             to whether or not he withholds consent to the new matter being
             considered, no later than  three  weeks  before  the  remitted
             hearing.

          e) I add that should there be any failure  to  do  so  on  yet  a
             further second opportunity being given to  the  Respondent  to
             consider the new matter, given the inconvenience  and  expense
             that  the  Appellant  has  been  unnecessarily  put  to  as  a
             consequence of the  Respondent's  failure  to  make  a  formal
             written decision in this matter as to whether or not  to  give
             consent to the new matter being considered,  pursuant  to  the
             Appellant's representatives letter  of  3rd  July  2018,  such
             further failure would likely have costs consequences  for  the
             Respondent.

    iii) As a consequence of the above agreed error,  the  decision  is  set
         aside in its entirety and is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard by a differently constituted bench.

 2. The Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
    allowed.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error by
    consent.



Directions

 4. I make the following  directions  for  the  continuation  and  remitted
    hearing that is to shortly follow before the First-tier Tribunal:

      i) The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Hatton Cross.

     ii) A Dari interpreter is required.

    iii) The Appellant and the Reverend  are  to  be  called  once  more  as
         witnesses.

     iv) The time estimate given is two hours.

      v) I direct that the Secretary of State indicate whether  he  consents
         or objects  to  the  new  matter  being  heard  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, along with reasons for that decision, no later than three
         weeks prior to the date of the remitted hearing.  The  Respondent's
         decision and reasons are to be filed with the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and served upon the Appellant in accordance with that time period.

     vi) The remitted appeal is not to be listed before six weeks  from  the
         date of promulgation of this decision.

 5. Anonymity direction hereby made at the parties' request.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
