
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09055/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 08 February 2019                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                   mr Nandlal Alias Nirmal Shyam Chhabria
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born on 29  October  1981.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  him  leave  to
    remain dated 7 April 2018.

 2. Judge G D Davison (the judge) allowed the appeal in a decision dated 19
    November 2018.  The judge found there was a difference between the late
    filing of a return and dishonest filing.  The  Presenting  Officer  for
    the respondent accepted at the hearing that the  information  given  to
    UKVI and HMRC was the same.  There was no issue that the appellant  had
    earned the money in question.  Applying Khan (Dishonesty,  tax  return,
    paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC) the judge found that  he  had
    not acted dishonestly rather, he was simply overwhelmed and in time, he
    notified HMRC and paid the tax owed without penalty such that paragraph
    322(5) was applied by the respondent incorrectly.  That was because  at
    worst, the appellant was only guilty of filing his accounts late.

 3. The grounds claimed that the judge made a mistake as to a material fact
    and made a material misdirection in law.

 4. The Presenting Officer's note at the hearing said:

         "I submitted that by his own evidence the appellant had left the UK
         on 31/12/2009 at a time when his leave to remain  had  expired  and
         was subsequently refused entry  clearance  at  the  BHC  Mumbai  on
         05/02/2010."

 5. The appellant left the UK on 31 December 2009 on his own  evidence  and
    did not make an entry clearance  application  within  28  days  of  his
    previous leave expiring.  In actual  fact,  the  appellant's  leave  to
    remain had expired on 23 November 2009 so even if the appellant's  date
    of leaving the UK was taken as 5 January 2010, that was still after the
    appellant's leave to remain had expired.  As a result, the judge  erred
    in making a mistake as to the time period after the  appellant's  leave
    expired which had materially affected the outcome of the appeal as  the
    28  day  period,  permitted  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  had  been
    incorrectly calculated.

 6. Further, the  judge  erred  because  he  failed  to  follow  Khan  when
    assessing if the appellant's behaviour in failing to  provide  his  tax
    return could be viewed as dishonesty.  Headnote (iv) of Khan says:

         "For an applicant simply to blame his  or  her  accountant  for  an
         'error' in relation to the historical tax return will  not  be  the
         end of the matter, given that the accountant will  or  should  have
         asked the taxpayer to confirm that the return was accurate  and  to
         have signed the tax return.  Furthermore the  applicant  will  have
         known of his or her earnings and will  have  expected  to  pay  tax
         thereon.  If the applicant does not take steps within a  reasonable
         time to remedy  the  situation,  the  Secretary  of  State  may  be
         entitled to conclude that this failure justifies a conclusion  that
         there has been deceit or dishonesty."

 7. At [23](ii) of the decision the judge said:

         "The appellant should have been on top of his financial  situation,
         but the documents in the bundle, particularly those referenced  'G'
         show the financial pressures and struggles he  was  under  at  this
         time.  It is to his credit that  he  sought  to  resolve  the  mess
         created in his business by the global financial  crisis.   But  the
         Tribunal did not find him to be acting dishonestly, he  was  simply
         overwhelmed, in time he did notify HMRC and has paid the  tax  owed
         without penalty (save interest charges)."

 8. The Secretary of State argued following the rationale in Khan that  the
    appellant was fully aware of his earnings and the fact  that  he  would
    have to pay tax on those earnings.  The appellant did not resolve  that
    issue within a reasonable timescale, waiting until 2016  to  ensure  he
    met his tax liabilities such that he deliberately and knowingly avoided
    meeting his tax liabilities at the time, regardless of  the  fact  that
    his business was in trouble.  That could only be seen  as  a  dishonest
    act when applying the guidance in Khan, as  the  appellant  would  have
    benefited financially from not paying taxes owed at  the  time.   As  a
    result,  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  by  finding  that  the
    appellant's deliberate failure to declare earnings to HMRC  was  not  a
    dishonest act but something done due to the  pressure  of  his  failing
    business.

 9. Judge Grimmett granted permission to appeal on 28  December  2018.   He
    said inter alia:

         "2.  There appears to be an issue as  to  the  date  on  which  the
             appellant left the UK, whether it was 31 December 2009 as  the
             respondent says or January 2010 but  in  either  event  it  is
             arguable that after the appellant left the 28  day  period  in
             which he could re-apply was not met."

10. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

11. Mr Clarke said there was confusion regarding  the  date  the  appellant
    left the United Kingdom but that it was beyond doubt that he could  not
    have left before 5 January 2009 because he was  only  handed  back  his
    passport on that day.  Mr Clarke acknowledged ground 1  was  in  error.
    The guidance was inconsistent with the  Rules.   Mr  Clarke  sought  to
    amend the grounds which Mr Muquit challenged.  I offered Mr Clarke  the
    opportunity to apply for an adjournment so the grounds could be amended
    and served upon the appellant, which he declined on issues of costs.

12. As to the challenge that the judge had made a material misdirection  in
    law, Mr Clarke relied upon the grounds.  Mr Muquit submitted that  this
    was not a case where the accountant had been blamed as  in  Khan.   The
    judge was entitled to reach the decision he did such that  he  did  not
    err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. The judge might well have been generous in the findings he made at [19]-
    [24] but the facts in this case can clearly be distinguished from those
    in Khan.  In the circumstances, the judge was entitled to conclude that
    the appellant had not carried out a dishonest act and that the omission
    was one of  error,  having  been  overwhelmed  by  events  and  without
    dishonest intention.  That was a conclusion the judge was  entitled  to
    come to on the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

The judge's decision reveals no error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
