

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09931/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reason Promulgated    |
|on 17 October 2018                        |on 8 November 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     QAV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Howard promulgated on 6 June 2018 in which the Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.





Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on  12th  February  1968
        who is the subject of an order for his deportation from the  United
        Kingdom following his conviction on 26 August 2016 at Perth Sheriff
        Court of assault with a statutory aggravate of domestic abuse,  for
        which he was sentenced to 42 months  imprisonment,  reduced  to  36
        months on appeal.
     3. The appellant asserted that his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
        will breach his human rights pursuant to article 8 ECHR outside the
        Immigration Rules. Such claim was refused by the respondent  on  24
        April 2018  and  on  25  April  2015  the  respondent  refused  the
        applicant's protection claim on the basis he had not established  a
        well-founded fear of being persecuted if returned to Vietnam. It is
        the appeal against these decisions which came before the Judge.
     4. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge sets out findings  of  fact  from  [22]  of  the
        decision under appeal. The Judge did not find the appellant to be a
        credible witness for the reasons set  out  at  [24  -  29]  of  the
        decision. The  Judge  found  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
        appellant's inconsistencies in his claim  and  his  behaviour  when
        engaged with the respondent led to rejection of the appellant as  a
        credible witness. The Judge also found the appellant had not made a
        genuine  effort  to  substantiate  his  claim  in  accordance  with
        paragraph 339L(i) the Immigration Rules.
     5. At [32] the Judge confirms the  appellant's  narrative  account  of
        being persecuted for failing to do his duty when requested  by  the
        army was rejected as not being credible, which was the  only  basis
        on which the protection claim was based.
     6. The Judge, having dismiss  the  protection  claim,  considered  the
        human rights claim noting the appellant has a wife and son who are,
        for the time being, in the United  Kingdom  with  leave  to  remain
        until 11 June 2018.
     7. At [40-42] the Judge records the following:


             40.  The appellant was convicted of an offence that ultimately
                  resulted in the immediate  term  of  imprisonment  for  36
                  months. The respondent relies upon the appellant's removal
                  being conducive to the  public  good  and  in  the  public
                  interest because of the single conviction  secured  before
                  the Perth Sheriffs Court. The  appellant  pleaded  guilty.
                  The sentencing judge heard that the appellant slapped  his
                  wife about the face until her vision  became  blurred.  He
                  then repeatedly kicked her to her body shouting "I'm going
                  to kill you". He then grabbed her by the hair and  dragged
                  her through  the  bedroom  where  the  children  were.  He
                  continued to assault her in  front  of  the  children.  He
                  twisted her arm causing friction burns to them.   He  then
                  kicked her  to  the  body  before  holding  her  down  and
                  attempting to suffocate her  by squeezing her  throat  and
                  holding her nose for two minutes.  All the  time  she  was
                  struggling to break free.  He  released  his  grip  before
                  pinning her to the bed holding the duvet over her face  in
                  an attempt to suffocate her  all  the  time  shouting  I'm
                  going to kill you. The assault lasted thirty minutes.  The
                  appellant  and  his  wife  now  seek   to   minimise   the
                  seriousness of the assault. I  reject  those  attempts  at
                  minimisation.  The  appellant  pleaded  guilty   and   was
                  sentenced on the facts as I have set them out above.


             41.  Following his arrest the appellant was bailed.  His  wife
                  stated that one of the conditions was that he not  contact
                  the children, as she put it because  "he  was  accused  of
                  hitting me". There is no doubt  an  address  to  which  he
                  moved is a Bournemouth address. It has been said this  was
                  his  girlfriend's  address.  The  appellant  refutes   the
                  suggestion  the  woman  was  his  girlfriend  although  he
                  accepts the children called him "daddy". Both he  and  his
                  wife refer to her as such in their witness statements.


             42.  Whether that is the case matters not. What  is  clear  is
                  that the appellant and his wife set about reconciling. The
                  events between his being arrested  and  sentenced  require
                  careful consideration. The appellant's wife told  me  that
                  following the appellant's  arrest  she  and  the  children
                  moved to Manchester. There she met with the appellant.  In
                  January 2016 she travelled to Vietnam leaving the children
                  with  the  appellant.  There  are   two   notes   on   the
                  respondent's system about events in  Manchester.  What  is
                  clear is that following her departure  the  children  were
                  taken into the care  of  Manchester  Children's  Services.
                  Harry had a nonaccidental injury about  which  I  know  no
                  more. The appellant's wife was contacted  in  Vietnam  and
                  returned in mid-February.


     8. The Judge noted that following the appellants  wife's  return  both
        the  appellant  and  his  wife  appeared  to  be  living   in   the
        Middlesbrough area and at [44] that the appellant's  wife  said  in
        her evidence there was a plan with social services  concerning  her
        children. They are not in care, but she has signed a contract  with
        social services such that the appellant is not allowed to see them.
        There is  a  prohibition  on  his  seeing  the  children  an  issue
        substantiated  by  his  advocate  in  the  Perth  proceedings   who
        commented that the appellant was seeking to obtain contact  to  the
        children and that there are 'ongoing matters down  south  which  he
        requires to attend'.
     9. The appellant's evidence was that he had not instituted proceedings
        in the Family Court but lodged complaints about the conduct of  his
        Scottish advocate and named social workers.
    10. The Judge finds at [51] he was not satisfied  it  is  in  the  best
        interests of the children to live as a family  with  the  appellant
        and that that had been the conclusion of  social  services  without
        challenge for two years now. The Judge finds  the  children's  best
        interests are to continue to live with their mother,  a  conclusion
        of social services, albeit with supervision.
    11. The Judge concludes that the public interest  requires  deportation
        and none of the exceptions found in UK Borders  Act  apply  to  the
        appellant. The Judge also finds no very  significant  obstacles  to
        the appellant's integration into Vietnam have been  identified.  At
        [56] the Judge finds:


             56.  He has committed a serious offence in the United Kingdom,
                  assault in the context of  domestic  violence.  It  has  a
                  social impact upon the wider  public.  The  appellant  has
                  knowingly and wilfully breached  the  law  in  the  UK.  I
                  assess the appellant as posing a threat  to  the  personal
                  safety and well-being of the general public on  the  basis
                  of his known offending.


    12. The Judge concludes there  are  no  very  compelling  circumstances
        which outweigh the public interest in the appellant being  deported
        and that, therefore, the appeal must fail.
    13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a single  ground  that
        the Judge erred by failing to give weight to the appellant's family
        life. The Grounds of Appeal assert,  inter  alia,  the  appellant's
        family life continues and that he wishes to sort out  contact  with
        his child and stepchild and seek leave to remain, so  he  can  sort
        out contact with his children. The appellant  states  that  despite
        the serious nature of his conviction he is reconciled with his wife
        and that he will not be able to see the children if he is  deported
        to Vietnam. The appellant claims that the finding he poses a threat
        to the personal safety and well-being of the general public is  not
        supported by evidence as the attack of his wife was a "one-off' and
        that is his only conviction.
    14. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal on 22 June 2018.



Error of law


    15. Ms Record relied on  two  issues,  the  first  being  an  assertion
        evidence in the Home Office  bundle  contained  false  information.
        This refers  to  a  letter  provided  by  the  appellant  from  the
        Vietnamese Embassy dated March 2016 which is said  to  support  the
        appellant's claim that is not entitled to a passport. It is  argued
        that  this  is  a  relevant  issue  which  could  make  a  material
        difference to the outcome.
    16. The Judge considered the evidence from all sources which would have
        included that provided by the respondent  in  the  refusal  letter.
        There is no dispute that the appellant is a citizen of Vietnam  and
        therefore not stateless. The  respondent's  position  is  that  the
        appellant should be deported from the United Kingdom  to  his  home
        country for which, even if he does not have a  valid  passport,  he
        can be removed on an emergency travel document. If the appellant is
        undocumented and cannot be returned that may give rise to  concerns
        at a later date but does not, in itself, give rise to an issue that
        impacts upon the adverse credibility findings. Those findings  were
        arrived at by a  proper  consideration  of  the  evidence  and  are
        adequately reasoned. They are sufficient  to  support  the  Judge's
        concerns in this respect.  I do not find this establishes  arguable
        legal error material to the Judge's conclusions.
    17. The chronology attached to the front sheet prepared by the Criminal
        Casework Directorate shows on 25 November 2014 an emergency  travel
        document was agreed by the Vietnamese authorities which is all that
        is needed for the appellant to be returned.
    18. The second ground relates to article 8 in  which  it  is  submitted
        that the Judge did not recognise that the appellant was not granted
        bail earlier but now he has he can make an application to  see  his
        children. It was argued there will  be  no  supervised  contact  in
        Vietnam and that the appeal should have been allowed on  article  8
        grounds to enable the appellant to pursue options available to  him
        through the UK courts.
    19. The Judge property records that at the date of  the  hearing  there
        were no applications made by the appellant even if he had  remained
        in detention until his release which must have been  prior  to  the
        appellant's wife going to Vietnam as this  is  when  she  left  the
        children with him.
    20. Even though article 8 contains a positive obligation upon the State
        to enable the  maintenance  and  development  of  family  life  the
        proportionality assessment in any cases where  this  is  the  issue
        arises is to be undertaken in exactly the same manner as  in  other
        human rights cases.
    21. The Judge carefully considered  the  available  evidence  with  the
        required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  weighing   up   competing
        arguments, before concluding that the public interest warrants  the
        appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.
    22. The appellant may disagree with this conclusion but the  suggestion
        the public interest was somehow reduced on the basis the  appellant
        may at some point in the future do  something  that  might  have  a
        particular result has not been shown to  establish  arguable  legal
        error. The conclusion by the Judge that, notwithstanding this being
        an assault by the appellant upon his  wife  in  relation  to  which
        there is a strong deterrent argument, the appellant posed a risk to
        the public is in accordance with the evidence the Judge  was  asked
        to consider and has not been shown to be irrational.
    23. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out sufficient to warrant a grant of  permission  to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 October 2018












