
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers: HU/09093/2016
                                                               HU/09091/2016



|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House                |  |Decision & Reasons promulgated     |
|On       |19 March 2018              |       On 6 April  |                   |
|         |                           |2018               |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |[K S]                                             |             |
|           |[I W]                                             |Appellants   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer (ECO), Pretoria           |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms  T  Mershed,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Caveat
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions

 1. The appellants are twin brothers, born on [ ] 2002. They are  nationals
    of Uganda. They have been granted permission to appeal the decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  A  Khan  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 13 July 2017  following  a  hearing  on  22  June  2017,
    dismissed their appeals against  decisions  of  the  respondent  of  26
    February 2016 to refuse their applications for entry clearance in order
    to join their father, a Mr [BS] (hereafter the  "sponsor"),  a  Ugandan
    national, in the United Kingdom as his dependent children.

 2. The respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility for the upbringing of the appellants or that there  were
    serious and compelling family or other considerations which made  their
    exclusion undesirable. The respondent therefore refused the appellants'
    applications under para 297(i) (e) and (f) of the Statement of  Changes
    in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  (hereafter  referred  to
    individually as a "Rule" and collectively the  "Rules").  In  addition,
    the respondent was not satisfied that the decision in each case was  in
    breach of Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("ECHR").

 3. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  Ground 1 is that the judge  misapprehended  the  evidence  of  the
         sponsor in two material respects. Ground 1 contends as follows:

         (a)  The sponsor had not said in oral evidence, as  the  judge  had
             stated, that the appellants' mother  visits  them  once  every
             three months at their boarding school. It  is  said  that  the
             sponsor had in fact given evidence that the mother  "has  gone
             to the school and visited them, once in three months there are
             visitation rights"; and that, when he was in Uganda  in  2016,
             the appellants told him that they last  saw  their  mother  in
             2015. Accordingly, the  grounds  contend  that  the  sponsor's
             evidence before the judge was that the school  had  visitation
             days once every 3 months and not that the  appellants'  mother
             visited them once every 3 months.

         (b)  The sponsor had not said at the  hearing,  as  the  judge  had
             stated, that the appellants' mother left the  appellants  with
             his (the sponsor's mother) and "went off  for  work  reasons".
             His evidence was that "she got  married  and  moved  away  and
             later she started work".

         The grounds contend that, given the judge's reasoning  in  relation
         to both (a) and (b), the judge's misapprehension  of  the  evidence
         was material to his finding that the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
         responsibility.

    (ii) Ground 2 is that the judge's decision is riddled with spelling and
         grammatical errors, the number and nature of which are such that:

         (a)  they cumulatively diminish the faith that the appellants  have
             that their  appeals  have  been  considered  with  appropriate
             scrutiny and care; and/or

         (b)  the judge's decision falls so far short of the  standard  that
             an appellant is entitled to expect in a judicial decision that
             it  cannot  be  allowed   to   stand   without   significantly
             undermining the reputation of the  Tribunal  itself.  In  this
             respect, the grounds rely upon the judgment of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844.

    (iii)    Ground 3 is that the judge misdirected himself in reaching his
         finding on the sole responsibility  issue.  In  this  respect,  the
         ground refers to paras 21 and 22 of the judge's decision  where  he
         relied upon the sponsor's evidence that he maintained contact  with
         the appellants' mother once or twice a year. On the basis  of  this
         evidence,  the  judge  found  that  the  only  reason  the  sponsor
         maintained contact with his ex-partner was  because  she  had  some
         responsibility for the appellants and he therefore found  that  the
         sponsor  had  not  demonstrated  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
         responsibility for the appellants.

         Ground  3  contends  that,  even  leaving  aside  the   appellants'
         contention that the judge had misapprehended the sponsor's evidence
         as contended in ground 1, the judge erred in reaching  his  finding
         on the sole responsibility issue as follows:

         (a)  he appeared to think (incorrectly) that the test  was  whether
             the appellants'  mother  had  abandoned  the  appellants  i.e.
             ceased to have any contact with them at all; and

         (b)  in any event, the fact that the sponsor had contact  with  the
             appellants' mother once or twice a year was not evidence  that
             she had responsibility for the appellants.

 4. In support of ground 1, Mr G Lee, of  Counsel,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellants before the judge, submitted a  witness  statement  with  the
    grounds. The sponsor also submitted a witness statement.

 5. I am grateful to Mr Lee who attended the hearing before me in order  to
    give evidence if required. In the event, it was not necessary for me to
    hear oral evidence from Mr Lee, for the reasons given at paras 6-8 and,
    in the alternative, paras 11-14 below.

 6. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law as contended in ground  3  and  that,  on  that
    basis alone, his finding on the sole responsibility issue should be set
    aside.

 7. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in reaching his finding that
    the sponsor had not shown that he had had sole responsibility  for  the
    appellants' upbringing. The judge referred to TD (paragraph  297(i)(e):
    sole responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 (IAC) which  said,  inter
    alia, that where both parents are involved in a child's upbringing,  it
    will be exceptional that one of them  will  have  sole  responsibility.
    However, it is clear that the judge assumed, from the  mere  fact  that
    the sponsor was in contact with the appellants' mother once or twice  a
    year, that  such  contact  meant  that  she  was  involved  with  their
    upbringing. He did not explain why such contact between the sponsor and
    the appellants' mother indicated that  she  had  any  involvement  with
    their upbringing especially given the  sponsor's  evidence  (which  the
    judge did not say that he disbelieved)  that  the  appellants  were  at
    boarding school and that he had chosen their boarding school. The  fact
    that the appellants were in a boarding school means  that  any  finding
    that the mother had responsibility for their day-to-day care would need
    to be clearly explained, which was absent from the judge's reasoning.

 8. I am therefore satisfied that ground 3 is established.  On  this  basis
    alone, I set aside the decision of Judge Khan in its entirety. None  of
    his findings shall stand.

 9. In relation to  the  re-making  of  the  decision  on  the  appellants'
    appeals, I also agree with Ms Mershed and Mr Duffy that the appropriate
    course of action is to remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal. In
    my judgment, para 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration
    and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal
    applies.

10. I informed the parties that, notwithstanding the decision on ground  3,
    I would make a decision on ground 2 given its importance.  I  therefore
    turn to ground 2.

11. Para 12 of the grounds sets out the list of  spelling  and  grammatical
    errors in the judge's decision. I identified  some  additional  errors.
    The errors are follows (the underlining is supplied):

         Para1:   "There were no serious of compelling circumstances..."


         Para 3:  "... that there are serious and  compelling  circumstances
                  for their exclusion undesirable"


         Para 8:  "establsihed" and "family lif"


         Para10:  "sponsor adopted her written witness statement..."


         Para 11: "his sons were on eyear old..."'


                       "the appellants' mother visit them on vistations..."


                       "... he was in Ugnada in 2016"


                  "He said siad..."


         Para 12: "The sponsor said that they boys were enrolled..."


                       "...decisions in thei lives... "'


                       "He said that he  contact  with  the  mother  of  his
                  sons..."


         Para 13: "...the sponsor said his sons are a a Boarding school.."


                       "He said that he has never made and application..."


                       "...cheaper for him to go to Uganda then for them  to
                  come to the UK"


         Para 14: "'...he knows some othe teachers there."


         Para 15: "...ms Chopra."


                       "The sponosr does not have  the  sole  responsibility
                  for his son..."


         Para 16:      "He has choosen schools for his sons..."


                  The appellantds"


         Para 18: "The appellants made applications for entry clearance from
                  the United Kingdom as depends..."


                       "...the appellant do not meet..." [pic]


         Para 19: "...vague and evasive to say the lease."


         Para 20: "The apellants' mother..."


                       "I therefore attach little wait to this letter."


         Para 21: "...the appellants' mother has had no rolw..."


                       "...once or twice a years..."


         Para 24: "I find that he was deliberatly seeking..."


         Para 25: "...th esponsor..."


                       "In order for consideration under Article  8  of  the
                  ECHR, in particular, the compelling compassionate  aspects
                  and ciricumstance, have to be demonstrated."


                  "...for example where the applicant in living..."


                       "will involve inequiry as to wether..."'


                       "...sufficiently serious and comelling..."


         Para 26: "... Justice Blacke..."


                       "...more tha the parties... "


                       "...pwesuasive and powerful..."


                  "...the anaysis..."


                  "Such an inerpretation..."


         Para 27: "Paragraph 35 of the Mundeba..."


                       "The terms od s55 (1) and rhe decision..."


                       "...we have qouted above..."


                  "...set out in the inetrcution..."


                  "...states thw legal positions..."


                       "...spirit if the duty make enquiries"


         Para 28: "...I find that there are no considrable..."


                  "...right to implemint the immigration control..."


                  "...they have been studying in in Boarding school..."


12. Of course, I bear in mind the pressures on  judges  not  only  to  hear
    appeals and write their decisions on a timely basis but also to  ensure
    that evidence is considered with appropriate care and  that  sufficient
    reasons are given for their  findings  of  fact.  Nevertheless,  in  my
    judgement, the sheer catalogue of spelling and  grammatical  errors  in
    the judge's decision, as set out above, is indeed such that I  am  duty
    bound to conclude that, irrespective of ground 3, this decision  simply
    cannot be allowed to stand without risking the reputation of the First-
    tier Tribunal itself. In view of ground 2 which is established,  I  can
    have no confidence in the judge's record or summary  of  the  evidence.
    For this reason, I did not call on Mr Lee to give evidence in  relation
    to this ground.

13. Since ground 1 does not raise the same  serious  issue  concerning  the
    reputation of the Tribunal, I did not consider it necessary to consider
    ground 1 and therefore I did not consider it  necessary  to  hear  oral
    evidence from Mr Lee.

14. In any event, in view of ground 2 which is established, I can  have  no
    confidence in the judge's record or summary of the evidence.

15. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Khan in its entirety.  None
    of his findings shall stand, nor shall his record  or  summary  of  the
    evidence stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  M  A  Khan  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that the decision  is  set  aside  in
its entirety. This case is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing on all issues  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Khan. I consider the quality of the decision is such that I  should
specifically draw it to the attention of the Resident Judge  at  the  First-
tier Tribunal's Hatton Cross hearing centre.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 31 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
