
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09937/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Case Management Hearing              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |On 24 June 2021                      |
|On 10 June 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RRA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L King instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. In a decision sent on 26 June 2019, the Upper Tribunal  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Solly) which had allowed the
    claimant's appeal on human rights grounds (Art 8) following a  decision
    to deport him as a foreign national criminal.  The appeal was adjourned
    and directed that the appeal be re-listed to be re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal after 1 October 2019, that date was  in  order  to  allow  the
    claimant's representatives to obtain further evidence.

 2. The appeal was relisted on 13 February 2020 but was  adjourned  at  the
    request of the claimant's (then) recently instructed new solicitors.  A
    relisted hearing date of 7 April 2020 was vacated in the light  of  the
    lockdown during to Covid-19.  The hearing was relisted on 18 March 2021
    but  was  adjourned  as  the  claimant  (who  was  then   not   legally
    represented) had not been sent notice of the  hearing  at  his  current
    address.

 3. A Case Management Hearing was listed on 10 June 2021 and held  remotely
    by Microsoft Teams.  The claimant had instructed new solicitors and was
    represented by Ms Lucy King of counsel and the Secretary of  State  was
    represented by Mr Alain Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 4. At the CMH both representatives agreed that given the  period  of  time
    that had elapsed since Judge Solly heard the evidence (and  indeed  the
    error of law hearing before me) there was a need for a fresh evidential
    hearing to determine the current circumstances  of  the  claimant,  his
    partner  and  the  relevant  children.   Ms  King  indicated  that,  in
    addition, to evidence from the claimant,  his  partner  and  (possibly)
    other family members, there was likely to be  evidence  from  a  social
    worker and the school of one of the children.  The evidence was  likely
    to be extensive and subject to cross-examination.

 5. Both representatives indicated that they agreed that, in the  light  of
    these changed circumstances and the impact upon on  the  re-hearing  of
    the appeal, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing rather than retain the appeal in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 6. I agree.  My initial direction that the appeal should  be  retained  on
    the UT was based upon the (then) representatives'  position  that  only
    limited new additional evidence (none oral) would be adduced at the re-
    making hearing.  The effect of the delay - due to change of  solicitors
    and the Covid-19 crisis - is that the appeal  has  to  start  again  in
    order to determine the current circumstances for the  claimant's  human
    rights appeal and that is more appropriately done by  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on Disposal

 7. Consequently, with the agreement of the parties, I  revoke  my  earlier
    direction on disposal of the appeal and,  under  s.12(2(b)(ii)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, I remit the appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  re-hearing  in  accordance  with  my
    directions below.

Directions

      1) The First-tier Tribunal's decision (Judge Solly) was set  aside  by
         my decision sent on 26 June 2019.

      2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at  the  Newport
         Hearing Centre for a de novo rehearing before a  judge  other  than
         Judge Solly.

      3) The parties agree that the appeal should not  be  listed  before  1
         October 2021 in order to allow the claimant's  new  representatives
         to obtain and file additional new evidence.

      4) The parties indicated that it would be desirable for the First-tier
         Tribunal to hold a CMR hearing 4 weeks before the listed hearing in
         order to ensure the parties are ready to proceed and  to  determine
         whether the hearing should be held remotely or  be  a  face-to-face
         hearing.  I agree.  The FtT is invited to list the appeal for a CMR
         accordingly.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                16 June 2021

