
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/09073/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 November 2018                |On 12 December 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RAZIA BANO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim (counsel) instructed by M-R solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego,  promulgated  on  11/07/2018
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14/08/1979 and is a national  of  Pakistan.  On
18/08/2017 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Housego ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  08/10/2018  Judge  Lambert
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia


      2. The issue was whether the appellant had continued to  have  section
      3C leave following  an  application  made  on  17  February  2017  for
      administrative review of a refusal of tier 1 general  ILR.  The  Judge
      found the original application to have remained live, by virtue of the
      respondent's agreement on judicial review to reconsider a decision  of
      4 February 2017  to  refuse  the  tier  1  application.  The  decision
      concludes that the appellant's lawful residence remained uninterrupted
      until the appeal was determined; she could meet the immigration  rules
      and therefore there was a breach of article 8.


      3. The grounds take issue with the findings made by the Judge  on  the
      same basis as argued at the hearing. The primary issue appears  to  be
      whether and at what point the original application has  been  decided;
      and whether on the facts of  this  case  the  scenario  under  section
      3C(2)(d) applied, or whether there was  an  extension  of  section  3C
      leave under section 3C(2)(a)-(c). It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
      reasoning in particular the analogy  drawn  at  paragraph  31-32  with
      employment law may be in error.


      4. There is therefore an  arguable  error  of  law  disclosed  by  the
      application.

The Hearing

5. For the respondent, Mr Bramble  adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He read from the Home Office guidance, which  the  Judge  quotes  at
[25] of the decision. He took me to [31] to [33] of the  decision  and  told
me that there the Judge misinterprets the provisions of section  3C  of  the
1971 Act. He told me that if the Judge had properly interpreted  section  3C
of the 1971 Act the appellant could not  have  succeeded.  He  asked  me  to
allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6. For the  appellant,  Mr  Nasim  told  me  that  the  respondent  has  now
reconsidered the decision made in February 2017. The respondent has  adhered
to that decision and the appellant  has  again  applied  for  administrative
review  of  the  fresh  decision.  He  took  me  through  the   history   of
applications and told me that the appellant  has  enjoyed  leave  to  remain
throughout the entirety of her time  UK,  and  that  section  3C  leave  was
created by the application made on 8 January 2016. He told  me  that,  as  a
matter of fact, at the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
the appellant was awaiting a decision on the  application  made  in  January
2016. He took me through the decision and told me that the Judge's logic  is
flawless and that his interpretation of  section  3C(2)(a)  is  correct.  He
emphasised that the appellant enjoyed leave  because  of  the  operation  of
section3C(2)(a), and told me that the grounds  of  appeal  are  misconceived
because they focus on s3C(2)(d), from which the appellant does not benefit.

7. At the conclusion of the hearing both Mr  Bramble  and  Mr  Nasim  agreed
that the question I have to answer is whether or not there is a gap  between
the respondent's administrative review decision of 17  March  2017  and  the
start of judicial review proceedings on  3  May  2017,  and,  if  there  is,
whether  the  gap  is  bridged  by  the  outcome  of  the  judicial   review
proceedings.

Analysis

8. The history of the appellant's applications is accurately set out by  the
Judge at [2] of the decision. The  respondent's  position  has  always  been
that the appellant's lawful residence ended on 17 March 2017. It  is  beyond
dispute that the appellant entered  the  UK  on  9  August  2007.  She  made
various applications which were granted & which resulted in leave between  9
August 2007 and 11 January 2016.

9. On 5 October 2015 the appellant made an application for indefinite  leave
to remain which the respondent refused on  8  October  2015.  The  appellant
applied for administrative review of that decision because it did not  carry
a right of appeal. The respondent adhered to  the  decision  on  4  November
2015.

10. On 8 January 2016 the appellant made a second  application  for  tier  1
general indefinite leave to remain. The respondent refused that  application
on 4 February 2017. The respondent's decision  did  not  carry  a  right  of
appeal. The appellant unsuccessfully sought  administrative  review.  On  17
March 2017 the respondent adhered to the decision.

11. On 29 March 2017 the appellant  submitted  an  application  for  further
leave to remain. On 5 August 2017 the  appellant  submitted  an  application
for settlement on the  basis  of  10  years  long  residence.  It  was  that
application which led to the decision under appeal dated 18 August 2017.

12.  On 3 May  2017  the  appellant  applied  for  judicial  review  of  the
decision of 4 February 2017. On 11 January 2018 the Upper  Tribunal  made  a
consent order, sealed on 16 January 2018, recording that the respondent  has
agreed to reconsider his decision of 4 February 2017 within three months  of
the date on which evidence is submitted. At the date of hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal, that process  was  ongoing  so  that  at  the  date  of
hearing there was no decision on that reconsideration.

13. The Judge took the view that the judicial review  proceedings  kept  the
application made on 8 January 2016 alive. The respondent still  argues  that
the 3C leave dependent on the application of 8  January  2016  ended  on  17
March 2017, when the respondent adhered to the decision of 4 February 2017.

14. s. 3C of the 1971 Act says


       Continuation of leave pending variation decision


           (1) This section applies if-


           (a) a person who has limited leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State  for  variation
           of the leave,


           (b) the application for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
           expires, and


           (c) the leave expires  without  the  application  for  variation
           having been decided.


           (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section  during  any
           period when-


           (a)  the  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
           withdrawn,


           (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum and
           Immigration Act 2002 could be brought while the appellant is  in
           the United Kingdom against the decision on the  application  for
           variation (ignoring any possibility of an  appeal  out  of  time
           with permission),


           (c) an appeal under that section against that decision,  brought
           while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is pending (within
           the meaning of section 104 of that Act).


           (d) an administrative review of the decision on the  application
           for variation-


                 (i) could be sought, or


                 (ii) is pending.


           (3) Leave extended by virtue of this section shall lapse if  the
           applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

15.  Home Office policy Guidance states that

      (a) Where there is a judicial  review  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      refusal to grant permission  to  appeal,  the  person  will  not  have
      section 3C leave while the claim is brought, or if it  is  successful,
      even if the outcome  means  that  an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      proceeds.
      (b) Where a decision is withdrawn by the Secretary of  State  and  the
      person  has  section  3C  leave  because  of  a  pending   appeal   or
      administrative review, their section 3C leave will continue  but  will
      revert to leave under section 3C (2)(a) instead of section 3C(2)(b) as
      a decision on the original application will be outstanding.
      (c) Where the decision is withdrawn after section 3C leave has come to
      an end, withdrawal of the decision does not mean that the person  once
      again has section 3C leave. This is because section 3C leave can arise
      and exist only where it is a seamless continuation  of  leave,  either
      extant leave or section 3C leave. Where  there  is  a  break  in  that
      leave, such that section 3C leave has come to an end, section 3C leave
      cannot be resurrected.
16. Section 3C is written in straightforward terms. It  is  argued  for  the
appellant that the Judge was  correct  to  find  that  the  appellant  meets
s.3C(2)(a). The Judge finds at [27] that the focus  is  on  s.3C(2)(a).  The
error that the Judge makes is at [29] and [30] where the  Judge  finds  that
the judicial review procedure breathed new life into  the  application  made
on 8 January 2016, so that the application had not been  "finally  decided".
At [30] the Judge imports the word "finally" into s.3C(2)(a).

18. The word finally does not feature in section 3C(2)(a) of the  1971  act.
S.3C(2)(a) says

       (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any period
       when-


            (a) the  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
            withdrawn,

19. The  appellant's  application  was  decided  on  17  March  2017,  after
administrative review, when the respondent adhered  to  the  decision  of  4
February 2017. The fact that the appellant's judicial review  procedure  met
with some degree of success does not revive s.3C leave which has come to  an
end.  There  is  no  provision  for  reviving  s.3C  leave,   although   the
respondent's guidelines instruct the respondent to treat the termination  of
s.3C leave as nothing more than neutral in this appellant's circumstances.

20. The fact that the  respondent  will  not  consider  the  termination  of
section 3C leave  as  a  negative  factor  in  the  reconsideration  of  the
decision of 4 February 2017 does not alter the wording, meaning  or  effect,
of section 3C of the 1971 act. The Judge falls into material  error  of  law
at [29] and [30] of the decision. That error renders [31]  to  [33]  of  the
decision irrelevant, and fatally undermines the conclusion at [34].

21. The appellant  cannot  rely  on  section  3C(2)(d).  The  administrative
review of decision could not be sought and was not pending between 17  March
2017 and  3  May  2017.  That  gap  between  the  conclusion  of  the  first
administrative review and the start of judicial review  proceedings  brought
section 3C leave to an end. There  is  a  finality  in  the  termination  of
section 3C leave. It  cannot  be  revived  by  success  in  judicial  review
proceedings.

22. Because the decision contains a material error of law, I set  it  aside.
The appellant's article 8  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal  have  not  been  fully
considered. I cannot substitute my  own  decision.  A  further  fact-finding
exercise is necessary to carry out proper proportionality assessment.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

23. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

24. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

25. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Housego.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 11 July 2018. The appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



