
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09083/2016

                                HU/09087/2016

                                HU/09088/2016

                                HU/09092/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2018                          |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                Mrs A G patel
                                Mr G V Patel
                                     +2
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jaqviss, instructed by Bespoke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant and proceedings

 1. The appellants are Indian citizens. They appeal with permission granted
    at the First-tier Tribunal, decisions of Judge Manyara  promulgated  on
    03 July 2017 in which the judge dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
    refusal of their human rights applications. The first appellant came to
    the UK as a student in 2008, her husband followed as her dependent. The
    couple have two children, the eldest child was born on [ ] 2009 and the
    youngest on [ ] 2013.

 2. The first appellant's student leave was extended until July 2014.  That
    leave was curtailed for non-attendance so  that  it  expired  in  April
    2014. At that point the appellants became overstayers.  An  application
    was made in May 2014 but that  was  refused,  and  an  application  for
    reconsideration rejected on 18 August 2014. There was no  challenge  to
    that decision.  The  couple  did  not  leave,  but  stayed,  supporting
    themselves by working illegally.

 3. In March 2016 they made another application on the same  grounds.  That
    application failed under the Immigration rules because neither  of  the
    adults had any individual basis upon which  they  could  expect  to  be
    allowed to remain. They  could  not  satisfy  the  adult  Private  Life
    requirements because there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  their
    returning to India, and they could not satisfy the Family Life parental
    route, not least because both parents and children would be leaving  as
    a family unit. The children could not satisfy the  child  Private  Life
    requirements because neither had obtained the  gateway  requirement  of
    seven years residence, being only five and two years old at the time.

 4. The appellants appealed to the Ft-T. Counsel did not argue  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the parents  reintegrating  to  India.
    The appellants raised a new argument: that due to the passage  of  time
    since refusal the adults were, by the time of the hearing  on  03  July
    2017, parents of a  child  who  had  obtained  seven  years  residence,
    relevant to s117B (6) of the Nationality and Immigration  Act  2002.  I
    pause to note that whilst that did not provide the  child  any  Private
    Life entitlement  to  remain  under  the  rules,  because  the  gateway
    requirements are fixed to the date of application, the  position  under
    the rules is not necessarily the complete answer in an Article 8  case,
    and because the adults now had a child  who  had  reached  seven  years
    residence,   and  so  came  within  the  gateway  requirement  of   the
    qualifying child definition set out at  s117  of  the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2002, there needed to be a  consideration of whether it
    was reasonable to expect the eldest child, a daughter to relocate.

 5. Before the Ft-T it was argued that removal of the family would  now  be
    disproportionate because it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    eldest child to relocate given her long residence and integration here,
    the lack of any family with whom the family could live  in  India,  and
    difficulties with her continuing her education in India as she did  not
    speak Gujarati.

 6. The judge began by assessing the child's best interests and found  them
    to be to stay with her parents, and  concluded  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect her to relocate to India with them,  so  that  the  decision  to
    remove was proportionate.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. In summary the grounds are:
      a) The judge failed to adequately reason the Article  8  dismissal  in
         respect of the position of the eldest child because:
          i) The test in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 is that where  a
             child has obtained  seven  years  residence  that  must  carry
             "significant weight" and that there would need  to  be  strong
             reasons for leave not to be  granted.  There  are  "no  strong
             reasons" in this case.
         ii) The judge failed  to  give  significant  weight  to  the  long
             residence of the child and seems to require strong reasons for
             the child to be  granted  leave  rather  than  the  other  way
             around. This is shown by the judge's concentration on  whether
             there  were  compelling  reasons  requiring  leave,  such   as
             destitution and health issues. Matters which had not  met  the
             threshold of significant obstacles  to  reintegration  of  the
             adults should have been considered again in the context of the
             reasonableness of expecting the eldest child to relocate.
        iii) The judge does not deal with the argument that the removal was
             an interference with the family life the eldest child  enjoyed
             with her paternal aunt, her husband, and their  children  whom
             she saw every week-end.

My consideration and findings

 8. The judge correctly  self-directed  in  terms  at  paragraph  61,  with
    explicit reference to the case of MA (Pakistan) and the passage  relied
    on in the grounds.

 9. The submission that there were no strong reasons in this case for leave
    not to be granted is  extraordinary  because  the  adverse  immigration
    history was not in issue.

10. The judge, in a 21-page decision covers the entire factual matrix  that
    was argued. The judge's starting point was the position of the  parents
    and children under the rules. That is not surprising because s 117 sets
    out that the public interest is in immigration control i.e.  the  rules
    position. The vehicle for the fact finding is the rules at 276 ADE. The
    judge concluded that with the father  having  lived  independently  and
    worked as  an  electrician  in  India,  and  both  having  successfully
    established a life here, working and raising their family, and with the
    mother's education, they could be expected  to  obtain  employment  and
    establish  their  family  and  private  lives  in  India,  and  provide
    adequately  for  their  day  to  day  needs.  Those  findings  are  not
    challenged.

11. The grounds challenge the judge's reference to compelling circumstances
    operating  to  show  that  the  rules  do  not  provide   an   adequate
    consideration of the article 8 position, pointing out that s  117B  (6)
    does not require compelling circumstances.  There is no merit  in  that
    criticism. It fails to read the whole decision. In  substance,  at  the
    point complained about, the judge is very obviously  investigating  the
    respondent's position that  the  rules  provide  the  complete  answer.
    Finding that there is nothing additional in the  parents  position  she
    turns to the position of the eldest child, and recognises that there is
    further consideration required under s 117 B (6).

12. The  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  reference  to  factors  such  as
    destitution and health issues arguing that the bar  has  been  set  too
    high,  akin  to  the  significant  obstacles  test  rather   than   the
    reasonableness of relocation assessment required. There is no merit  in
    that criticism.  The judge is looking at the case  of  EV  Philippines,
    and so deals with the matters flagged up as relevant in  that  decision
    in the language of the decision, but the conclusion  is  not  that  the
    parents will not be destitute but that they are capable of  independent
    living, so that they do not require family  in  India  with  whom  they
    could live. The health reference is simply a statement that  health  is
    not a complicating factor. It is nonsensical to suggest that the  judge
    was setting any preconditions or  requirements  in  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness of relocation of the eldest child.

13. The ground criticising the judge for failure to  expressly  reason  how
    the eldest child's relationships with her UK relatives have been  taken
    into account when looking at the reasonableness of expecting the  child
    to relocate to India, where there is no such family, is without  merit.
    The argument fails to appreciate that the judge  noted  that  the  only
    person who attended was the aunt's husband, and that whilst  there  was
    contact with the family there was nothing beyond normal emotional  ties
    between the two families, who saw each other at  weekends.  I  was  not
    taken to anything specific concerning the eldest child in this  context
    which could have affected the  outcome.  There  is  no  requirement  to
    reason insignificant factors.

14. There is no force in the submission that the judge failed to  give  the
    child's length  of  residence  significant  weight.  Not  only  is  the
    residence referred to time and again, the judge self-directs  correctly
    in terms of the significant weight to be attached  to  that  length  of
    residence.  The judge weighs all the  relevant  factors  including  the
    best-interests assessment and the position on return,  as  against  the
    immigration history of the parents, and concludes that it is reasonable
    to expect the eldest child to leave with her family.

15.  The  decision  is  lengthy  and  at  times,   when   considering   the
    interrelationship of rules, statute and case law, the  reasoning  might
    be described as circuitous, but there is no doubt, reading the decision
    as a whole, that the judge has correctly self-directed  and  reached  a
    conclusion open on the evidence and within the assessment thresholds.

16. The decision reveals no error of law.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  reveals
    no error of law and stands.



Signed                                  Date 14 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

