
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09306/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 15 June 2020        |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 24 June 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD USMAN MASOOD
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 2 September 2019 First-Tier Tribunal Judge Myers  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal.
     2. Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant and granted  by  a
        judge of the Upper Tribunal, on a renewed application, on the basis
        that it was arguable  on  balance  that  the  judge's  decision  is
        inconsistent with the guidance in Balajigiri [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673
        and as a consequence arguably flawed by an error or errors  of  law
        as stated in the appellants grounds.
     3. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic an Initial Hearing listed  for  5
        May 2020 at Manchester was  vacated  and  directions  sent  to  the
        parties indicating the Upper Tribunal was  of  the  view  that  the
        question of whether the Judge had erred in law in a manner  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal could  be  assessed  on  the  papers
        without a hearing. Submissions were invited from the  parties  upon
        this proposed course of action.
     4. On 11 May 2020 a letter was received  from  a  Senior  Home  Office
        Presenting Officer the relevant part of which is in  the  following
        terms:

                    ii.    The respondent does not  oppose  the  appellant's
                           application for permission to appeal in line with
                           the grant of permission by Judge Allen.

     iii.         In addition, from paragraph 16 of  the  determination  the
                           findings are inconsistent  with  regards  to  the
                           appellant's conduct against the evidence that was
                           provided.

                   iv.          The Tribunal are invited  to  determine  the
                           appeal with a fresh oral hearing at the FTT.



Error of law


     5. This is a case in which  an  issue  arose  concerning  an  earnings
        discrepancy between  figures  declared  to  HMRC  and  in  previous
        applications for leave to remain. The Judge  set  out  findings  of
        fact from [14].
     6. The sole ground of refusal of the appellant's application was  that
        pursuant to paragraph 322(5).
     7. The appellants grounds of appeal  identified  issues  such  as  the
        Judge at [16] stating the appellant's evidence lacked coherence yet
        in explaining these concerns finding  the  appellant  had  given  a
        consistent explanation. No reasons are given by the Judge as to why
        the evidence might have lacked coherence.
     8. It is also said the Judge failed to consider the recent decision of
        the Court of Appeal in Balajigiri for which permission was granted.
     9. In light of the acceptance by the Secretary of State of the  errors
        in the decision as outlined in the grant of  permission  to  appeal
        and grounds seeking permission to appeal, which  totally  undermine
        the basis of the decision, I find the Judge has erred in law  in  a
        manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal and  set  the
        Judge's decision aside.
    10. The failure to give proper regard of the guidance of the  Court  of
        Appeal and lack of adequate reasoning means this decision will have
        to be considered afresh by a judge other than Judge Myers. I  remit
        the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford for  this
        purpose. There are no preserved findings.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Judge materially erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Judge. This  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to be  heard  afresh  by  a
        judge other than Judge Myers.





   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 June 2020












