
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 July 2017                     |On 11 August 2017                     |
|Prepared 27 July 2017               |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    Q S S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Jocelyn Sumibcay
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of the Philippines, date of birth [  ]  1977,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  14  October  2015  to
    refuse leave to remain.  His appeal against that decision  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan who, on 30 November 2016,  dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  on
    8 June 2017.

3.   Given the rights of appeal  the  key  issue  was  the  consequence  and
    impact of  proportionality  on  the  Appellant's  compliance  with  the
    Immigration Rules and also the  extent  to  which  the  Judge  properly
    assessed Article 8 ECHR as a consideration since it was a human  rights
    based appeal.  The permission to appeal gave  permission  it  seems  on
    limited grounds but  those  ultimately  are  not  material  or  not  as
    material as might have been the case.

4.   On 29 June 2017 the Respondent made a Rule 24 response.

5.   Given the fact that the Appellant is in  person  and  assisted  by  his
    wife who has done the advocacy on his part, I briefly set out what  has
    been said about the grounds of appeal which plainly were  settled  with
    some help.

6.   The general criticism in ground 1 is  not  without  some  validity  but
    ultimately makes no material difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.
    It is so much more a criticism generally of the care taken by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in dealing with  the  matter.   The  second  ground
    relates to the fact that the Appellant had as at the  date  of  hearing
    undertaken and successfully completed the appropriate English  language
    test.  That information was before the  Judge  and  was  raised  as  an
    issue.  The Judge was provided with a copy of the  certificate  showing
    international  standard  CEFR  level  A1  with  merit  and   that   the
    appropriate exam had therefore been undertaken.  In  the  circumstances
    whilst that had not been completed at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision the fact was given that it was a human rights based appeal  it
    was a relevant consideration in assessing the case.  The  Judge  simply
    did not address it properly and to  that  extent  it  is  now  accepted
    fairly on behalf of the Respondent that the  evidence  was  before  the
    Judge of those matters.

7.   So far as the third ground is concerned,  the  Appellant's  status  was
    precarious and remains precarious even though  he  has  obviously  been
    here a period of time and thus that conclusion by the Judge is  not  an
    error.  However, in considering the Article 8 claim it  is  clear  that
    the Judge failed  to  address,  albeit  it  is  somewhat  limited,  the
    evidence that was advanced showing that the Appellant's stepson  but  a
    family member Mark Lawrence Velasco, date of birth 10 July 1999, was at
    the date of the hearing under 18, he still lives at  home  and  on  the
    evidence it appears that he is  still  effectively,  although  now,  an
    adult dependent on his mother and stepfather.  In  addition,  there  is
    the child Ruth Elaine, date of birth 20 November 2014,  who  has  since
    the date of the Judge's decision become a British national but  was  at
    the time a child in the care  of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife.   The
    Judge's analysis of their best interests which  were  material  to  the
    assessment of proportionality was simply not  addressed.   I  can  only
    assume unfortunately that was the product  of  the  fact  that  neither
    party at the hearing of the appeal was represented and no-one took  the
    Judge to the importance of the issue.  In the alternative, the omission
    is an oversight or a product of other aspects of the way the matter was
    addressed.  In the circumstances Mr Bramble takes the matter no further
    and accepts it is for me to assess the position.

8.   I have formed the view that  the  Original  Tribunal  made  a  material
    error of law in failing to address relevant considerations.  It is fair
    to say to him that the evidence, because it was  effectively  homemade,
    was less than full as would be helpful.   I  have  concluded  therefore
    that the appropriate course is for this matter  to  be  sent  back  for
    further findings of fact particularly addressing the human rights based
    claim in the context that the English language test  is  no  longer  an
    issue and that is plainly a factor to which  weight  can  be  given  in
    assessing the Article 8 proportionality.

9.   In these circumstances the Original Tribunal's  decision  cannot  stand
    and the matter will have to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

1.   Return to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross,  not  to  be  put
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan nor First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Landes.

2.   List for hearing one and a half hours.

3.   No interpreter is required.

4.   Further evidence needs to be served by or on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    not later than fourteen days before the further hearing and  any  reply
    thereto by the Respondent not later than seven days before the hearing.

5.    Such  evidence  may  include  further  information  relating  to   the
    upbringing and education of the children  of  the  family,  the  family
    arrangements for the care of the children and their education, evidence
    as to current educational needs or  studies  taking  place,  any  other
    evidence relating to third parties who know of the  Appellant's  family
    and/or children, such as the Appellant's son Mark's  college,  and  any
    further references relied upon by the family in support of their  claim
    to remain in the UK and any other relevant information that  they  wish
    to provide.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order is appropriate.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 8 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


