
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09396/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2018                        |On 23rd January 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr valdeir barbosa de almeida
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Walsh, instructed by Bindmans LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  The Appellant is a citizen of Brazil born on 22 April 1978.
       His appeal, against the refusal of his human  rights  claim  and  the
      decision to deport him, was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  K
      Swaney on 2 October 2018.  The Secretary of State appealed.


   2. The grounds assert that the judge failed to  consider  material  facts
      and failed to adequately consider and make findings on very compelling
      circumstances over and above those set  out  in  Exceptions  1  and  2
      (section 117C of the 2002  Act).  The  judge  wrongly  relied  on  the
      Appellant's community involvement and rehabilitation which were issues
      of limited weight. The judge failed to appreciate the public  interest
      in deportation and his findings lacked adequate reasoning.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne
      for the following reasons:

         "In an otherwise careful and focused  decision  it  is  nonetheless
         arguable that the judge erred materially in  the  consideration  of
         very compelling circumstances over and above the circumstances  set
         out in Exceptions 1 and 2.  It is further  arguable  that  in  that
         context the findings are inadequately reasoned."


The Appellant's Immigration History

4.   The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  in  2006
    and overstayed.  He met his British citizen wife in early 2007. He  and
    his partner went to Brazil and were married on 11  December  2007.  The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance as a spouse in order to return to
    the UK. He entered on 20 April 2008 with valid leave until April  2010.
    On 23 March 2010 he applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  spouse
    which was granted. He made  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 14 May 2011 which was  granted  on  12  September  2012.  The
    Appellant was convicted of causing death by dangerous driving on 1  May
    2015  following  a  guilty  plea.  He  was  sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment and was disqualified for driving for five years and  until
    he has passed the extended test.


The Judge's Findings

5.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

         "56. In my view significant weight attaches to the public  interest
             in deportation but it is reduced to a degree by  his  previous
             good conduct, his remorse  and  the  effort  he  has  made  to
             educate  and  rehabilitate  himself  and   make   a   positive
             contribution to society. In reaching this  conclusion  I  have
             taken into account the OASys Assessment, the letters from  his
             probation officer, the evidence  regarding  the  education  he
             undertook while he was in prison and since his release and the
             Appellant's own evidence. I also accept  the  submission  that
             notwithstanding the person died  the  nature  of  the  offence
             means that it is not at the most serious end of the scale.


         57.  The Appellant speaks  English  as  demonstrated  by  his  oral
             evidence. I find that it is of a sufficient  level  to  permit
             his integration into the  UK.  The  Appellant  is  financially
             independent. There is no  evidence  he  has  been  reliant  on
             public funds during his stay in the United Kingdom and I  note
             the  evidence  of  his  employment  and  self-employment.  The
             Appellant's wife  is  employed.  These  are  at  best  neutral
             factors.


         58.  The Appellant had a period of overstaying between  the  expiry
             of his leave to enter and remain as  a  visitor  and  when  he
             returned to Brazil to marry his wife.  Although he established
             his relationship with his wife  during  the  time  he  was  an
             overstayer I take into account  the  fact  that  he  left  the
             United Kingdom voluntarily in order to regularise  his  status
             within the Immigration Rules and that since then his residence
             has been lawful.  In addition, his relationship with his  wife
             developed after he obtained settlement and when his status was
             not precarious. I consider I am entitled to  place  weight  on
             his relationship with his wife and on the private life he  has
             established.


         59.  I accept the evidence of the Appellant's  wife  that  she  has
             found it difficult to settle abroad in the  past.  She  stated
             that she is able to meet people  but  that  it  is  developing
             closer relationships and the network of friends that she finds
             difficult.  I accept that this together with her age means she
             is  likely  to   find   it   more   difficult   to   establish
             relationships, find work, learn a language there might be  the
             case for someone else in her position.


         60.  The Appellant is integrated in the  community  in  the  United
             Kingdom. He provided evidence  of  his  employment  and  self-
             employment. I take into account the support the Appellant  has
             from his local  community.   I  have  considered  the  witness
             evidence and other statements  of  support  which  demonstrate
             that notwithstanding the seriousness of his offence he  is  an
             important member of his community. This is also true  for  the
             Appellant's wife who  has  initiated  a  number  of  community
             projects. Although the Appellant and his wife may be  able  to
             replicate  to  some  degree  of  this   level   of   community
             involvement in Brazil it  is  likely  to  take  some  time  in
             particular for the Appellant's wife given the  difficulties  I
             have referred to.


         61.  It is expected that a person convicted of a  crime  will  take
             steps towards their rehabilitation.  I find that the Appellant
             has made efforts in this regard that  are  significantly  over
             and above what might normally be expected.  I accept  that  he
             requested a transfer to a different prison that  offered  more
             opportunities for education and rehabilitation.  I accept that
             he was the one who took the initiative  in  finding  out  what
             courses he could take to address his offending and  that  this
             continued after his release from prison.  I note in particular
             his completion of a drink drive education course  of  his  own
             volition.  I take into account the Appellant's  acceptance  of
             responsibility at a very early stage for which  he  was  given
             full credit in his sentencing.  I accept the  Appellant's  own
             evidence which is supported by that of the  probation  service
             that he is genuinely remorseful.  I note  his  willingness  to
             participate in restorative justice and the fact  that  he  has
             not applied for the early return of his driving licence.   The
             Appellant was a trusted prisoner while serving  his  sentence,
             having advanced status and a  position  as  an  insider.   The
             evidence shows that his conduct was exemplary while he was  in
             prison and that it  has  continued  since  his  release.   His
             probation officer reports that his meetings have reduced  from
             once every three weeks to once every four  weeks  as  this  is
             considered sufficient  to  manage  the  risk.   His  probation
             officer confirms that he has applied for all conditions of his
             licence.  I also consider the Appellant's  desire  to  make  a
             contribution to charity  while  in  prison  is  a  significant
             demonstration of his revolt and  desire  to  make  amends.   I
             consider these factors carry appreciable weight.


         62.  Having considered all of these factors together those relevant
             to the exception to deportation I  find  that  in  combination
             they outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular circumstances of this case."


Submissions

6.   Mr Melvin relied on Thakrar  (Cart  JR,  Art  8,  value  to  community)
    [2018] UKUT 00336 (IAC) and NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that deportation was disproportionate was perverse  and  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for coming to that conclusion. It
    was accepted that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs  399  or  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  There  were  no
    circumstances preventing family life from continuing in Brazil  and  it
    would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife to remain in the  UK
    without him.

7.   The issue in this case  was  Section  117C(6)  and  the  threshold  for
    offences over  four  years  was  a  high  one  as  demonstrated  by  NA
    (Pakistan). In the present case the Appellant  had  been  sentenced  to
    five years' imprisonment.  If it was not unduly harsh for his  wife  to
    go to Brazil or remain  in  the  UK,  then  what  were  the  compelling
    circumstances  which  rendered  his  deportation  disproportionate?  Mr
    Melvin submitted that rehabilitation and remorse were insufficient.

8.   The judge's reasons for finding that the high threshold test  had  been
    met  were  inadequate  and  showed  that  the  judge's  findings   were
    irrational.  The judge had not fully appreciated  the  public  interest
    and had not considered deterrent and public abhorrence.

9.   Mr Melvin relied on the headnote in Thakrar in particular point 3:

         "The fact that a person makes a  substantial  contribution  to  the
         United Kingdom economy cannot, without more,  constitute  a  factor
         that diminishes the importance to be given to  immigration  control
         when determining the Article 8 position of that person or member of
         his or her family."

10.  He submitted that the judge  had  misdirected  herself  in  failing  to
    appreciate the high threshold to be considered and her conclusions were
    inadequately reasoned.  Rehabilitation, remorse and  exemplary  conduct
    in prison did not meet the legal test of very compelling circumstances.
     There was a material error of law because on the facts  of  this  case
    any Tribunal properly directed,  after  finding  that  the  Immigration
    Rules cannot be met, could not come to the conclusion that  deportation
    was disproportionate. The test of very compelling circumstances  was  a
    high one. The decision should be overturned because it was  irrational.



11.  Mr Walsh relied on the case of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and  submitted
    that the Appellant's case came within the  Immigration  Rules  in  that
    there  were  very  compelling  circumstances.  He  accepted  that   the
    Appellant could not benefit from  the  exceptions  in  the  Immigration
    Rules or Section 117C,  but  on  the  facts  of  this  case,  the  very
    compelling circumstances test was met.

12.  Mr Walsh submitted that the judge's approach was an appropriate one  in
    that  she  considered  the  exceptions   and   then   very   compelling
    circumstances. The facts were assessed in the round in the  context  of
    the appeal. All the factors identified by the  judge  were  capable  of
    being relevant factors and the judge did not elevate  any  one  of  the
    factors  or  attach   undue   weight   to   those   factors.   Remorse,
    rehabilitation and contribution were relevant factors  and  the  weight
    given to them was permissible in the circumstances.

13.  Thakrar was  not  a  deportation  case  and  the  President  found,  at
    paragraph 131, that little weight could be attached to the  appellant's
    private life established while she had been in the  UK  unlawfully.  He
    also found that little  weight  could  be  attached  to  a  substantial
    contribution to society when assessing the weight  to  be  attached  to
    immigration control.

14.  However, in this case, the Appellant's character was relevant  and  the
    judge accepted the evidence of the Appellant, his partner and a witness
    from the prison service. The judge properly directed herself in law  at
    paragraph 43. She concluded that it would not be unduly harsh  for  the
    Appellant's wife to go to Brazil at paragraph 45 and that it would  not
    be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's  wife  to  remain  in  the  UK  at
    paragraph 48. At paragraph 51 she stated that the Appellant  could  not
    benefit from the exceptions  and  properly  directed  herself  on  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those exceptions. At  paragraph
    52 she attached significant weight to  the  public  interest  and  then
    carried out an evaluative exercise.

15.  This approach was that advocated in Hesham Ali:  balancing  the  public
    interest against all the factors in the Appellant's favour.  The  judge
    acknowledged that it was a serious offence, death by dangerous driving,
    and acknowledged the five year sentence.  She  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's guilty plea and his remorse but did not  underestimate  the
    significance of the offence. She then balanced it with the  Appellant's
    positive support in the community, the  risk  of  medium  harm  to  the
    public but low risk of reoffending, and the  Appellant's  private  life
    and relationship with his wife. Mr Walsh accepted that his  family  and
    private life was not enough in itself because the Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the exceptions, but they were relevant factors. The judge  also
    looked at the Appellant's integration and his employment record.

16.  At paragraph 61 the judge noted  that  the  Appellant's  rehabilitation
    was over and  above  what  was  expected  and  that  he  had  used  his
    initiative in order to undertake courses  in  prison  and  do  a  drink
    driving course once he was released. He accepted responsibility for the
    offence, had shown genuine remorse and had taken  part  in  restorative
    justice.  He had not applied for his driving licence  back.  He  was  a
    trusted prisoner with enhanced status and his conduct within prison was
    exemplary. This was attested  to  by  his  probation  officer  who  had
    reduced the number of meetings given the reduced risk  of  reoffending.
    The Appellant had complied with all the conditions of his  licence  and
    contributed to  charity.  All  these  factors  carried  weight  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

17.  Mr Walsh referred to paragraph 36 of Hesham Ali which stated:

         "Those rules, applicable where offenders have received sentences of
         between twelve and some four years, provide guidance  to  officials
         as to the categories of case where it is accepted by the  Secretary
         of State that deportation would be disproportionate.  The fact that
         a claim under article 8 falls outside rules 399 and 399A does  not,
         however, mean that it  is  necessarily  to  be  rejected.  This  is
         recognised by the concluding words of rule 398, which make it clear
         that a claim that deportation would be contrary to article  8  will
         not be rejected merely because rules 399 and 399A do not apply, but
         that 'it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public
         interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.' "

18.  The  judge  was  therefore  obliged  to  carry  out  a  proportionality
    exercise which she did at paragraph 62.  Mr Walsh relied  on  paragraph
    38 of Hesham Ali which stated:

         "The countervailing considerations must be very compelling in order
         to outweigh the general public interest in the deportation of  such
         offenders, as assessed by Parliament and the  Secretary  of  State.
         The  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  indicates   relevant   factors   to
         consider, and rules 399 and 399A provide an indication of the sorts
         of matters which the Secretary of State regards as very compelling.
         As explained at  paragraph  26  above,  they  can  include  factors
         bearing on the weight of the public interest and the deportation of
         the particular offender, such as his conduct since the offence  was
         committed, as well as factors relating to  his  private  or  family
         life. Cases falling within the scope of Section 32 of the 2007  Act
         in which the public interest in deportation  is  outweighed,  other
         than those specified in the new rules themselves, are likely to  be
         a very small majority (particularly  in  non-settled  cases).  They
         need not necessarily involve any circumstance which is  exceptional
         in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for  the  Secretary
         of State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007]  2  AC  167  para
         20), but they can be said to involve 'exceptional circumstances' in
         that they involve a departure from the general rule."

19.  Mr Walsh submitted  that  the  judge's  approach  was  consistent  with
    Hesham Ali. She established the facts and considered the evidence which
    was before her, which was significantly greater than  that  before  the
    Secretary of State. It was for the Tribunal to make its own  assessment
    of proportionality.  In this case the judge heard  oral  evidence  from
    three witnesses and  significant  weight  should  be  attached  to  the
    judge's decision which should stand unless there was a clear  error  of
    law.

20.  The judge's approach was consistent with paragraph  83  of  Hesham  Ali
    which stated:

         "One way of structuring such a judgment would be to follow what has
         become known as the 'balance sheet' approach.  After the judge  has
         found the facts, the judge would set out each  of  the  'pros'  and
         'cons' in what has been described as a 'balance sheet' and then set
         out reasoned conclusions as to whether the  countervailing  factors
         outweigh the importance attached to  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders.

21.  Mr Walsh submitted that the judge had done that in this  case  and  had
    given reasons for why there were very compelling circumstances.   These
    need not be extraordinary because the test was one of  proportionality.



22.  In response to Mr Melvin's submission  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    meet the high threshold test, Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  this  was  an
    unusual case. He could see the force of Mr Melvin's submission, if  the
    Appellant had a long criminal record or was a danger to the  community,
    but this was a single offence and the Appellant's rehabilitation was  a
    relevant factor. Although given limited weight, it did reduce the  risk
    of reoffending.  There  was  no  criminal  intent  in  this  case.  The
    Appellant  had  shown  remorse  and  pleaded  guilty   at   the   first
    opportunity. There was a low risk of reoffending. The judge's  findings
    were open to her on the evidence before her  and  there  was  no  clear
    error of law because the judge took into account all relevant  factors.
    A different judge may well have come to  a  different  conclusion,  but
    that was not relevant to whether there was an error of law.  The  judge
    properly decided proportionality and took into  account  all  necessary
    features of the case. It would not be  possible  to  just  reverse  the
    decision. It was important that the case should  be  reheard  and  oral
    evidence given.

23.  Mr Melvin submitted that Hesham Ali was  about  the  Immigration  Rules
    not Section 117C(6) and the Supreme Court were not looking  at  primary
    legislation. Mr Melvin had no issue with  the  judge's  self-direction,
    but her conclusion was not open to her  on  the  evidence  before  her.
    Further, she failed to address deterrence and  revulsion.   Looking  at
    the combination of factors in  this  case  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights could not outweigh the public interest in deportation.


Discussion and Conclusion

24.  There  was  no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  had  been  sentenced  to
    imprisonment of  more  than  four  years  and  the  Exceptions  in  the
    Immigration Rules  and  Section  117C  did  not  apply.  There  was  no
    criticism of the judge's approach in assessing  whether  the  Appellant
    could bring himself within those Exceptions or the  judge's  conclusion
    that, even though the Exceptions were not applicable, it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant and his wife to return to Brazil or  for
    the Appellant's  wife  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  him.  Had  the
    exceptions applied to the Appellant, he would not be  able  to  satisfy
    them. The result of such a finding is that the weight to be attached to
    his private life and family life is limited because he  was  unable  to
    show that his deportation would result in unduly harsh consequences for
    himself or his wife.

25.  It is also not in dispute that the test to be applied in this  case  is
    very compelling circumstances over and above those Exceptions.   It  is
    not the case that if the Appellant cannot satisfy the  exceptions  then
    he will be unable to show very compelling  circumstances.  All  factors
    must be considered in the round. The 'balance sheet' approach in Hesham
    Ali is appropriate in this case.

26.  The facts in this case are not in dispute. The  factors  considered  by
    the judge can be summarised as follows:

    (i)  The Appellant had positive support from the community;


    (ii) He was at risk of medium harm to the public;


    (iii)    The risk of reoffending was low;


    (iv) It would not be unduly harsh for family life to continue in Brazil
         or for the Appellant's wife to remain in the UK,  even  though  the
         Appellant's wife would face some difficulties integrating;


    (v)  Although, the Appellant  met  his  wife  when  he  was  unlawfully
         present in the UK, he voluntarily left the  UK  and  returned  with
         leave to  enter  as  a  spouse.  His  relationship  with  his  wife
         developed after he obtained settlement;


    (vi) The Appellant speaks English and is integrated into the UK. He has
         a good employment record and is  financially  independent  (neutral
         factors);


    (vii)    He has committed a single offence and  has  taken  significant
         steps,  over  and  above  what  might  normally  be  expected,   to
         rehabilitate himself;


    (viii)   He accepted responsibility for the offence and pleaded  guilty
         at the earliest opportunity;


    (ix) He has shown remorse and taken part in restorative justice;


    (x)  His prison record was exemplary, and he has made contributions  to
         charity.

27.  The judge quite rightly acknowledged the serious weight to be  attached
    to the public interest. The offence was a serious one, causing death by
    dangerous driving, and the test was a high one, there had  to  be  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest. However,  for
    the reasons that follow, I find that she failed to properly apply  that
    test and her conclusion at paragraph 62 was irrational.

28.  The Appellant's lawful presence in the UK and the matters relied on  by
    the judge at  paragraph  61  are  matters  which  the  Appellant  would
    ordinarily do as a law-abiding citizen. The  fact  that  he  has  taken
    steps to make amends, rehabilitate himself and is genuinely  sorry  for
    his actions  are  not  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    Exceptions in the Immigration Rules or section 117C. I  agree  with  Mr
    Walsh that they are relevant factors, but looking at all those  factors
    listed in  paragraph  61  they  are  not  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    significant weight to be attached to the public interest in  this  case
    because of the five year sentence and the fact the Appellant has caused
    death by dangerous driving. It is commendable that the  Appellant  has,
    of his own volition, taken significant steps to  rehabilitate  himself,
    has engaged in restorative justice and has been an exemplary  prisoner,
    but those circumstances could not be said to amount to very  compelling
    circumstances.

29.  In addition, little weight can be attached to the  Appellant's  private
    life and relationship with his wife because he could  not  satisfy  the
    Exceptions. Family and private  life  could  continue  in  Brazil.  Any
    interference with family and private life was negligible.

30.  The factors listed at paragraph 26 above, including  the  finding  that
    the Appellant and his wife could relocate to  Brazil,  means  that  the
    Appellant's deportation could not be said to be  disproportionate.  The
    Appellant is unable to show very compelling circumstances. The low risk
    of re-offending and exceptional evidence of remorse and  rehabilitation
    are relevant to the protection of the public, but they do not impact on
    the other public interest  elements,  namely  deterring  other  foreign
    criminals and marking social revulsion at the nature of the crime.

31.  I find that on the facts of this case the circumstances were  not  very
    compelling, the high  threshold  test  was  not  met  and  the  judge's
    conclusion that there were compelling circumstances was irrational. The
    judge erred in law and I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and
    remake it.

 32. On the facts, the Appellant's Article 8  rights  do  not  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation given the serious nature of his offence,
    the significant weight to be attached to the public  interest  and  the
    unchallenged finding that the Appellant's family and private life could
    continue in Brazil.

33.  I am not persuaded by Mr Walsh's submission that the  matter  needs  to
    be reheard.  Save for the passage of time, no change  in  circumstances
    was advanced. Any strengthening of the Appellant's private  and  family
    life would not be material given the judge's finding that it would  not
    be unduly harsh for the Appellant and his wife to live in Brazil.

34.  Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision of 2 October 2018  and  I
    remake it dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of decision

The Respondent's appeal is allowed.

The decision of 2 October 2018 is set aside.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 11 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
