
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09036/2017
                                                             & HU/09037/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  DD and TD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person (First Appellant)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Vietnam.  The  first  appellant  is  the
    father of the second appellant. The firs appellant was born in 1979 and
    the second appellant in December 2010.  They are living in  the  United
    Kingdom with the first appellant's wife (the second appellant's mother)
    and a younger child who are also both citizens of Vietnam.  Neither  of
    the parents have a right to live  in  the  United  Kingdom  beyond  the
    completion of  this  litigation  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  first
    appellant claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom  in  2006.  By  a
    decision dated 11 August 2017, the Secretary of State refused the human
    rights applications of both appellants. They appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal which, in in  a  decision  promulgated  on  1  February  2018,
    dismissed the appeals. The appellant is now appeal, with permission, to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Granting  permission,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bennett   refused
    permission on the third ground of  appeal  This  concerns  the  alleged
    failure  of  the  judge  to  take  into  account  recent  jurisprudence
    concerning Article 3 ECHR as  regards  the  first  appellant's  medical
    condition (he  is  HIV-positive).  The  first  appellant  attended  the
    hearing in Bradford on 4 March 2019. He  was  not  represented.  I  was
    careful to explain the procedures of the  Tribunal  to  the  appellant.
    Given that permission had not been granted on ground three, I  did  not
    touch upon this in  my  discussions  at  the  hearing  with  the  first
    appellant and this decision addresses only the remaining grounds which,
    as Judge Bennett observed, are linked. They concern  the  relevance  of
    the first appellant's health in an Article 8  EC  HR  context  and  the
    correct test as regards removal which should have  been  applied  given
    that the second appellant has been living continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years.

 3. I find that Ground 1 has merit. As the judge had recorded at  [22]  the
    test under Appendix FM, EX1 (a) (ii) as whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a child  who  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least seven years to leave the United Kingdom.  The
    judge noted that the second appellant had  not  completed  seven  years
    continuous residence immediately preceding the date of the  application
    to the Secretary of State. However,  he  appears  (correctly)  to  have
    assessed the evidence on the basis that EX1 did apply; as at  the  date
    of the hearing second appellant had completed  seven  years  continuous
    residence. The difficulty, however, is that in his concluding paragraph
    [27] the judge does not make reference to  the  reasonableness  of  the
    second appellant leaving United Kingdom. Instead, whilst noting  strong
    links which the family has forged in Doncaster in  the  Vietnamese  and
    the wider community, he has discussed the  strength  of  contacts  with
    relatives in Vietnam and, as regards  the  effect  of  removal  on  the
    second appellant, says only that  'whilst  I  recognise  that  children
    would be exposed to some considerable upheaval when they relocate  with
    their parents as one family unit to Vietnam, nevertheless this will  be
    tempered by some knowledge and experience of Vietnamese culture,  their
    ability to already speak Vietnamese being able  to  develop  close  and
    meaningful relationships with relatives in Vietnam.' The reasonableness
    of removal is  not  mentioned  and,  indeed,  the  reference  to  'some
    considerable upheaval' reads more like an  application  of  a  test  of
    significant obstacles to reintegration than it does to an assessment of
    reasonableness.

 4. I consider the judge may have fallen into error.  However,  I  need  to
    consider whether it is necessary for me to set aside the decision. I am
    reminded of the guidance provided by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)
    2018 UKSC 53 in particular at [18-19]:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?""

 5. Asking the question addressed by Lord Boyd in SA, 'Why would the  child
    be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' The  answer  in  the  instant
    appeal is 'because the parents have no right to remain here.' The  'the
    ultimate  question'  so-described  by  the  Court  of  Appeal   in   EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, 'is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of
    origin?' is, in respect of these appellants, met with the same  answer.
    Even if I were to remake the  decision  having  set  aside  the  judges
    determination, the facts in the present appeal would be no different; I
    would have to consider whether it is reasonable to expect a  child  who
    is not a citizen of this country but who has lived here for  more  than
    seven years to return with his parents  and  his  sibling  to  Vietnam,
    their country of joint nationality. Even taking into account the  first
    appellant's medical condition (which I  find  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge addressed correctly) and the  strength  of  the  ties  which  all
    members of the family may have forged  whilst  living  here,  the  fact
    remains that they do not meet the requirements private life and  family
    life  under  Appendix  FM  whilst  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the second appellant  to  return  to  Vietnam  with  the
    remainder of his family is irresistible. In the circumstances, whilst I
    am not satisfied that the judge had in the forefront of  his  mind  the
    correct test of reasonableness, I have decided not  to  set  aside  the
    decision since the outcome of any remaking would be the same.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
