
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09718/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2019                     |On 17th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Alhassan Kwasau
                        (no ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    J. Robertson, promulgated on 8th June  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 2nd May 2018.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and  was  born  on  12th
    June 1964.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    21st August 2017, refusing his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis  of  his  marriage  to  [GK],  a  British
    citizen, who is present and settled in the UK, as his wife.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is set out  in  the  comprehensive
    determination of Judge Robertson.  She observes how the  Appellant  had
    joined his wife in the UK as her dependant, when she arrived with leave
    to remain on a points based system.  The Appellant had arrived together
    with his children in July 2008.  His wife  had  arrived  a  few  months
    earlier.  Before then, the Appellant ran a law firm in  Nigeria.   They
    all lived together in this country.  In 2013, however, there was a fire
    in the family home, and this caused the Appellant  to  live  separately
    from his family for several months.  It was also a time when "there was
    a breakdown in his relationship with his wife but they  moved  back  to
    live together after about eight months" (7).   The Appellant's problems
    really  began  when  he  made  his  application  for  leave  to  remain
    separately from that of his wife.  His wife  was  normally  responsible
    for the completion of documents relating to  immigration  matters.   It
    was during the period of their separation, that the Appellant completed
    his own application "incorrectly applying for limited leave  to  remain
    rather than  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   His  family  applied  for
    indefinite leave and are now all British citizens" (paragraph 7).

 4. The Appellant states that he cannot return back to Nigeria as there are
    insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.   If  he  returns  this  will
    break the period of his lawful  stay  in  the  UK.   It  will  also  be
    disproportionate to his family life interests.  His wife has had cancer
    treatment and needs his support, his children are in education and need
    financial support.  His  son  plans  to  go  to  university  this  year
    (paragraph 8).  He has also remained a dependant of his wife throughout
    and "their applications  for  leave  are  linked"  (paragraph  9).   He
    maintains that "The whole family should have qualified in 2013" if only
    the Appellant had made the application in the right way (paragraph  9).



 5. The judge went on to conclude that:-

         "Whilst I accept that the Appellant's current predicament is  as  a
         result of an error made some years ago ignorance of the law  is  no
         excuse and it is an accepted principle that there is no such  thing
         as a 'near miss' with regard to the Rules" (paragraph 11).

 6. The judge also held that given that the family had lived separately for
    eight months in 2013 following a house fire when there was a  temporary
    breakdown in the couple's relationship, this  was  a  case  where  "the
    family  are  therefore  accustomed  to  spending  long  periods  apart"
    (paragraph 13).  As far as the children  were  concerned,  the  judge's
    view was that, "they have both shown an ability to adapt to changes  in
    their circumstances" and that  although  they  had  relationships  with
    their parents, "I do not find that this is anything outside the  normal
    relationship between adult children and their parents" given  that  the
    children are now 20  and  18  (paragraph  14).   With  respect  to  the
    Appellant's wife having undergone cancer treatment, she was now back at
    work and the Appellant could provide the support from abroad (paragraph
    15).  The judge also held that, "I can  attach  little  weight  to  any
    private life the Appellant may have established as his status has  been
    precarious throughout his time in  the  UK"  (paragraph  16).   It  was
    accepted by the judge that "the Appellant's return may be difficult and
    may not accord with their plans, [but] I do not find any insurmountable
    obstacles to his return to Nigeria" (paragraph 17).  Finally, "There is
    a public interest in the maintenance of immigration control" in a  case
    such as this (paragraph 18).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The Grounds of Application state that the judge had failed to  consider
    material matters and had materially  misdirected  herself  in  law,  in
    erroneously using Section 117B as a blunt instrument given  that  there
    was no public interest in requiring the Appellant to return to  Nigeria
    because he would have succeeded in 2013.  Also, it was not  correct  to
    say that the husband and wife were accustomed to living separately,  as
    this had only happened for one period when there had  been  a  fire  in
    their home.

 9. On 15th January 2019, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that this was a case which  merited  a  departure
    from the Rules on a strict application  of  Article  8  proportionality
    balance.  This is because the family are all British citizens following
    an application made in  2013,  in  which  the  Appellant  was  omitted,
    because of a temporary breakdown in  the  couple's  relationship,  that
    arose as a result of a fire in the house.  In  granting  permission  to
    appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan, observed that,  "It  seems  to  me
    that if the application made by his wife in 2013 could or  should  have
    included the Appellant, and would have been  successful,  there  is  no
    public interest in removing the Appellant now" (see paragraph  3).   In
    granting permission, it was also observed that, "Either the Appellant's
    departure will see the end of this relationship or the  British  family
    will be required to uproot themselves (some or  all)  and  relocate  to
    Nigeria" (paragraph 3).   It was held that the judge did  not  take  on
    board the full consequences and the realities of her decision.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, on 7th June  2019,  Mr  Vokes,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that  the  judge  reached  a  result
    which was  disproportionate,  and  was  recognised  as  such  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan, when  he  granted  permission,  because  it  was
    accepted by the judge (at paragraph 11) that the Appellant should  have
    been granted indefinite leave to remain, together with the rest of  his
    family, if only he had been included in his wife's  application,  which
    he drafted in 2013.  However, due to  circumstances  that  arose  as  a
    result of the fire at the home, the  Appellant  was  living  separately
    from his wife and made his own application.  This  should  not  obscure
    the fact that  the  Appellant  was  living  lawfully  in  this  country
    together with his wife and children for nine years and  ten  months  at
    the date of the hearing, and failed just two months short  of  the  ten
    year period for indefinite leave to remain, and  the  judge  failed  to
    take this into account.  Furthermore, there was no public  interest  in
    these circumstances in requiring the Appellant to return to Nigeria and
    to be separate from his family, and nor was there any  public  interest
    in requiring them, as British citizens, in doing the  same.   In  fact,
    the conclusion reached by the judge (at paragraph 13) that "The  family
    are therefore accustomed to spending  long  periods  apart"  is  simply
    incorrect because there has only been one period  when  they  had  been
    living apart and that was directly as a result of the fire in the home.
     It was a single period.  It could hardly be said to be a "long period"
    which has repeated itself.

11. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the fact here was that the couple
    had separated at the material time.  This was in 2013.   The  fire  had
    led  to  a  family  breakdown.   The  Appellant's  wife  made  her  own
    indefinite leave to remain  application  and  the  Appellant  made  his
    application on the basis of his dependency on his wife.  What  we  were
    currently looking at were the consequences of the Appellant having made
    the wrong application.  It is not enough to say that the Appellant  had
    almost qualified back in 2013, if in fact he had not done so.

12. The Appellant's claim that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  exercise
    discretion in his favour was unwarranted.  It was open to the Appellant
    to make the right application even now.  He had not done so.  The judge
    was correct to take Section 117B into account in coming to  a  balanced
    decision with respect to both the state interest  and  the  Appellant's
    own interest.  The judge was perfectly alive  to  the  fact  that  "the
    Appellant's return may be difficult  and  may  not  accord  with  their
    plans" (paragraph 17).  That did not mean to say that the decision  was
    incorrect.  There was no error of law.

13. In reply, Mr Vokes submitted that it was important to look at what  the
    judge had actually found as a question of fact.  The  judge  had  found
    (at paragraph 11) that, "Whilst I accept that the  Appellant's  current
    predicament is as a result of an error made some years ago ...",  which
    suggested that in applying Article  8,  the  judge  had  to  take  into
    account the fact that the Appellant had lived in this country for  nine
    years and ten months with his wife and family, and that there  had  not
    been any period of an illegal  stay  during  this  time.   It  was  not
    correct to say, as a bland statement, that, "I can attach little weight
    to any private life the Appellant may have established  as  his  status
    has been precarious throughout his time in the UK ..." (paragraph  16).



14. In fact, submitted Mr Vokes, a great deal of weight can be attached  to
    the Appellant's private life in  the  UK  during  this  time.   If  the
    Appellant now abandoned his appeal he would  be  here  unlawfully.   He
    would not be  able  to  return  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  lawful
    residence.  He would have no current leave on the  basis  of  which  he
    could invoke the ten year Rule.  This was nothing short  of  a  "family
    splitting" case.  It was recognised as such  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan.  The balance of considerations plainly fell in  favour  of  the
    Appellant in this case.  I should make a finding of an error of law and
    allow the appeal.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, the judge is incorrect to
    say (at paragraph 16) that the Appellant's private life should be given
    little weight.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act cannot  be  applied  as  a
    blunt instrument as is well-established in Kaur [2017] UKUT 14  and  in
    Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803.  This was a case where the Appellant  had
    lived nine years and ten months lawfully  in  the  UK  and  it  is  not
    rational to state that this period of time in the UK  can  be  accorded
    only little weight.  This is particularly the case given that the judge
    had also recorded (at  paragraph  11)  that  "the  Appellant's  current
    predicament is as a result of an error made some years ago".

16.  Second, the  judge  did  not  give  proper  weight  to  the  fact  (at
    paragraphs 9 to  11)  that  the  Appellant  would  have  qualified  for
    indefinite leave to remain in 2013,  together  with  the  rest  of  his
    family, had he made the  right  application  together  with  his  wife,
    because she failed to reduce the public interest against the  Appellant
    in the assessment of the proportionality considerations.  The Appellant
    and the other witnesses  were  found  by  the  judge  "to  be  credible
    witnesses" (paragraph 6).  The only reason  for  the  short  period  of
    family breakdown between the Appellant and his  wife  appears  to  have
    been on account of a serious fire at their property (see  paragraphs  9
    to 16).  The judge failed to factor this in to a sufficient degree.

17. Third, there was also a failure by the judge to consider the rights  of
    the Appellant's  wife  and  children,  especially  given  that  it  was
    accepted by the judge that family life had been established  (paragraph
    18) and the rest of the family members were now all  British  citizens.
    Their circumstances, in terms of the support that  the  Appellant  gave
    for his  wife  during  her  cancer  treatment  (paragraph  8)  and  the
    financial support that the children  required  (paragraph  8)  together
    with the continuing need  for  support  that  he  claimed  they  needed
    (paragraphs 14 to 15) needed to be properly taken into account.

18. Fourth, ultimately it is incorrect to state (at paragraph 13) that "the
    family are used to spending long periods apart" and this is irrational,
    given that the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  a  pre-existing  family
    relationship, which was not precarious, at  the  time  when  they  were
    living in Nigeria, together with their children.  In fact, they entered
    only a few months apart from each other, with the wife coming first and
    the Appellant  and  the  children  coming  a  few  months  later.   The
    Appellant was caring for his children and waiting until the end of  the
    academic year before coming to the UK.  The  period  of  a  few  months
    separation during the time that the Appellant was waiting  to  come  to
    the UK with the children, as well as the period of  eight  months  when
    there was a fire in the home, does not rationally demonstrate that  the
    family are used to spending long periods apart.

Remaking the Decision

19. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the  following  reasons.   First,
    this is a case where the family has to all intents  and  purposes  been
    living together for much of their married and family  life.   The  only
    exceptions are a few months before the Appellant joined his wife in the
    UK and the eight months' separation, occasioned as a result of the fire
    at  the  home.   The  relationship  has  been  genuine  and  subsisting
    throughout that period of time.

20. Second, the Appellant has been with lawful  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country for that period of time.

21. Third, it was on account of the Appellant living  separately  from  his
    wife, that he made the wrong application, whereas they made  the  right
    application for indefinite leave to remain, as a result of  which  they
    are now all British citizens and settled in the UK.

22. Finally, the balance of considerations in any proportionality exercise,
    falls in favour of the  Appellant  in  this  case.   He  had  made  his
    application on 6th January 2014 and was granted leave to  remain  as  a
    spouse of a settled person until 1st October 2016.   Had  he  made  his
    application alongside his wife in 2013, which would have  included  the
    Appellant as a family member in the wife's application, he  would  have
    been successful, and there is therefore no public interest in  removing
    the Appellant now.  Ultimately, requiring the Appellant  to  return  to
    Nigeria now, would amount  to  "insurmountable  obstacles"  because  it
    would  see  the  end  of  his  relationship  with  his   family.    The
    alternative, namely, that the British family should  uproot  themselves
    and  relocate  to  Nigeria  is  no  less  more  proportionate.    This,
    accordingly, is a case where the circumstances merited  departure  from
    the Rules on a strict application of Article 8 proportionality balance.
     I allow the appeal.

23. No anonymity direction is made.

24. The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019


