

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
HU/09516/2015

                                                     HU/03276/2015

                                                      HU/08769/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 13th March 2018                   |          On 18th April 2018         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                        NIMAT SAJIDAH BIBI HUSNOO (1)
                      NISHAAT SAMEERAH BIBI HUSNOO (2)
                   AL HASHIM MUHAMMAD ZACHARIA HUSNOO (3)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, of Counsel, instructed by GS Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of Mauritius born in March 1999, June  1997
    and July 2002. The applied in 2014 for entry clearance  to  join  their
    mother in the UK; the application was refused and the appeal dismissed.
    They reapplied in 2015 for entry clearance once  again  to  join  their
    mother, Mrs Nazira Bibi Aucharagram, who is a British citizen living in
    the UK and their sponsor. Their appeals against these  decisions  dated
    10th June 2015 were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chudleigh in
    a determination promulgated on the 3rd April 2017.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to  consider  relevant
    medical evidence with respect to the  appellants'  father  that  formed
    part of the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

    Submissions - Error of Law & Remaking

 4. The key issue is said by the appellants to be whether  the  appellants'
    mother has sole responsibility for them or  whether  there  were  other
    considerations which made their exclusion  undesirable,  in  accordance
    with paragraph 297(1)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules. The issue of
    sole responsibility is  a  factual  matter  to  be  determined  on  the
    evidence, and is distinct from the fact that another parent or relative
    may provide day to day care.

 5. It is further argued by the appellants that  at  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  no  medical
    evidence that the appellants' father  was  unwell  when  this  was  not
    accurate. Further at paragraphs 24 and 30 it is also  said  that  there
    was no evidence of communication by the sponsor  with  the  appellant's
    relatives and school, but  this  was  not  factually  accurate  either.
    Further there was no finding  that  the  sponsor  was  not  a  credible
    witness, and she provided evidence going to both issues which ought  to
    have been evaluated as well. The First-tier Tribunal  therefore  failed
    to take material evidence into consideration and erred in law.

 6. Mr Duffy argued that the First-tier Tribunal had meant,  when  it  said
    there was  "no evidence" that there was none except the oral  testimony
    of the sponsor, and  that  therefore  all  relevant  matters  had  been
    considered.

 7. At the end of the hearing on error of law I informed the parties that I
    found that there was a legal error for the reasons I set out below, and
    it was agreed that the remaking hearing could  proceed  immediately.  I
    had the relevant bundles and updating evidence copied for all  parties,
    and we had a break so these  could  be  examined  and  Mr  Murphy  take
    instructions from the sponsor. It was also agreed that  the  respondent
    would have a month from  today's  date  to  make  any  further  written
    submissions that she wished to make on the  death  certificate  of  the
    appellants' father, and the appellants would have two weeks to reply to
    any such written submissions from the  date  of  receipt  of  any  such
    submissions.

 8. Mr Duffy submitted that the  matter  now  needed  to  be  remade  under
    paragraph 297(1)(d) of the Immigration rules as  the  evidence  of  the
    appellants was that their father  had  died.  He  said  that  no  other
    matters had been put in issue by the entry clearance officer and so the
    only question was whether the appellants' father was dead. If the death
    certificate is genuine then he accepted that the refusal to grant entry
    clearance would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR  as  the
    Immigration Rule would be met and there would be no public interest  in
    refusing to grant entry clearance.

 9. I reserved my determination on remaking.

10. I did not receive  any  representations  from  the  respondent  by  the
    deadline of 13th April 2018 set in my directions of 13th March 2018.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

11. The  First-tier  Tribunal  directs  itself  correctly  by  setting  out
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules and citing relevant case law  at
    paragraphs 25 to 27 of the decision.

12. The decision records that the sponsor states that  she  is  in  regular
    contact with the appellants and produced 30 phone cards as evidence  in
    support of this, see  paragraph  13  of  the  decision.  She  also  had
    demonstrated that she had visited Mauritius on four occasions  in  2015
    and 2016, see paragraph 14 of the decision. This evidence,  along  with
    the sponsor's financial support is accepted  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision.

13. It is the written evidence of the sponsor that at the time  of  hearing
    the appellants' father had diabetes,  heart  and  lung  problems  which
    means that he was unable to support  or  care  for  the  children,  see
    paragraph 15 of the decision. It is commented  in  this  paragraph,  as
    contended in the grounds of appeal, that  this  was  not  supported  by
    medical evidence.  It is concluded at  paragraphs  29  and  30  of  the
    decision that there was "no evidence" that  the  sponsor  "directed  or
    controlled important matters such as schooling and healthcare, or  that
    she had any input at all into the day to day needs of the Appellants."

14. At paragraph 24 the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal is  that  the
    sponsor has not had "any significant responsibility" for the  children,
    and this did not change after 2014 when the father became unwell.

15. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal from  the  sponsor  in  her
    statement was that the appellants' father  played  no  active  role  in
    their upbringing as he had become progressively extremely  unwell  with
    his heart condition to the point where  he  provided  no  emotional  or
    financial support or even accommodation as the children were living  on
    a temporary basis with her uncle as he had asked them to leave him. The
    evidence from the sponsor was that the appellants' father did not  have
    long to live. Her daughter had also stopped  attending  school  due  to
    this situation. In addition to the  sponsor's  testimony  there  was  a
    medical certificate from a medical officer from the Ministry of  Health
    dated 16th January 2014 confirming that the appellants' father  has  an
    ischemic heart condition and impaired lung function in the bundle  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider this material medical evidence and due to failure to  consider
    or alternatively give reasons for rejecting the sponsor's evidence that
    she did in fact direct all important matters  and  had  taken  on  sole
    responsibility for the appellants.


    Conclusions - Remaking

17. I have had regard to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban
    promulgated on 17th November 2014 which noted that  at  that  time  the
    appellants met all aspects of the Immigration Rule  bar  that  of  sole
    responsibility or serious and  compelling  family  consideration  under
    paragraph 297(1)(e). They were the children of the appellant, they were
    under 18 years at the date of application and they were not leading  an
    independent life,  and  they  met  the  accommodation  and  maintenance
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

18. It is  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  all  aspects  of  paragraph
    297(1)(d) are met including that the appellants' father has passed away
    as set out on the death certificate of 13th December 2017.

19.  In these circumstances I find that  family  life  exists  between  the
    appellants and their mother: she is their biological mother, they  were
    under 18 years at the  date  of  application  and  remain  children  or
    dependent young adults and are not leading independent  lives.  It  was
    found by the First-tier Tribunal that they kept  in  regular  telephone
    contact, that the sponsor had visited on four occasions  in  2015-2016,
    and that she provides financial support. I find that  the  sponsor  did
    become solely responsible for  her  children  as  their  father  became
    increasingly unwell as described in  her  statement.  The  two  medical
    certificates dated 2014 and  2015  evidencing  the  appellants'  father
    suffering from diabetes, lung  and  heart  disease  and  his  death  in
    hospital December 2017 are strongly supportive of this history. I  find
    that the interference with this family life that refusal to grant entry
    clearance constitutes is disproportionate  given  the  ability  of  the
    appellants to show compliance with the Immigration Rules.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on human rights
         grounds.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   17th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley




Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have  had
    regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
    Immigration Appeals. I have decided to make no fee award  because  none
    was requested and the remaking appeal relied upon some new evidence.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley                                    Date:  17th  April
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






