
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09215/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  Mr M f j
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B. K Sharma, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  made  an  application  for
    entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  under  Appendix   FM.   His
    application, made on 28 December 2017, was on the basis of  his  family
    life with his partner, KB, who is his Sponsor.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  and  following  an
    Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) review the original decision stood.

 3. The Appellant appealed and following a hearing at Hatton Cross, and  in
    a decision promulgated on  20  March  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Mill  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  both   under   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 4.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.  His  application  was
    considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford on 20 May 2019. She
    granted the application and her reasons for so doing are: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal in  time,  against  a
         decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mill)  dated  20.03.2019
         whereby it dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary
         of State's decision to refuse his application for  entry  clearance
         relying on his relationship with his British national partner.

         2.   The grounds are not focused. They are more in the nature of  a
         skeleton argument than an application for permission.  The  reality
         of this application is that the Appellant argues the Tribunal erred
         in  the  proportionality   assessment,   in   particular   in   its
         consideration of the best interests of the  Appellant's  two  minor
         sons, one of whom suffers from a serious medical condition (metopic
         stenosis), for which he is receiving ongoing  specialist  treatment
         in the UK.

         3.   While it is not apparent that the Tribunal had evidence before
         it of the medical condition of the Appellant's eldest son  and  the
         Appellant may be open to criticism for this, it  is  arguable  that
         the assessment of the best interests of the Appellant's 2  children
         at paragraph 14 is nonetheless deficient.

         4.   The grounds are arguable. There is an arguable material  error
         of law."

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. Ms Cunha accepted that the Judge had erred in failing  to  engage  with
    the totality of  the  evidence  when  looking  at  the  proportionality
    assessment, and in particular in the Judge's consideration of the  best
    interests of the Appellant's two minor sons, one of whom suffers from a
    serious  medical  condition  (metopic  synostosis,  for  which  he   is
    receiving ongoing specialist treatment in the United Kingdom).  It  was
    acknowledged that the decision does not deal with this issue  and,  for
    example, the evidence in relation thereto. For example, I was  referred
    to paragraph 134 of the Appellant's bundle which is a  letter  from  Mr
    Greg Thomas, Consultant Plastic Surgeon, and is dated 16 November 2018.
    There he confirms that the Appellant's son underwent  a  major  cranial
    reconstructive surgical procedure to correct his metopic synostosis and
    that he will remain under the hospital's care for regular follow-up for
    his condition until he is sixteen years old. He is currently  suffering
    from a number of symptoms which necessitate him having a CT scan in the
    near future. Depending on the result of the scan he may require further
    surgical intervention.

 7. Mr Sharma urged me to accept that this was a material error. The  Judge
    had failed to engage with key evidence  within  the  appeal  and  as  a
    consequence the decision cannot stand.

 8. I find that to be the position. For the reasons identified  within  the
    grant of permission to appeal the Judge has materially  erred.  Further
    fact finding is required and consequently the appeal is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Mill.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                                    Date: 1 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



