
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09874/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2021                     |On 01 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                Intizar Ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is  1  March
    1981.  On 20 November 2013 he made an application for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur).   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 21 December 2018.  The Appellant  appealed.   His
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Housego  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 11 September 2019.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Sheridan on 1  June  2020.   On  13  July  2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington issued directions in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.  She
    took the provisional view that it would  be  appropriate  to  determine
    without a hearing whether or not there was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Housego.  In response to those directions the parties
    made  further  submissions.  Upon  consideration   of   those   further
    submissions, I listed the matter for a remote hearing.

The Background

 3. The Appellant came to the UK on 27 December 2010, having  been  granted
    leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   On 9 May 2012 he
    made an in-time application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  student.  On
    25 August 2012 he was granted leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  His leave was valid until 22 November 2013.

 4. On 20 November 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur), together with another person with whom he said he was
    going into business in IT  consultancy.   The  decision  was  initially
    refused by the Respondent in 2015. An appeal against this decision  was
    allowed to the limited extent that the matter  was  "remitted"  to  the
    Respondent.

 5. The Respondent made another decision on  22  March  2016  refusing  the
    application because the Appellant had used a proxy test  taker  for  an
    English language test and had submitted a fraudulent  certificate  with
    his application made on 9 May 2012.   The  Appellant  appealed  against
    this decision.  On 20 March 2017 his appeal was allowed by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The judge concluded that the  Appellant  had  not  used
    deception.

 6. On 21 August 2017 the Secretary of State specialist appeals team wrote
    to the Appellant's solicitors  stating  "this  case  has  been  refused
    permission to appeal to both the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunals,  we
    have no further right of appeal.  No further challenge will  be  made".



 7. On 5 October 2017 the Secretary of State wrote to the Appellant stating
    that

         "The implementation of this decision [the successful  appeal]  will
         be taken by the postdecision caseworker in Sheffield.   We  aim  to
         implement the Immigration Judge's decision on their application  as
         soon as possible and it may be necessary for us  to  write  to  you
         again to request further information".

 8. Despite the above communication the  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in the decision of 21 December 2018  which  was  the
    subject of the appeal before Judge Housego.





The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 20 March 2017

 9. The judge found that the Appellant was a truthful witness and that  the
    Respondent had not discharged the legal  burden  of  proving  that  his
    TOEIC certificate was procured by dishonesty.  She said as  follows  at
    paragraph 36:-

         "I should add that the Respondent was satisfied that the  Appellant
         had scored 95 points for his Tier 1  Entrepreneur  application  but
         refused the application under paragraph 245DD(a).  In view  of  the
         findings made above the  refusal  under  paragraph  245DD(a)  falls
         away".

10. After that  hearing  the  Appellant  received  communication  from  the
    Secretary of State as set out above.

The decision of the Respondent of 21 December 2018

11. The Secretary of State again refused the application on the basis  that
    she was not satisfied that the Appellant is a genuine entrepreneur.

12. She relied on the case of  Arshad  and  Others  (Tier  1  applicants  -
    funding  "availability")  [2016]  UKUT  and  stated,  although  it  was
    accepted  that (unlike in relation to Profectus) no evidence  has  been
    provided  as  to  the  extent  or  derivation  of  Equinox  funds,  the
    connections between Equinox and Profectus suggest that  the  source  of
    such funds was likely  to  be  the  same,  or  in  any  event  that  no
    additional funds were available to Equinox.

13.  The Secretary of State stated:-

         "In the interests of fairness, given the time that has passed since
         your application, the Secretary of State has considered whether the
         funding  offer  remains  available  to  you.   But  on  balance  of
         probabilities, even if a successful funding offer had been made, we
         do not see how this could now be fulfilled.   The  Companies  House
         filings documentation reveals that Mohammed Amran Azram (the signee
         of the funding letter from Equinox,  and  original  director),  and
         Mohammed Serfraz  (also  an  original  director),  appointments  as
         members of Equinox were terminated as of 1 May 2015.

14. In relation to the Appellant's business plan  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that it contains a number of factual errors and these are set
    out in some detail by the author of the refusal.

The decision of Judge Housego

15. There was a skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal, which  in
    summary argues that the Respondent should have implemented the decision
    of Tribunal which was promulgated on  20  March  2017.   The  Appellant
    relied on the  cases  of  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor's  licence  -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 and Thakur (PBS decision - common law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151.

16. There was no oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge
    said there were no facts in dispute.   The  appeal  was  determined  on
    submissions.

17. The judge recorded that the primary submission made  by  the  Appellant
    was that the appeal should be allowed because the  Secretary  of  State
    promised to implement the 2017 decision and "there was  no  mandate  to
    revisit the points awarded." It was submitted that  there  were  strong
    grounds to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

18. The presenting officer described the situation as "odd" because  points
    had been awarded when the application was considered on 22 March  2016.
    The presenting officer submitted that the application had been  refused
    ( on 21 December 2018) on suitability grounds and it was not known  the
    extent  to  which  the  points  had  been   substantively   considered,
    particularly given that Arshad postdated the  original  decision.   The
    decision under appeal gave full reasons why the application  should  be
    rejected

19. At paragraph 47 the judge said that the real issue  in  the  appeal  is
    that during the long history of the application Arshad was decided  and
    the Tribunal found that the funding used in multiple applications was a
    clever manipulation of the Rules and not  genuine.   The  judge  stated
    "The Appellant's funder is that funder or as close to it  as  makes  no
    difference".  The judge said at paragraph 48 "knowing this, I  find  it
    cannot be right to permit the appeal to succeed ...".  He stated:-

         "If it was considered afresh, then there is a prima facie case that
         it would be refused.  Given the TOIEC certificate provided, and the
         Secretary of State's response to such certificates at the  time  it
         is unsurprising that the Secretary of State awarded all the  points
         at face value, then used suitability grounds to refuse.  The  first
         decision did not give any reasons why the points were  awarded  and
         did not have to do so, but since this was before Arshad there would
         have been no reason to question the funding at that time".

20. The judge acknowledged that the counterargument was  strong,  as  there
    was a judicial decision which was "unequivocal" and which set out  that
    the points had been awarded and that the reason for refusal had  fallen
    away. The judge said that the change of circumstances arises  from  the
    decision of Arshad.

21. The judge did not find that there was any  analogy  with  the  case  of
    Balajigari and SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 673 and found that in any event the
    Appellant had an opportunity to advance a case by way  of  a  statutory
    appeal.  The judge said at paragraph 53

         "The Appellant had the legitimate  expectation  of  being  approved
         after his Ft-T appeal was allowed, and after the Secretary of State
         decided not to challenge  the  Ft-T  decision  and  said  it  would
         implement it.  In my judgment that does not mean that he  then  had
         the right to 'minded to refuse' notice, or an absolute right to the
         grant of a visa".

22. The judge acknowledged that the Appellant had a  right  of  appeal  and
    that he chose to base that on legal submissions and chose not to engage
    with the substantive decision.  He said it was the  Appellant's  choice
    to limit his appeal in this way.  He said that it was open  to  him  to
    advance his appeal in  the  alternative.  At  paragraph  56  the  judge
    stated:-

         "As it is, he has not met the burden of proof that lies  upon  him,
         as set out in Arshad.   The  absence  of  the  notes  of  the  2014
         interview is unfortunate, but that is not an issue that assists the
         Appellant, not least as he has not engaged with the  reasons  given
         for refusal".

23. The judge took into account that the  application  was  made  in  2013,
    almost six years ago, and if he  were  to  remit  the  application  for
    reconsideration it is highly unlikely that the Secretary of State  will
    grant the application after considering what representations are  made.
    The judge said that whatever the outcome of an appeal there will  "very
    likely be a request for an upward appeal".  At paragraph 59 he said:-

         "I accept that it is unsatisfactory for a refusal letter to  state,
         as here, that 'all the evidence suggests' without  specifying  that
         evidence, but the root cause of the refusal  is  absolutely  clear.
         First the Secretary of State thinks the funding is a sham, as it is
         from an Arshad funder, and for the reasons set out in  that  case".



24. The judge went on to say that the business plan was not real  and  that
    it was not a genuine business seeking  �50,000  because  no  commercial
    lender would advance that amount of money on flimsy grounds "still less
    without nailing down a shareholder's  agreement  to  be  sure  to  reap
    rewards in future if the  speculative  exercise  was  successful".   At
    paragraph 60 the judge said as follows:-

         "60.     This is an unusual case, and  whichever  side  lost  would
             have sought permission to appeal.  It will  now  fall  to  the
             Appellant to do so, and  if  permission  is  granted  he  will
             doubtless  wish  to  deal  with  the  reasons  given  for  the
             Secretary of State's refusal of his  application.   The  Upper
             Tribunal will then be able to give a ruling on  whether  I  am
             right to  reject  the  primary  submission  (which  would  not
             involve consideration of the merits of the refusal) or not and
             if not then it can itself to decide (sic) whether the  reasons
             for refusal were sound, or not.  That is  a  route  consistent
             with the overriding objective and should  enable  finality  in
             the shortest possible time.  Alternatively, the Appellant  may
             decide that the reasons for refusal cannot  be  overcome,  and
             decide to limit any challenge to this decision to the  primary
             argument that the Secretary of State was obliged to issue  the
             visa by reason of the Ft-T decision of March 2017".

The grounds of appeal before the UT

25.  Ground  1  asserts  that  the  findings  in  relation  to  Arshad  are
    fundamentally flawed.   There is lengthy argument on this ground. I  do
    not need to engage with this.

26. Ground 2 raises the issue of fairness  with  reference  to  Thakur  and
    Patel and Balajigari.    It is submitted that the  Tribunal  could  not
    carry out the process themselves because  of  the  prohibition  on  new
    evidence in section 85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  Furthermore the Respondent in the letter to the Appellant in
    October 2017 said that if further information was required  they  would
    write to the  Appellant.   It  is  argued  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    legitimate expectation.

27. The judge said that the Appellant "has chosen not to  engage  with  the
    matters set out in the refusal letter" and "he could have  pleaded  his
    appeal" however there is no reference to or  consideration  of  section
    85A of the 2002 Act.

28. It is  further  argued  that  fairness  demanded  that  the  Respondent
    produced the Appellant's interview.

29. Ground 3 is that the judge did not properly engage with Article 8 ECHR.



30. Ground 4 is that the judge failed to apply  binding  authority,  namely
    Boafo, R and Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,  ex  parte
    [2002] EWCA Civ 44, TB (Jamaica) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  977,  and  Chomanga
    (binding effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 312.

Rule 24 response of 27 July 2020

31. The Secretary of State's position is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was entitled to note that the first refusal decision did not detail the
    consideration of points awarded and that the decision was  made  before
    Arshad.  The refusal decision made by the Secretary of  State  in  2016
    focused entirely on the TOEIC-ETS issue and that was the focus  of  the
    appeal. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal in 2016 was clearly made
    in relation to the ETS issue.  The remark in  relation  to  scoring  of
    points reflected the narrow scope of  that  appeal.   This  was  not  a
    finding on the merits of whether the Appellant scored 95 points but was
    simply a contextual or obiter comment.

32.  Arshad  involved  a  complicated  and  intricate  assessment  of   the
    availability of funding.  It is evident that the Appellant was  seeking
    to  rely  on  finances  from  the  same  source  as  Profectus  through
    Providentia Capital LLP  (same  FSA  Regulation  number  426749)  which
    features  throughout  the  decision   in   Arshad.    Arshad   shed   a
    retrospective light on the Appellant's application.  Any communications
    between the SSHD and the Appellant referred to in the grounds  must  be
    considered in the light of the fact that  the  only  issue  in  dispute
    before the Tribunal in 2016 was whether  the  Appellant  had  practised
    deception by using a fraudulent ETS certificate.      Reference is made
    to the headnote in Arshad to assert that the offer of potential funding
    was in effect defunct as the authors of  the  offer  Mr  Azram  and  Mr
    Serfraz were no longer appointed as directors of Equinox as  of  1  May
    2015,  therefore  the  application  on  that  point   would   fail   on
    availability.

33. The burden of proof remained with the  Appellant  at  all  times.   The
    application was rejected on the basis that he had not shown that  funds
    were available to him  and  that  his  business  plan  was  not  deemed
    credible.

34. The Secretary of State acknowledges "that it is unfortunate" that there
    was no interview record available but it is noted  that  the  interview
    did not inform the basis on which to refuse the Appellant's application
    and nor was it a matter held against the Appellant.

35. Whilst the Appellant relies on Chomanga the Respondent refers the UT to
    paragraph 21 of the judgement which reads as follows:-

         "21.     None of the exceptions to the general  principle  that  an
             unappealed decision is binding set  out  in  paragraph  35  of
             Stanley Burnton LJ's  judgment  apply  in  the  present  case.
             There was no fresh evidence which was  not  available  at  the
             date of the hearing, no change in  the  law  and  no  relevant
             change of circumstances  or  new  events  after  the  date  of
             decision.  This was also not a case where there was subsequent
             evidence of fraud: see EB (fresh evidence - fraud - directors)
             Ghana [2005] UKAIT 00131."

36. There was a change in the law on  matters  directly  relevant  to  this
    appeal  (Arshad).   At  the  very  least  in  the  light  of  the  non-
    availability of funding for the reasons set out above there was a clear
    material change in circumstances.

37. The judge dealt with issues of fairness and that whilst  the  Appellant
    may have been restricted by the provisions under section 85A, he  opted
    to provide no evidence in rebuttal whether that be under the  Rules  or
    under ECHR.

The Appellant's response to the Rule 24

38. The Presenting Officer said at the hearing before Judge Housego that he
    did not know whether the rules had been substantively  considered  when
    full points were previously awarded to the Appellant in the decision of
    22 March 2016. There was nothing before the Tribunal to show  that  the
    Respondent had not considered all issues before awarding points to  the
    Appellant.

39. The Secretary of State accepted that no evidence had been  provided  as
    to the extent or derivation of Equinox funds. The judge did not  engage
    adequately with this. In relation to the business plan the Secretary of
    State ignores that the Appellant was interviewed prior to the  decision
    and he was  questioned  about  funding  and  following  that  interview
    awarded full points.

40. Whilst the Respondent says that the funding was defunct as the  authors
    of the offer were no longer appointed directors of Equinox as of 1  May
    2015 so the application would fail on availability of funds, this makes
    little sense against the full award of points in the decision dated  22
    March 2016.

41. The Appellant's case was that he answered issues  relating  to  funding
    when interviewed by the Respondent in 2014.  The interview,  which  the
    Respondent has  not  been  able  to  find,  should  have  informed  the
    decision.  The failure to re-interview the Appellant prior  to  raising
    new matters was unfair and unlawful.

42. Judge Housego's decision is fundamentally flawed as it failed  entirely
    to address the prohibition on new evidence. In relation to Article 8 it
    is argued that there was no dispute  that  the  Appellant  was  arguing
    against his removal. The Respondent accepts that the  Appellant  raised
    Article 8 in his grounds of appeal and that  he  had  raised  his  nine
    years of residence and private life.

43. The Respondent has failed  to  adequately  engage  with  ground  4  and
    Chomanga.

Error of Law

44. The parties agreed that the old statutory regime applied. The Appellant
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State  on  the  basis
    that the decision was not in accordance with the law (s84  (1)  (f)  of
    the 2002 Act. [1]) So far as his appeal against the decision under  the
    Rules is concerned s85A applies.[2]

45. The judge erred because he did not properly apply Chomanga. It  is  not
    clear to me whether the case was brought to his  attention.  While  the
    grounds before the First-tier Tribunal and the skeleton  argument  rely
    on the previous decision of the Tribunal, neither  specifically  raises
    the Chomanga.  The head note of which reads as follows:-

         "The parties are  bound  by  unappealed  findings  of  fact  in  an
         immigration judge's decision. It  is  therefore  not  open  to  the
         respondent following a successful and  unchallenged  appeal  by  an
         appellant to make a further adverse  decision  on  the  same  issue
         relying on the same evidence as before unless there is evidence  of
         fraud or one of  the  exceptions  identified  in  para  35  of  the
         judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State v  TB  [2008]
         EWCA 997 applies."

46. At paragraph 19 of the judgement  in  Chomanga,  the  UT  set  out  the
    salient parts  of  Stanley  Burnton  LJ's  summary  of  the  issues  of
    principle in TB as follows:

         "32. As a matter of principle, it cannot  be  right  for  the  Home
         Secretary to be able to circumvent  the  decision  of  the  IAT  by
         administrative decision.  If she could do so, the statutory  appeal
         system would be undermined; indeed, in a case such as the  present,
         the decision of the immigration judge on  the  application  of  the
         Refugee  Convention  would  be  made  irrelevant.   That  would  be
         inconsistent with the statutory scheme.

         33.  The principle that the decision of the Tribunal is binding  on
         the parties, and in particular on  the  Home  Secretary,  has  been
         consistently upheld by the Courts.  In R (Mersin) v Home  Secretary
         [2000] EWHC Admin 348, Elias J said:

             'In my opinion there is a clear duty on the Secretary of State
             to give effect to the Special Adjudicator's decision.   If  he
             can refuse to do so in the event of changed  circumstances  or
             because there is another country to which the applicant can be
             sent, there is still a duty unless and  until  that  situation
             arises.  It would wholly undermine the rule of law if he could
             simply ignore the ruling of the  Special  Adjudicator  without
             appealing it, and indeed Mr Catchpole [Counsel  for  the  Home
             Secretary] does not suggest that he can.  Nor  in  my  opinion
             could he deliberately delay giving effect to the ruling in the
             hope that something might turn up to justify not  implementing
             it.  In my judgment, once the adjudicator had  determined  the
             application in the applicant's favour,  the  applicant  had  a
             right to be granted refugee status, at least unless and  until
             there was a change in the position.'

         34.  In R (Boafo) v Home Secretary [2002] EWCA Civ,  [2002]  1  WLR
         44, Auld LJ said at [26] in a judgment with which the other members
         of the court agreed, '... an unappealed decision of an  Adjudicator
         is binding on the parties.'  In R (Saribal) v Home Secretary [2002]
         EWHC 1542 (Admin), [2002] INLR 596, Moses J said:

             '17.     The  decision  in  ex  parte  Boafo  demonstrates  an
             important principle at the heart of  these  proceedings.   The
             Secretary  of  State  is  not  entitled   to   disregard   the
             determination of the IAT and  refuse  a  claimant's  right  to
             indefinite leave to remain as a  refugee  unless  he  can  set
             aside that determination by appropriate procedure  founded  on
             appropriate evidence.'

         35.  Of course, different considerations may apply where  there  is
         relevant fresh evidence that was  not  available  at  the  date  of
         hearing, or  a  change  in  the  law,  and  the  principle  has  no
         application where there is a change in circumstances or  there  are
         new events after the date of decision: see  Auld  LJ  in  Boafo  at
         [28].  But this is not such a case.

         36.  The judge described the attempt by the Secretary of  State  to
         raise the s.72 issue after the immigration judge's decision and  to
         refuse leave to enter and to remain as an abuse of  process.   That
         is an expression normally reserved for abuses of the process of the
         courts.  The Secretary of State's action might be castigated as  an
         abuse of power, but I would prefer to avoid pejorative  expressions
         of uncertain denotation and application and to hold simply that the
         Secretary of State was bound by the  decision  of  the  immigration
         judge and that her subsequent action was  unlawful  on  the  ground
         that it was inconsistent with that decision.  It follows  that  the
         judge's conclusion was correct.  The Home  Secretary  is  bound  to
         grant TB the  leave  to  which  the  immigration  judge's  decision
         entitled him."

47. On 22 March 2016 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application  on
    ETS grounds only; however, full points  were  awarded  under  the  PBS.
    This would accord with the  interpretation  of  that  decision  by  the
    Tribunal in 2017. I accept Mr Lemer's  submission  about  the  decision
    letter. A proper reading of it indicates that there was  an  assessment
    of the points  to  be  awarded  to  the  Appellant  undertaken  by  the
    Respondent. If indeed this was  not  the  case,  it  was  open  to  the
    Respondent to appeal the decision of the Judge allowing the  appeal  on
    20 March 2017. There was no application made.

48. At the hearing in 2017, the Respondent was  not  represented.  However,
    the case of Arshad had by then been promulgated for several months  and
    the connection between Exquinox and Profectus Venture Capital was known
    to the Respondent who did not raise it before the judge in 2017.    The
    information relied on by the Respondent from Companies House related to
    2015. The change in circumstances  arose  before  the  hearing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal in 2017. Therefore the material  relied  on  by  the
    Respondent was available when the appeal was heard  in  2017.  However,
    the Respondent did not rely on issues of funding or the business  plan,
    having awarded full points to the Appellant.

49. It was open to the Respondent to raise the matter before the hearing in
    2017. All matters that are now relied on by the Respondent refusing the
    application could have been raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    2017.  This was not a case of new events after the date of the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. In these circumstances,  properly  applying
    Chomanga, the appeal should have been allowed by Judge Housego  on  the
    basis that the decision of the Respondent was not  in  accordance  with
    the law (s86 (3) (a) of the 2002 Act.[3]).  It  was  not  open  to  the
    Respondent to make a further adverse decision  in  the  absence  of  an
    exception (identified in para 35 of  the  judgement  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Secretary of State v TB [2008] EWCA 997)).

50. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  allow  the
    appeal on the limited basis that the decision of the Respondent  on  21
    December 2018 is not in accordance with the law.  The consequence of my
    decision is that the application  made  on  20  November  2013  remains
    outstanding.

51. Judge Housego's decision is set aside in its entirety. However, I  make
    the following observations. It may be open to the Respondent to curtail
    any leave granted to the Appellant (following my decision) in the light
    of a change in circumstances.

52. Although the following is irrelevant to the outcome of this  appeal  in
    the light of the absence of a  lawful  decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, I observe that any  fairness  issue  arising  from  the  alleged
    failure to  give  the  Appellant  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the
    allegations may have had more weight had the Appellant  indicated  what
    evidence he would have produced. Furthermore, while s85A  of  the  2002
    Act prevented him from adducing such evidence in a points based appeal,
    there was nothing preventing the Appellant from submitting evidence  in
    support of his appeal under Article 8. It is not correct to say that he
    did not have the opportunity to advance  his  case.  He  chose  not  to
    advance  his  case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  challenging  the
    substantive decision.  There is no substance in the  Balajigari  point.



53. The judge did not determine the appeal under Article 8.  There  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant enjoyed family  life  here.  There  was  no
    evidence that there were very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.
    While the Appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  for  a  number  of
    years, this was not arguably such a weighty factor that it  is  capable
    of tipping the scales  in  his  favour  so  far  a  proportionality  is
    concerned.  The Appellant simply failed to develop an appeal on Article
    8 grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of the  judge  is  not
in accordance with the law.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 24 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


-----------------------

[1] 84 Grounds of appeal

(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must be
brought on one or more of the following grounds-
    (a) that the decision is not in accordance with immigration rules;
    (b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of F1... [F2 ... Article
    20A of the Race Relations (Northern Ireland) Order 1997];
    (c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
    Convention) as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention
    rights;
    (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the family of
    an EEA national and the decision breaches the appellant's rights under
    the [F3EU] Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United
    Kingdom;
    (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;
    (f) that the person taking the decision should have exercised
    differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
    (g) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom in
    consequence of the immigration decision would breach the United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would be unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being incompatible with
    the appellant's Convention rights.
(2) In subsection (1)(d) "EEA national" means a national of a State which
is a contracting party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area
signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992 (as it has effect from time to time).
(3) An appeal under section 83 must be brought on the grounds that removal
of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's
obligations under the Refugee Convention.
[F4 (4) An appeal under section 83A must be brought on the grounds that
removal

[2] 85A Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions

(1) This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in section 85(5).
(2) Exception 1 is that in relation to an appeal under section 82(1)
against an immigration decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(b) or
(c) the Tribunal may consider only the circumstances appertaining at the
time of the decision.
(3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-
    (a) the appeal is against an immigration decision of a kind specified
    in section 82(2)(a) or (d),
    (b) the immigration decision concerned an application of a kind
    identified in immigration rules as requiring to be considered under a
    "Points Based System", and
    (c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds specified in section
    84(1)(a), (e) or (f).
(4) Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may consider evidence adduced by
the appellant only if it-
    (a) was submitted in support of, and at the time of making, the
    application to which the immigration decision related,
    (b) relates to the appeal in so far as it relies on grounds other than
    those specified in subsection (3)(c),
    (c) is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or valid, or
    (d) is adduced in connection with the Secretary of State's reliance on
    a discretion under immigration rules, or compliance with a requirement
    of immigration rules, to refuse an application on grounds not related
    to the acquisition of "points" under the "Points Based System".]
[3] 86 Determination of appeal
(1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1) [F1, 83 or 83A.]
(2) [F2The Tribunal] must determine-
    (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not by virtue
    of section 85(1)), and
    (b) any matter which section 85 requires [F3it] to consider.
(3) [F2The Tribunal] must allow the appeal in so far as [F4it] thinks that-
    (a) a decision against which the appeal is brought or is treated as
    being brought was not in accordance with the law (including immigration
    rules), or
    (b) a discretion exercised in making a decision against which the
    appeal is brought or is treated as being brought should have been
    exercised differently.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) a decision that a person should be
removed from the United Kingdom under a provision shall not be regarded as
unlawful if it could have been lawfully made by reference to removal under
another provision.
(5) In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, [F2the Tribunal] shall
dismiss the appeal.
(6) Refusal to depart from or to authorise departure from immigration rules
is not the exercise of a discretion for the purposes of subsection (3)(b).


