
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/09285/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th August 2017                    |         On 15th August 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                mr waqas ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  13th  October
    2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of  his
    private and family life in the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S J Clarke dismissed the appeal.  The Appellant  now  appeals  to
    this Tribunal with permission granted on 28th June 2017.

 2. The issue in this appeal is a  straightforward  one  arising  from  the
    following findings at paragraph 5 of the decision:

         "The Appellant has a son called Z born in 2016 and he is a  British
         Citizen, and his wife Mrs B has indefinite leave to remain.  It  is
         accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with his wife and son and falls  within  EX.1  of  the
         Rules.  However, whilst I find that it is not  reasonable  for  the
         son as a British Citizen to leave the UK, he can remain in  the  UK
         with his mother looking after him..."

 3. The judge went on at paragraph 6 to say that he did not find that there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life if the Appellant goes  back
    to Pakistan to make an application to join his wife and son because the
    Appellant's wife appears to meet the financial requirements of Appendix
    FM. The judge went on to conclude that there was nothing preventing the
    family  going  to  Pakistan  as  a  family  unit  finding   their   own
    accommodation or for the Appellant to return and apply to join his wife
    and son with or without them visiting.  The judge concluded that it  is
    reasonable for the Appellant's wife  to  look  after  the  son  in  his
    absence as she is not  working  [6].   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE.   The
    judge could find no compelling reason to consider the Appellant's  case
    outside the Rules and went on to dismiss the appeal.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law in failing to properly apply the provisions
    of EX.1 and Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 having found that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.

 5. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable  that,  having
    made the finding that it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK, the judge should have allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant appears to satisfy EX.1 and Section 117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.

 6. In the Rule 24 response dated 13th July 2017 the  Respondent  indicated
    that she does not oppose the Appellant's application for permission  to
    appeal.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell said that he had nothing to add to
    the Rule 24 notice.  He accepted that there was a material error of law
    in the judge's decision.  He  submitted  that  the  decision  could  be
    remade on the basis of the finding at paragraph 5 of the decision  that
    it was not reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.  Mr  Dhanji
    had no objection to that approach.

 8. I have taken into account the properly made concession by the Secretary
    of State that there is a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I  take  into  account  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph  5  that  the  Appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his son, a British citizen, and it is not  reasonable
    for the Appellant's son to leave the UK. Therefore there is a  material
    error of law in the judge's application of the provisions of  paragraph
    276ADE and section 117B of the 2002 Act to  his  findings  of  fact.  I
    therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 9. There is no challenge to the judge's findings. In  these  circumstances
    applying EX.1 and Section 117B(6) the Appellant meets the  requirements
    of EX.1 as he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  British
    citizen child and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK.  EX.1 of Appendix FM reflects the  Respondent's  position
    in relation to Article 8 in an application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of a private and  family  life.   Further,  in  relation  to  the
    broader proportionality assessment under Article 8, the  weight  to  be
    given to  the  public  interest  is  clarified  by  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 117B of the  2002  Act.  Section  117B(6)  mirrors  EX.1  and
    accordingly, as the Appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a British child and it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK, it is not in the public interest  for
    the Appellant to be removed from the UK.

10. In these circumstances  I  re-make  the  decision  in  this  appeal  by
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and I set it aside.

12. I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.

13. No anonymity direction is granted.


Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

To the Respondent
Fee award

I make no fee award as the Appellant's circumstances have changed since  the
date of the decision made by the Respondent on 13th October 2015.


Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
