
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09646/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 April 2019                               |On 30 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     GH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Muzira of Counsel, instructed by Thompson &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 27  February  1985.   He
    appeals the decision of a First-tier Judge following  a  hearing  on  5
    November 2018 against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse
    to revoke a deportation order made against him.

2.   The appellant claimed to have  arrived  in  this  country  in  December
    2002.  He was granted leave to remain as a student from June 2003 until
    April 2004 but was then served with a notice to an illegal entrant on 5
    August 2005 as he had remained in breach of his period of leave.

3.   The appellant's subsequent immigration history  is  summarised  by  the
    First-tier Judge as follows:

         "2.  On 21 June 2011 he was convicted of two offences at the  Crown
             Court at Harrow and sentenced to  6  months  imprisonment  and
             four months imprisonment to be served consecutively in respect
             of breach of a  suspended  sentence.  On  26  August  2011  he
             claimed asylum but this claim was refused. A subsequent appeal
             to the Tribunal was dismissed and  he  became  "appeal  rights
             exhausted" on 2 February 2012.


         3.   On 31 July 2012 at  the  Crown  Court  at  St  Albans  he  was
             convicted of  an  offence  of  fraud  by  means  of  obtaining
             personal bank and credit card information from individuals and
             sentenced to 3 years imprisonment for the more serious offence
             and 12 months to be served concurrently in respect of  another
             offence. He was served with a notice concerning his  liability
             to deportation as a  foreign  criminal  on  7  July  2012  and
             responded. On 10 January 2013 he claimed protection but on 28
             November 2013 the deportation order was signed. An appeal  was
             lodged against that decision and dismissed, as was  permission
             to appeal the decision at the First Tier and he became "appeal
             rights exhausted" in respect  of  this  decision  on  23 July
             2014."

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from  his  partner
    and helpfully made the following agreed factual findings:

         ".   the Appellant is a 33-year-old national of Zimbabwe


         .    he came to this country in December 2002, about two months shy
             of his 18th birthday


         .    he was granted further leave to remain  but  he  has  remained
             here since  that  leave  expired  in  2004  and  has  done  so
             unlawfully


         .    he has twice claimed  protection  but  his  claims  have  been
             refused by  the  Respondent  and  subsequent  appeals  to  the
             Tribunal have been dismissed


         .    he now has a partner in this country  and  between  them  they
             have two young children, who are aged just 4 and approaching 2
             years of age


         .    he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  partner




         .    he has a genuine parental  relationship  with  the  two  young
             children, living with them and taking an active role in  their
             upbringing


         .    the partner and the children are all British citizens


         .    he has served terms of imprisonment for at least four separate
             offences


         .    most pertinently in late summer 2012 he  was  sentenced  to  a
             term of three years imprisonment for an offence of fraud


         .    he has been made the subject of a  deportation  order  by  the
             Respondent


         .    his younger son, C 1, has no health issues


         .     the  older  boy,  C  2,  has  difficulties,  particularly  in
             connection with speech and possibly behaviour, but there is no
             complete diagnosis of such problems


         .    his partner is a well-educated woman who has  previously  held
             responsible  and  presumably  remunerative  employment  as   a
             project manager and she is actively seeking work


         .    her parents live in Hayes, Middlesex which is in  an  adjacent
             borough to where the Appellant and his partner live,  although
             about 9 miles distant


         .    the Appellant has not reoffended  for  a  period  of  about  6
             years, although  part  of  that  period  would  have  been  in
             detention or as a serving prisoner."

5.   The judge further notes that it was undisputed that the  appellant  was
    a foreign criminal liable to automatic deportation under the provisions
    of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  He had been sentenced  to  a
    term of imprisonment of twelve months or more.  The judge  referred  to
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   He
    concentrated on the second exception as the first was irrelevant.   The
    issue  was  whether  the  appellant  "has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect  of  [the
    appellant's] deportation on  the  partner  or  child  would  be  unduly
    harsh."  It  is  undisputed  that  both  the  children  are  qualifying
    children.

6.   While the judge accepted that the appellant had not been  convicted  of
    any offence since 2012 the judge  noted  that  the  appellant  did  not
    appear to have been at liberty until early 2014 and comments as follows
    in paragraph 21 of his determination:

         "21. The sentencing judge remarked upon "a record for  offences  of
             deception and dishonesty which goes back a  number  of  years"
             and he then refers in his remarks  to  convictions  from  2006
             onwards.  The judge also referred to  the  second  offence  of
             dishonesty (which attracted the term of 3 years  imprisonment)
             as being one "of extreme seriousness".  He  later  stated  "as
             I have  indicated,  these  are  extremely  serious  matters".
             Notwithstanding a guilty plea, the judge  imposed  a  term  of
             imprisonment of three years.  It  follows  that  the  original
             tariff for the offence is likely to have been between 4 and  5
             years. With a considerable record for offences  of  dishonesty
             over a number of years, I find  that  the  period  since  2014
             without conviction is not a significant factor."

7.   The judge accepted that the appellant was in a  relationship  with  his
    partner and that they had been living together in early March 2015.

8.   The judge concludes his determination as follows:

         "24. I should start with the children because their best  interests
             are  important  and  the  primary  consideration,  within  the
             constraints of the legislation. I have read the  report  from
             the social worker, Ms Austin, carefully. I accept that she has
             seven years post qualification experience as a social  worker.
             In my judgement, however, her report  goes  a  little  further
             than it would in respect of any family of this  nature,  apart
             from the particular issues that may affect C  2.  Miss  Austin
             explains why she considers there will be difficulties for  the
             family (and C 2 in particular) if they all removed to Zimbabwe
             and refers particularly to the question of  whether  he  would
             receive adequate professional support as a young boy diagnosed
             as being on the Autistic Spectrum.


         25.  I accept that the  best  interests  of  these  children  would
             almost definitely be served if they were able to  continue  to
             exercise their rights as young British citizens  and  live  in
             this country with both of their parents. Removal  to  Zimbabwe
             would have to be a decision for the family as  a  whole.  Both
             the adults were born in Zimbabwe and the Appellant lived there
             until he was almost 18. It is apparent  that  they  have  some
             relations there, although I accept  they  may  be  of  little
             immediate practical help. Ms M is an educated  person  with  a
             history of employment in responsible positions. It  is  by  no
             means an impossible choice for them to make but that has to be
             their choice.


         26.  I consider that it would  be  harsh  to  suggest  these  three
             British citizen family members  move  with  the  Appellant  to
             Zimbabwe, particular perhaps having  regard  to  the  personal
             difficulties that C 2 has. I do not consider it to  be  unduly
             harsh with two loving parents, both of them in their early 30s
             and with education behind them.


         27.  Even if I had considered that it might be unduly harsh for any
             or all of them to relocate to Zimbabwe, I do not  consider  it
             is unduly harsh for them to live in this country  without  the
             Appellant.  This  is  not  because  of  the  nature   of   the
             criminality of the Appellant. In the  case  of  children,  the
             sins of the father should not be visited upon them in such  an
             assessment as I have  to  make.  This  appears  to  have  been
             reaffirmed in the recent decision of the Supreme Court  in  KO
             (Nigeria) & Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.


         28.  In that decision, however, Lord Carnwath (giving the judgement
             of the Court) approved (paragraph 27  of  his  judgement)  the
             comments of McCloskey J, then President of the Tribunal, in MK
             (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
             [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC)  on  what  comprised  "unduly  harsh"
             circumstances:


                  "we are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does not  equate  with
                  uncomfortable,   inconvenient,   undesirable   or   merely
                  difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably  more  elevated
                  threshold. 'Harsh'  in  this  context,  denotes  something
                  severe, or bleak. It is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
                  comfortable.  Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the  adverb
                  'unduly'  raises  an  already  elevated   standard   still
                  higher."


         29.  Sedley LJ in  AD  Lee  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWCA Civ  248  stated  in  relation  to  the
             appeal before the Court:


                  "The tragic consequence is that this  family,  short-lived
                  as it has been, would be broken up for  ever,  because  of
                  the Appellant's bad behaviour. That  is  what  deportation
                  does".


         30.  I mention this short comment from Sedley LJ not of  itself  to
             justify a conclusion concerning undue harshness but to reflect
             that the normal  consequence  of  deportation  will  often  be
             severance of a young family. I accept that the Appellant  has
             played a diligent role as father and  the  two  children  will
             have bonded with him and that one of  them  has  some  special
             needs, although the extent of his needs going forward have yet
             to be identified. In my judgement, however, their mother is  a
             competent person. She has family  around  her  in  the  United
             Kingdom and a good record of work.  On the evidence before  me
             C 2 is in mainstream schooling but with the  prospect  of  the
             need of quite a lot of support  there  and  C  1  is  in  good
             health.


         31.  I do not for a moment suggest that life will be easy for  this
             young family if the British  citizens  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom without the Appellant. The consequences of his removal
             may be harsh. I do not consider, however, in the circumstances
             which I have outlined that they are unduly harsh.  The  issues
             in C 2's young life do add to his needs and are  relevant  but
             in my judgement,  given  the  circumstances  I  have  set  out
             concerning him and the other factors I have  identified,  they
             do not elevate the appeal to the standard of undue  harshness.




         32.  There are additional considerations which  I  am  required  to
             take into account and these are set out in section 117B of the
             2002 Act. The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
             in the public interest and the  Appellant  has  been  in  this
             country for 13 years without leave and thus  has  circumvented
             those controls. He does speak good English. I have no evidence
             of this own finances but he may be capable of being maintained
             by his partner. In  respect  of  her,  however,  theirs  is  a
             relationship established wholly whilst Appellant has  been  in
             this country unlawfully and for that  reason  alone  I  should
             have called it a little  weight.  The  provisions  of  section
             117B(6) do not apply in respect of the children, because their
             father is liable to deportation.


         33.   On  the  basis  of   these   findings,   considerations   and
             conclusions, the Appellant cannot succeed in  respect  of  his
             private or family life having regard to the Immigration  Rules
             or the 2002 Act.  There is little to be  said  otherwise.  The
             interests of the State are very strong in his removal. He  may
             not have offended since his release in 2014 but he has a  very
             poor criminal record  before  then  of  repeated  offences  of
             dishonesty and the sentencing judge, with all the facts before
             him, had no doubt that the index offence was  a  very  serious
             one. Public expectation is that foreign nationals  who  commit
             serious (and particularly where repeated) offences  should  be
             removed.  The decision taken by the Respondent,  initially  to
             deport and  now  to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  was  not
             unlawful."

9.   There was an application  for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    renewed on the footing that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to  have
    regard to the independent social worker's  report  and  the  background
    evidence about  conditions  in  Zimbabwe.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on 13 March 2019.  A response  was  filed
    on 5 April 2019.  On the same day a consolidated bundle  was  filed  by
    the appellant.  Counsel relied on the grounds of appeal  and  submitted
    that the judge's approach had been flawed.  He  had  failed  to  engage
    with the background evidence and the social worker's  report.   It  was
    acknowledged that he had referred to the bundle provided in  paragraphs
    8 to 10 of the decision.  It was clear  from  the  background  material
    that there would be food shortages and other problems.  Had  the  judge
    taken these matters into account he would find that the impact  on  the
    children would have been unduly harsh.   The  judge  had  accepted  the
    social worker's report had  been  provided  by  an  experienced  social
    worker but had failed to take into account her evidence.  It was  clear
    that C 2 needed parental support.  Counsel referred to  the  care  plan
    that had been prepared for the appellant.  Counsel submitted that there
    was a need for continuity of care.

10.  The appellant was responsible for putting the  children  to  bed  every
    night and stayed with the children at  home  and  in  his  absence  the
    children would be alone.  There would be difficulties for  C  2  to  be
    understood in Zimbabwe and he would be isolated.  There were no  speech
    therapists in Zimbabwe.  He would not be able to maintain communication
    through Skype.  The judge had materially erred in law  in  not  finding
    that it would be unduly harsh, rather than simply harsh.

11.  Mr Tarlow relied on the response that  had  been  filed  and  submitted
    that the arguments were simply a disagreement with the findings of fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge had correctly  referred  to
    the best interests of the children and to relevant authorities such  as
    KO (Nigeria).  He had referred to the decision of Lord  Justice  Sedley
    in Lee v Secretary of State.  Deportation had tragic consequences.   He
    was entitled to conclude that the effect would be harsh but not  unduly
    harsh.

12.  In response Counsel  submitted  that  the  grounds  went  further  than
    disagreeing with the judge's decision.  There was no  dispute  that  he
    had applied the correct legal  framework  and  had  not  given  it  the
    correct scrupulous analysis.  The decision  was  materially  flawed  in
    law.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  In  order
    to succeed in  this  appeal  it  is  necessary  for  the  appellant  to
    establish an error of law.  In this case it is accepted that the  judge
    directed himself appropriately on legal issues but  complaint  is  made
    about his treatment of the material in front of him.

14.  At the hearing the judge  was  presented  with  what  he  describes  as
    extensive bundles and Counsel refers in particular to paragraphs  8  to
    10 of the decision which it is perhaps helpful to reproduce here:

         "8.  In addition to his notice and grounds of appeal, the Appellant
             is  also  provided  a  bundle  of   documents,   through   his
             solicitors. This may be seen under cover of a letter dated  30
             October 2018.  It  extends  to  381  pages  in  five  separate
             sections. The last 241 pages are copies of reported  decisions
             relied  upon  by  the  Appellant   and   background   evidence
             concerning Zimbabwe. The first 140  pages  contain  subjective
             evidence. Because this bundle is helpfully  both  indexed  and
             paginated, I see no  need  to  set  out  the  details  of  its
             contents either.


         9.   On 2 November 2018, solicitors for the Appellant  again  wrote
             to the Tribunal. With this letter  they  included  a  skeleton
             argument relied upon in submissions on his behalf and  several
             items of additional background evidence concerning Zimbabwe.


         10.  At the hearing  the  Tribunal  was  served  with  two  witness
             statements and an independent social worker's report and other
             documents.  These may now  be  seen  under  cover  of  another
             letter dated 2 November 2018. Neither Ms Dogra nor I had  seen
             these additional  documents  and  I  adjourned  for  about  35
             minutes to enable each of us to consider them. At the  end  of
             that period I was assured by Ms Dogra that the time given  had
             been sufficient."

    The judge states in paragraph 13 that he had taken full account of  the
    documents provided by both parties.  The judge makes express  reference
    to the report of the social worker in paragraph  24  of  his  decision.
    The judge also makes express reference to the  particular  difficulties
    faced by C 2.  The judge observes in paragraph 25 that while  it  would
    be in the best interests of the children to remain in the UK with  both
    their parents "removal to Zimbabwe would have to be a decision for  the
    family as a whole."  It was a matter of their choice.  The options  are
    explored by the judge in paragraphs 26 and 27 of the decision  which  I
    have reproduced above.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    played "a diligent role as father" and that the two children  would  be
    bonded with him, although the extent of C 2's needs "going forward have
    yet to be identified".  The judge acknowledged  the  difficulties  that
    the family would face  if  left  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant.  The judge clearly had in mind C 2's circumstances  and  his
    needs.  He did  not  arguably  err  in  law  in  concluding  that  such
    circumstances did not "elevate the appeal  to  the  standard  of  undue
    harshness".  As the judge says, the interests of the  state  were  very
    strong in the appellant's removal.

15.  The essential question in this case is whether the judge had regard  to
    the material before him.  The determination makes it quite  clear  that
    the judge did have regard  to  the  documents.   In  particular  it  is
    apparent that  the  judge  adjourned  the  proceedings  to  enable  the
    additional documents to be looked at as he says in paragraph 10 of  the
    decision.  Further, in paragraph 13 the judge states,  and  I  have  no
    reason to doubt, that he  had  taken  full  account  of  the  documents
    provided.  He refers in paragraph 15 to the agreed facts which included
    C 2's difficulties and the fact that there was no complete diagnosis of
    his problems.

16.  I do not find that the judge erred in concluding that  while  it  would
    be harsh for the family to move with  the  appellant  to  Zimbabwe,  it
    would not be unduly harsh for any or all of  them  to  relocate  there.
    The judge's decision is satisfactorily reasoned and while it is concise
    it is none the worse for that.  I agree with the submissions made by Mr
    Tarlow and do not  find  that  the  judge  neglected  to  consider  any
    relevant matter or failed to take into account the evidence to which he
    makes reference.

17.  For the reasons I have given I find the  decision  raises  no  material
    error of law.

    Appeal dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Judge stands.


Anonymity Direction

18.  An anonymity order has been made in this  case  which  I  direct  shall
    continue.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 23 April 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
