
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09441/2019
                                                                         (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 17 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Delwar hussain
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas ("the judge"), promulgated on 7 October  2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of a human rights claim made on 29 October 2018.  That  refusal
    encompassed an allegation that the appellant had  dishonestly  obtained
    an English  language  test  certificate  in  2011  and  had  used  that
    certificate in an application made on 20 November 2012.  Thus, this was
    a case involving the well-known ETS issues  within  the  context  of  a
    human rights claim based on Article 8.



Procedural issues

 2. I have reached my decision on the error of law issue without a hearing,
    pursuant to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and in light of the Senior President of Tribunal's Pilot  Practice
    Direction of 23 March 2020 and the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1
    2020.

 3. Having issued directions on 30 April 2020 indicating a provisional view
    that the error of law  issue  could  fairly  be  determined  without  a
    hearing, both parties provided responses.  The appellant's  submissions
    in fact make no reference to  whether  there  were  objections  to  the
    absence of a hearing.  The respondent did state that she  requested  an
    oral hearing, although no reasons were provided for this.

 4. I have given careful consideration to the following matters:

      i. the core issue of fairness to both parties;

     ii. the overriding objective;

    iii. the content of the grounds of appeal;

     iv. the content of the parties' respective submissions on  the  merits;
         and

      v. the guidance set out by the Supreme Court in Osborn v Parole  Board
         [2013] UKSC 61.

 5. The core challenge in this case is narrow in scope: did the  judge  err
    in respect of the application of the applicable burden of  proof  in  a
    case involving an allegation of dishonesty against the appellant?  I am
    satisfied that the parties have addressed  this  core  issue  in  their
    respective submissions.  No  additional  matters  of  material  concern
    arise which might require either a further opportunity  to  address  in
    writing or an oral hearing.  In all the circumstances, I have concluded
    that it is appropriate to determine the error of law  issue  without  a
    hearing.

The judge's decision

 6. Having set out in summary form the evidence and the parties' respective
    positions, at [23] the judge directed himself that,  "[t]he  burden  of
    proof is upon the Appellant and the standard of proof is of the balance
    of probabilities."

 7. At [24] and [26] the judge placed significant weight on the appellant's
    assumed inability to converse  in  English.   It  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had failed to produce supporting evidence of his  ability  in
    the English language.  The  judge  goes  on  to  note  the  absence  of
    evidence of close ties in the United Kingdom, and he was  of  the  view
    that the appellant had maintained good ties with  Bangladesh.  At  [31]
    the judge stated as follows:

         "On the balance of probabilities, the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that
         the  Appellant  did  deploy  deception  in  relation  to  the  Test
         Certificate in 2011.  The Tribunal, as said, is entitled to examine
         the totality of the circumstances presented in this case as well as
         the generic evidence of cheating produced by the Respondent."

 8. The appeal was duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The grounds of appeal are succinct.  First, it is said that  the  judge
    erred by failing to ask the appellant at the hearing whether or not  he
    (the appellant) could indeed speak  English.   Simply  relying  on  the
    appellant's use of an interpreter at  the  hearing  was  an  inadequate
    basis for making an adverse finding.  Second, it is  alleged  that  the
    judge failed to apply the correct burden of proof.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    27 February 2020.

The appellant's written submissions

11. These  submissions  essentially  reflect  the  two  grounds  of  appeal
    described above, albeit in reverse order.   Specifically,  it  is  said
    that the judge failed to apply the  three-stage  approach  of  deciding
    whether the respondent discharged the evidential  burden;  whether,  on
    the evidence provided, the appellant had provided an  explanation  that
    was plausible/capable of belief; and finally whether the respondent had
    discharged the legal  burden  resting  upon  her  in  cases  concerning
    allegations of dishonesty.  In respect of the  appellant's  use  of  an
    interpreter at the hearing, it is  said  that  the  judge  should  have
    raised the issue at that stage.

The respondent's written submissions

12. The respondent acknowledges  the  three-stage  approach  applicable  in
    cases such as the present.  It is said that the judge was clearly "well
    aware" of the generic evidence provided by the respondent in ETS  cases
    and that:

         "that it would be reasonable to assume that  the  very  experienced
         judge knows the law in relation to ETS  appeals  although  in  this
         decision has not recorded the actual procedure."

13. These submissions go on to assert that the judge's failure to have  set
    out the "tos-and-fros" is immaterial given the lack of evidence adduced
    by the appellant.

Decision on error of law

14. For the following reasons I conclude  that  the  judge  has  materially
    erred in law.

15. In the context of this appeal, the judge's self-direction at  [23]  was
    clearly erroneous.  There are cases in which subsequent passages  in  a
    decision indicate that the correct approach has in  fact  been  adopted
    notwithstanding an apparently erroneous starting  point,  as  it  were.
    However, no such indications are evident  from  the  judge's  decision.
    There is no reference to the three-stages at any point or in any  form.
    Whilst I have taken the respondent's submissions into account, I am not
    prepared to simply assume  that  a  correct  approach  must  have  been
    adopted solely on the basis that the judge was "experienced" (a similar
    point relied on by a  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  was  regarded  as
    inappropriate by the Court of Appeal in Asfar  Uddin  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    338, at [15]).

16.  It  is  clear  from  the  judge's  decision  that  he  was  distinctly
    unimpressed by the absence of supporting evidence from  the  appellant.
    That fact  clearly  did  nothing  to  further  the  appellant's  cause.
    Notwithstanding this deficiency, it was incumbent on the judge to  deal
    specifically with the evidence that  he  did  have  (which  included  a
    witness statement) and  go  through  the  three-stage  process,  making
    appropriate findings along the way.  Having regard to the decision as a
    whole and the seriousness of allegations of dishonesty, I conclude that
    the judge's approach was flawed.  In short terms, there is  nothing  to
    satisfactorily indicate that the judge had considered  the  appellant's
    evidence and either  concluded  that  it  did  not  even  amount  to  a
    plausible  explanation  or,  if  it  did,  that  the   respondent   had
    nonetheless discharged the legal burden of proof.  In that sense, there
    was nothing to displace the initial erroneous self-direction stated  at
    [23].

17. I also conclude that, despite the lack of very much evidence  emanating
    from the appellant, the error was material.  It is not a case that  the
    absence of the error would have made a difference to the  outcome,  but
    in my view, it is the case that it could have done so.

18. The judge's decision must be set aside on this ground alone.   None  of
    the judge's findings are to be preserved.

19. I am bound to say that I am much  less  impressed  by  the  appellant's
    other ground of appeal.  Whilst it may have been prudent for the  judge
    to have raised the issue of the  appellant's  ability  in  the  English
    language  himself,  it  really  was  for  the  appellant  (and/or   his
    representative) to lead relevant evidence.  I conclude that there is no
    specific error in respect of the second ground.  However, this does not
    have a material bearing on my conclusion as to the first.

Disposal

20. Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the exception to the  rule.   In
    this case and having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement
    and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise  to   be
    undertaken, I conclude that the appropriate  course  of  action  is  to
    remit this appeal.

Anonymity

21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  and  there
    is no reason for me to do so.  I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

23. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

24. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete
         rehearing;

      2. No findings of Judge Lucas are to be preserved;

      3. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by Judge Lucas;

      4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  issue  any  further   appropriate
         directions to the parties in due course.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date: 3 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
