
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/09395/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 April 2018                           | On 11 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             ELKIN PATA ZULUAGA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E King, Counsel, instructed by Alexander Shaw
                    Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Abebrese (the judge),  promulgated  on  27  October  2017,
        allowing the respondent's appeal against a  decision  made  by  the
        appellant on 22 March 2016 refusing the respondent's  human  rights
        application made on or around November 2015.




Background


     2. The respondent is a national of Colombia, date of birth 5 May 1969.
        He claims to have first entered the UK in 1992 pursuant to a  visit
        visa. He returned to Colombia in 1997, 1999 and 2005. He obtained a
        Residence Card as a family member of an EEA national  on  29  March
        2004 based on his marriage to a  Spanish  national.  The  Residence
        Card was valid until 20 March 2009. An application for a  residence
        card signifying a right to permanent residence was  refused  on  12
        February 2010 as there was insufficient evidence  that  the  spouse
        had exercised Treaty rights for a  five-year  period.  Although  an
        appeal was lodged against this  decision  it  was  later  withdrawn
        because the relationship with the spouse broke down. A divorce  was
        finalised on 24 May 2017.


     3. The November  2015  application  was  made  on  the  basis  of  the
        respondent's relationship with his daughter and  other  members  of
        his immediate and extended family, including his mother and sister,
        and the private life he claimed to  have  established  since  first
        arriving in the  UK.  The  respondent  married  Dorelsy  Morena,  a
        Spanish national, on 28 July 2017.

     4. The application was refused on several bases. The appellant was not
        satisfied that the Suitability requirements of Appendix FM were met
        given the  length  of  the  respondent's  unlawful  residence,  his
        illegal employment and his illegal entry to the UK on  at  least  2
        separate occasions. The respondent could not meet the  requirements
        of Appendix FM under the 10-year Parent route because his  daughter
        was over the age  of  18  at  the  date  of  the  application.  The
        appellant was not satisfied EX.1 applied because the respondent did
        not have  a  qualifying  relationship  within  the  terms  of  that
        provision. The appellant was not satisfied the respondent had lived
        continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years,  as  required  by
        paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), because his residence was broken  by  his
        visits to Colombia and he had no reasonable expectation at the time
        of leaving the UK that he would be lawfully able to return. Nor was
        the appellant satisfied there were very  significant  obstacles  to
        the respondent's return  to  Colombia,  as  required  by  paragraph
        276ADE(1)(vi). The appellant  was  not  satisfied  there  were  any
        'exceptional   circumstances'   outside   the   immigration   rules
        warranting a grant of leave to remain in accordance with article  8
        principles.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

     5. At the appeal hearing  the  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
        respondent, his wife and his mother. Although there  was  a  letter
        from the respondent's daughter the respondent  informed  the  judge
        that he and his daughter had an argument and she did not attend the
        hearing. The respondent's representative conceded that he could not
        succeed under the '20-year rule' in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


     6. The judge found, based on  the  respondent's  immigration  history,
        that  he  had  evaded  the  attention  of  the  authorities  for  a
        significant period of time. The judge nevertheless stated, at [31],
        "... I do not make a  finding  that  the  [respondent's]  behaviour
        whilst in this country does not make him suitable under  the  rules
        in respect of the parent route because of his own evidence  he  has
        worked illegally, overstayed and not  made  himself  known  to  the
        authorities for significant part of his time in this country."  The
        judge found that the respondent was not eligible under  the  parent
        route of Appendix FM because his daughter was over the  age  of  18
        when the application was made and because she  and  the  respondent
        did not appear to be on  speaking  terms  [32].  In  light  of  the
        concession by the respondent's representative the judge found  that
        the '20-year rule' had  not  been  met  [33].  Nor  was  the  judge
        satisfied that there  were  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  the
        respondent's return to Colombia [34].


     7. The judge proceeded to consider the appeal outside the  immigration
        rules. The judge set out the 5-stage approach established in Razgar
        [2004] UKHL 27. At [36] the judge stated,

         I find that the proposed removal of the [respondent] will be an
         interference of the [respondent's] family life. I also find that
         the interference will such consequences of such gravity [sic] so as
         to potentially engage Article 8.


     8. At [37] the judge stated,

        I am also of the view that  the  decision  of  the  [appellant]  is
        unlawful because it  has  given  [sic]  sufficient  weight  to  the
        circumstances  of  the  [respondent]  in  this  country   and   the
        relationships which he has built with them in this country.

     9. At [38] the judge stated,

         I also find that the decision of the [appellant] has not been  made
         in the legitimate pursuance of effective  immigration  control  and
         that the interest of the [respondent] outweighs that of the public.
         The [respondent] speaks English, he  has  worked  in  this  country
         albeit for the majority illegally but he  has  paid  tax  and  made
         disclosure to HMRC in respect of his taxes and he provided evidence
         of having paid  tax  in  addition  to  evidence  of  his  P60.  The
         [respondent] will not and has not been a burden to the state and he
         has made a contribution. He has also in  my  view  integrated  into
         British society. I have also taken into consideration the fact that
         the [respondent] was candid in his evidence and  I  found  him  and
         members of his family to be credible witnesses.

    10. At [39] the judge found the appellant's  decision  disproportionate
        because the respondent had been in the UK for at least 18 years and
        because he has a daughter who was 20 years old. At [40]  the  judge
        found that the majority of the  respondents  'key'  family  members
        were either in the UK or Belgium, and found that the appellant, his
        mother and his wife were a close family unit. The judge found  that
        the majority of close family members were no longer in Colombia and
        that the respondent's removal would have "a negative impact" on his
        family members in  the  UK  and  Belgium.  The  judge  consequently
        allowed the appeal "under Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules  under
        exceptional circumstances."

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

    11. The grounds content that the judge failed to give legally  adequate
        reasons and made  perverse  or  irrational  findings.  The  grounds
        challenge the judge's assessment from [36]  to  [41].  The  grounds
        contend that the judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding  that
        family  life  was  engaged  in  the  context  of  the  respondent's
        relationships with adult family members. It was irrational to  find
        the  appellant's  decision  'unlawful'  having  accepted  that  she
        properly refused the application under the immigration  rules.  The
        judge failed to acknowledge that English  language  ability  and  a
        person's ability to demonstrate financial self-sufficiency were  at
        best neutral factors. Nor had  the  judge  considered  the  'little
        weight' provisions in circumstances where private  or  family  life
        was formed in precarious circumstances. There was also said to be a
        dearth  of  adequate  reasoning  as  to  how  the  impact  on   the
        respondent's   family   and   private   life   relationships    was
        disproportionate.


    12. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the  judge
        failed to adequately explain on what basis family life was found to
        exist between the respondent and his adult family members, that  he
        failed to adequately explain on what basis the appellant's decision
        was unlawful even though the application was  found  to  have  been
        correctly refused under the rules, and that  the  judge  failed  to
        adequately explain on what basis  the  section  117B  factors  were
        treated as other than neutral in the proportionality exercise.


    13. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  I  raised  my  concern  that  no
        consideration appeared to have been given to  any  right  that  the
        respondent may have  had  under  EU  free  movement  law  when  the
        proportionality assessment was undertaken. Mr Bramble  pointed  out
        that no application had been made for a residence  card  under  the
        Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016,  and  later
        submitted that any consideration of the  respondent's  relationship
        with his Spanish wife would have constituted a 'new  matter'  under
        s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Ms  King
        informed me that the respondent's wife passed away in January 2018.
        Ms King defended the decision and, whilst accepting that there were
        no clear findings in respect of the respondent's relationship  with
        his wife or her circumstances, any such failure,  as  well  as  any
        failure to regard the factors in s.117B (2) & (3) as  neutral,  and
        any failure to attach little weight to the private life established
        during the respondent's mostly precarious immigration  status,  was
        not material.

Discussion

    14. The principle reasons given by the judge for allowing the appeal on
        article 8 grounds outside the immigration rules, on the basis  that
        there were 'exceptional circumstances', are  detailed  at  [36]  to
        [40] of his decision. At [36] the judge finds that the respondent's
        removal would  interfere  with  his  family  life,  and  that  such
        interference would be of sufficient gravity to  engage  article  8.
        The judge does not identify the individual or individuals with whom
        the respondent has established his family life. If it is  with  his
        daughter,  this  sits  uncomfortably  with  the  judge's   previous
        findings that the respondent was not on  speaking  terms  with  his
        daughter. Nor was there any assessment  as  to  whether  there  was
        anything more than the normal  emotional  bonds  one  would  expect
        between adult children and their parents (Kugathas v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31; Singh  &  Anor  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630). It
        may however be that the judge was  referring  to  the  respondent's
        relationship with his wife. If so, there can be little challenge to
        the conclusion that article 8 was engaged as this relationship  was
        accepted as genuine. Although the paragraph remains unclear,  I  am
        not persuaded that this amounts to a material legal error.


    15.  I find paragraph 37 to be confusing. It is likely,  having  regard
        to the paragraph as a whole, that the judge forgot to  include  the
        word "not"  between  "has"  and  "given".  It  is  not  immediately
        apparent why the judge found the  appellant's  decision  'unlawful'
        given that the judge appeared to  accept  that  the  appellant  was
        correct to refuse the application under the immigration  rules.  If
        the judge found the appellant's decision 'unlawful'  based  on  the
        case of R (on the application of HRP and  Others)  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT  00351  (IAC),  which
        was relied on by the respondent's representative and is incorrectly
        cited at [27] of the judge's decision, then it is difficult to  see
        how this is relevant to a merits based proportionality  assessment.
        The case of HRP was a judicial review challenge where there was  no
        right of appeal, a context far removed from the present case  where
        the judge was able to consider proportionality for himself. Nor has
        the judge  given  legally  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that
        insufficient weight was given to the respondent's circumstances and
        the relationships established by  him.  It  is  apparent  from  the
        appellant's  decision  that   she   considered   the   respondent's
        relationship with his daughter and with his mother and sister (see,
        in particular, under 'Decision on Exceptional Circumstances'),  and
        that consideration was also given  to  his  personal  circumstances
        during consideration under the 10-year private  life  route.  While
        one may be entitled to disagree with the  appellant's  decision,  I
        can find no basis for holding the decision unlawful.


    16. It is difficult to identify the basis for the  judge's  conclusion,
        at [38],  that  the  appellant's  decision  was  not  made  in  the
        legitimate pursuance of effective immigration control.  This  is  a
        separate issue from  the  assessment  of  proportionality  (compare
        stages (4) and (5) of the Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  approach).  The
        judge provides no explanation  to  support  his  assertion.  I  can
        identify nothing in  the  evidence  before  the  judge  that  would
        entitle him to conclude that the decision was not made in pursuance
        of  effective  immigration  control,  which  has   been   held   to
        constitute, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim under article 8(2).
         Moreover, it appears from a holistic assessment of [38]  that  the
        judge has held the respondent's ability to speak  English  and  his
        ability  to  be  financially  independent  as  factors   positively
        advancing his article 8 claim. This approach however is contrary to
        Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA
        Civ 803 and AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)  which  held
        that a person's English language proficiency and their  ability  to
        be financially  independent  are  only  neutral  factors.  Ms  King
        submitted that  this  error  could  not  materially  undermine  the
        judge's ultimate assessment of proportionality. I cannot agree.  If
        the judge had  not  approached  these  two  factors  as  positively
        advancing the respondent's human rights  claim  then  he  may  have
        reached a different decision. In any  event,  I  find  this  error,
        cumulatively considered with the others I have identified,  renders
        the decision  unsafe.  I  additionally  note  the  absence  of  any
        reasoned explanation given by the  judge  for  his  view  that  the
        appellant has "integrated into British society."


    17. Even if the respondent's relationship with his wife  constituted  a
        'new matter' as understood in  s.85  of  the  2002  Act  (and  with
        reference to Mahmud (S. 85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters')  [2017]  UKUT
        00488 (IAC), the respondent's relationship with his spouse, at  the
        very least, constituted a significant element of his  private  life
        and required greater consideration than that given  by  the  judge.
        There was no satisfactory assessment of the nature  and  extent  of
        the family/private life relationships established by the respondent
        in the UK. Although the judge accepted that the respondent was in a
        genuine relationship with Ms Morena there was no assessment of  the
        possibility that she could move to Colombia in  order  to  maintain
        their relationship. I note that Ms Morena has visited Colombia (see
        paragraphs [22] & [24] of the determination) and  I  take  judicial
        notice of the fact that Colombia is a Spanish speaking country.  At
        [40] the judge finds that removing  the  respondent  would  have  a
        "negative impact" on all his family members in the UK and  Belgium,
        but there is no further explanation or assessment of this "negative
        impact." This aspect of the decision lacks satisfactory reasoning.


    18.  Nor  is  it  apparent  from  the  judge's  determination  that  he
        considered  and  applied  all  of  the  relevant  public   interest
        considerations identified in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration
        and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and  in  particular,  s.117B  (5),   which
        establishes that little weight should be given to  a  private  life
        established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
        status is precarious. This failure alone is  sufficient  to  render
        the judge's proportionality assessment unsafe.


    19. For all these reasons I find the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made
        material legal errors and that his  decision  is  not  sustainable.
        Given that there has been inadequate assessment of the  nature  and
        extend  of  the  private  life  relationships  established  by  the
        respondent, and given the recent  death  of  his  spouse,  and  the
        issues  raised  by  Mr  Bramble  with  whether   the   respondent's
        relationship constituted a 'new matter', it is appropriate to remit
        this case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered afresh
        by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese.

Notice of Decision

The decision is vitiated by material error of  law.  The  case  is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be decided  afresh,  by  a  judge  other
than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese.

Signed                              5 April 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


