
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/09840/2018
                                                               hU/09841/2018
                                                               hu/09843/2018
                                                               HU/09845/2018
                                                               hu/09847/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2019                    |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                ABDUL [S] (1)

                               TAHERA [B] (2)

                                  [A B] (3)

                                  [N B] (4)

                                  [M S] (5)

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T Shah, solicitor, from Taj Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1. The claimants are a family of Bangladeshi citizens.  The  first  two
       claimants are a married couple, and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
       claimants are their children who are 7, 6 and 3 years old. The first
       claimant entered the UK in April 2004  with  a  sector-based  scheme
       visa valid for two years, and has not  left  since  this  time.  The
       second claimant arrived in the UK in May  2008  with  a  visit  visa
       valid for 6 months. She left during this period but returned in  May
       2010 as a visitor, and then overstayed from October  2010  when  her
       leave to remain in this  capacity  expired.  The  first  and  second
       claimants met and were married in the  UK  in  September  2011.  The
       third, fourth and fifth claimants are their children  who  were  all
       born  in  the  UK.  Human  rights  applications/  applications   for
       reconsideration with additional evidence were made  in  2009,  2011,
       2014 and 2016. In January 2018 the  claimants  were  asked  for  any
       additional grounds, and the response to this notice was found to  be
       a human rights application which was refused on 16th April 2018 with
       a right of appeal. The appeal against this decision was  allowed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore in a  determination  promulgated  on
       the 23rd November 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Grimmett on 28th December 2018 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law. I found that the  First-
       tier Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out  in  Annex  A
       below. The matter now comes before me to remake the appeal.

    3. At the hearing Ms Willocks-Briscoe explained that due to the date of
       decision in this matter the decision refusing leave to remain would,
       in due course, be reviewed by the Secretary of State  as  it  was  a
       decision to which the previous policy of  the  Secretary  of  State:
       "Family Life as Partner or Parent and Private Life Version: Ten Year
       Routes" Version 1.0 published on  22nd  February  2018  applied.  It
       followed that powerful reasons  were  needed  not  to  find  it  was
       unreasonable to expect a child who has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
       years to leave the UK. She was not instructed to concede the  appeal
       but was not in a position to make any sensible submissions on behalf
       of the Secretary of State in the circumstances of  this  case  given
       the application of this policy. I therefore asked the four witnesses
       who had come to court (the first and second claimants and  Mr  Abdul
       [M] and Mr Malik [A]) to adopt their  statements  and  confirm  that
       they were true and then informed Mr Shah that he  did  not  need  to
       make any submissions as I would be allowing the remaking  appeal  on
       the basis of the application of this policy.

   Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    4. The key evidence of the first as set out by the  first  claimant  in
       his witness statement is that he came to the UK to work as a butcher
       with a visa to do this in April 2004, and  then  applied  to  remain
       further on human rights ground as he wished to continue doing  this.
       He met his wife, the second claimant, in 2010  and  they  had  their
       eldest child, the third claimant,  on  1st  September  2011  and  an
       Islamic marriage on 12th September 2011. They then went on  to  have
       two further children (the fourth and fifth claimants) in March  2013
       and March 2016. The oldest two children are in school in the UK.  He
       says that it would be very difficult for the  family  to  settle  in
       Bangladesh because  they  have  lost  ties  with  their  country  of
       nationality. He has now lived in  the  UK  for  15  years,  and  has
       friends in this country. He says that it would be hard to find a job
       and accommodation in his country of origin. His eldest daughter, the
       third claimant, has friends and sees herself as British having lived
       here all of her life. He would not be able to afford English  medium
       schooling as this is very expensive  in  Bangladesh,  costing  about
       $18,000 US per year. The third claimant  cannot  read  or  write  in
       Bengali. Bengali medium state schools also suffer from  large  class
       size and the  schools  lack  books  and  other  resource  materials.
       Returning to Bangladesh would lead to a life of poverty and hardship
       for all of them, including the three  child  claimants.  They  would
       also lose out on contact with his UK based  relatives,  he  has  one
       brother who is settled  here  and  the  second  claimant  has  three
       brothers, along with cousins and other extended  family.  UK  family
       could not afford to support them in Bangladesh as this would  be  an
       on-going permanent type of support whereas the support given here is
       time-limited as it will cease if they have leave to  remain  as  the
       first and second claimants are confident that they  could  get  work
       here with permissions to do so.  There are no family  in  Bangladesh
       who could provide financial or practical assistance.

    5. The evidence of the second claimant sets  out  the  same  points  as
       outlined by the first claimant.

    6. Written evidence was also provided by Mr Abdul [M] and Mr Malik [A].
       Mr Abdul [M] is the older brother of the first claimant. He confirms
       he is a British citizen and that the claimants have lived with  him,
       and that the third, fourth and fifth  claimants  have  strong  bonds
       with himself and his wife and his children who are of a similar age.
       He says the first claimant would struggle to  obtain  employment  in
       Bangladesh and that he only gives him a small amount of cash in  the
       UK which would not suffice for the claimants to get a house or  live
       in Bangladesh. He believes that  the  claimants  would  struggle  to
       reintegrate in Bangladesh and it would be very hard on them all.  Mr
       Malik [A] is the first claimant's cousin. Mr [A] says that he  is  a
       British citizen and that the claimants live with him, and that he is
       happy for them to continue staying with him.

    7. There other evidence in this case consists of letters from Mr  Adbul
       [Md] (cousin of the first claimant),  Mr  Md  [S]  (brother  of  the
       second claimant), Mr Mohammed [R] (brother of the second  claimant),
       Mr Sofike [U] (brother of the second claimant), Mr Salek [U] (cousin
       of the second claimant). They are all British citizens  who  confirm
       that they support the claimants in the UK,  and  have  contact  with
       them and believe that it is their best interests to remain  in  this
       country as they would not be able to  provide  support  to  them  in
       Bangladesh. School documents from the third claimant's  school  show
       that she is a friendly, hardworking and well-mannered member of  the
       class who is working academically  at  or  above  the  national  age
       expectations. The fourth claimant is likewise described as a delight
       to teach and is exceeding academic expectations in all areas.

   Conclusions - Remaking

    8. The third claimant is a qualifying child as she has lived in the  UK
       for more than 7 years, have been born here on  1st  September  2011.
       The first and second claimants have genuine and subsisting  parental
       relationships with her as her father and  mother.  These  facts  are
       accepted by the Secretary  of  State,  and  clearly  true  from  the
       evidence before me.

    9. This case turns on whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
       third claimant to leave the UK. If it  is  not,  there  will  be  no
       public interest in her removal as she will meet the requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) and there will  be
       no public interest in the removal of her parents as s.117B(6) of the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states this is the case
       if it is not reasonable to expect the third claimant to  leave.  Her
       siblings, the fourth and fifth claimants, would then also succeed in
       this appeal as it would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
       their family life relationships with the  first,  second  and  third
       claimants to require them to leave as they are very  young  children
       (aged 6 and 3 years) whose interests are simply  to  be  with  their
       parents and older sibling.

   10. The Policy Document of the respondent: "Family Life as   Partner  or
       Parent and  Private  Life  Version:  Ten  Year  Routes  Version  1.0
       published on 22nd February 2018 sets out as follows at  page  75  of
       the document: "The requirement that a non-British citizen child  has
       lived in the UK for a continuous period of at least the seven  years
       immediately preceding the date of application, recognises that  over
       time children start to put down roots and to integrate into life  in
       the UK, to the extent that it may be  unreasonable  to  require  the
       child to leave the UK. Significant weight must be given  to  such  a
       period of continuous residence. The longer the child has resided  in
       the UK, and the older the age at which they have done so,  the  more
       the balance will begin to shift towards  it  being  unreasonable  to
       expect the child to  leave  the  UK,  and  strong  reasons  will  be
       required in order to refuse a case where the outcome will be removal
       of a child with continuous UK residence of seven years or more".

   11. I find that  there  are  no  strong  reasons  to  find  that  it  is
       reasonable to expect the third claimant to leave giving  significant
       weight to the third claimant's seven year  period  of  residence  in
       line with the policy outlined above which it  is  accepted  for  the
       respondent applied at the time of decision in this case. Whilst  her
       parents have overstayed their leave to remain  they  did  not  enter
       illegally and have  not  used  false  identities  and  there  is  no
       evidence that they have committed any other unlawful acts. I find it
       is in the best interests  of  the  third  claimant  to  be  able  to
       continue living in the UK where she is excelling  at  school,  where
       she is surrounded by extended family members and where she  has  her
       school friends. I find that her parents will be able to provide  for
       her with accommodation and financial support very much  more  easily
       from work in the UK than in Bangladesh as her father came to the  UK
       to work under the Sector Based Scheme as a  butcher  for  this  very
       reason. Whilst her father may well obtain work in Bangladesh if  the
       family were returned he is not a highly educated or qualified person
       and the family is likely to live in a significant degree of poverty.
        The third claimant cannot current write  and  read  in  Sylheti  or
       Bengali and so her education would be  hindered  for  a  significant
       period of time if she had to return to Bangladesh  and  learn  these
       skills at a point when other children  will  have  already  acquired
       these skills.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.
   2. I set aside the decision and all of the  findings  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.
   3. I remake the appeal allowing it under Article 8 ECHR.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   16th July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






Annex A: Error of Law Decision



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


    1. The claimants are a family of Bangladeshi  citizens.  The  first  two
       claimants are a married couple,  and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
       claimants are their children who are 7, 5 and 2 years old. The  first
       claimant entered the UK in April 2004 with a sector-based scheme visa
       valid for two years, and has not left since  this  time.  The  second
       claimant arrived in the UK in May 2008 with a visit visa valid for  6
       months. She left during this period but returned in  May  2010  as  a
       visitor, and then overstayed from October  2010  when  her  leave  to
       remain in this capacity expired. The first and second  claimants  met
       and were married in the UK in September 2011. The third,  fourth  and
       fifth claimants are their children who were all born in the UK. Human
       rights applications/ applications for reconsideration with additional
       evidence were made in 2009, 2011, 2014 and 2016. In January 2018  the
       claimants were asked for any additional grounds, and the response  to
       this notice was found to be a  human  rights  application  which  was
       refused on 16th April 2018 with a right of appeal. The appeal against
       this decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shore  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 23rd November 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Grimmett on 28th December 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in finding that there  were  no
       insurmountable obstacles to family life in Bangladesh  but  that  the
       weight to be given to the eldest child having  been  in  the  UK  for
       seven years outweighed the public interest  in  the  removal  of  the
       family.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law


    4. The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
       take into account the decision of the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)
       and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 as there was a failure  to  look  at
       the real world context of the  best  interests  of  the  child  which
       should have included the fact that the parents and  children  had  no
       leave to remain in the UK. As there was a finding that there would be
       no very significant obstacles to integration at paragraph 62  of  the
       decision; a finding that the third claimant was young enough to adapt
       to life in Bangladesh at paragraph 71; and a finding that there  were
       no exceptional circumstances at paragraphs 71  and  77  the  decision
       allowing the appeal fails to follow KO (Nigeria).  It is argued  that
       there was a failure to identify  any  best  interests  of  the  third
       claimant in remaining in the UK, such as matters relating to  health,
       schooling or family ties with the UK, and indeed to the  contrary  it
       is found that all three child claimants speak basic Bengali and would
       be able to improve their language on  return  at  paragraph  63.  The
       First-tier Tribunal found that the first  and  second  claimants  had
       deliberately attempted to avoid the immigration law, at paragraphs 29
       and 61-64 and also  found  that  there  were  other  public  interest
       factors against them, see paragraphs 73 to 78,  including  that  they
       were not financially independent and could not speak English.

    5. The claimants did not file a Rule 24 notice. Mr Shah argued initially
       that the grant of permission did not identify all of the  aspects  of
       the Secretary of State's grounds, but did not pursue this matter when
       I pointed out that the grant was not an explicitly  limited  one.  He
       also argued that there was material before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       which might have led the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  conclude  that
       it was in the best interests of the children to  remain  in  the  UK,
       such as evidence about their having cousins and friends  in  the  UK,
       and in relation to  the  progress  with  their  schooling,  but  that
       evidence had not been set out in the decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law


    6. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are accurately summarised  by
       the respondent in the grounds of appeal, and are as set out above.

    7. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law  by  failing  to
       give adequate reasons at paragraphs 69 to 72 for finding that  it  is
       in the third claimant's best interest to remain in the UK. There  are
       no reasons given beyond the fact that the third claimant has lived in
       the UK all of the seven years of her life, and in fact reasons  which
       would appear to question whether it  is  in  her  best  interests  to
       remain such as her being  young  enough  to  adapt  to  returning  to
       Bangladesh; the fact that she would be returning with her family; and
       the fact that she already speaks basic Bengali and would  be  quickly
       able to catch up linguistically  if  returned  to  Bangladesh  appear
       perhaps to point to the opposite conclusion.

    8. I also find that the First-tier Tribunal erred, in the light  of  the
       guidance given in KO(Nigeria) at paragraph 19, in failing to  provide
       reasons why it would not be reasonable to expect  her  leave  the  UK
       when applying s.117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002 particularly  given that that reasonableness must be a "real
       world" assessment which should have included reference  to  the  fact
       that the third claimant's parents did not have leave to remain.

    9. The lack  of  sufficient  reasons  for  the  decision  on  the  third
       claimant's case under s.117B(6) then makes the decision unreliable in
       relation to the rest of  the  claimants  as  it  is  clear  that  the
       decision in her favour under  this  provision   is  the  only  factor
       found to be in the claimants favour, and  thus  the  decisive  factor
       which leads to the allowing of the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
       for the whole family.



  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.
    2. I set aside the decision and all of the findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.
    3. I adjourn the re-making appeal to take place  after  the  forthcoming
       guidance decisions on the implementation of KO  (Nigeria)  which  are
       anticipated shortly from a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal.






Directions:

    1. The matter will be listed for a case management review hearing at the
       first available date in April 2019, and it  is  anticipated  that  at
       this hearing a date will be fixed for the matter  to  be  reheard  de
       novo in the Upper Tribunal.
    2. Any updating evidence relating to the best  interests  of  the  child
       claimants, or other relevant matters, will be served and filed in  an
       indexed paginated bundle 10 days prior to  the  substantive  remaking
       hearing.


Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    11th  February
2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



