
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09880/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2019                             |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR GURNAM SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Z Young, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Singh, Moore Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is Mr  Gurnam  Singh.
    However for ease of reference, in the course of  this  determination  I
    shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  Hereafter, I
    shall in this determination, refer to Mr Gurnam Singh as the appellant,
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The appellant is a national of India. The appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom on 4th November 2015 with a family visit visa  valid  from  4th
    September 2015 until 4th September 2017.  When he first arrived in  the
    United Kingdom, he was accompanied by his wife.  Sadly, his wife passed
    away in May 2016, and it would appear that the  appellant  returned  to
    India to deal with the funeral arrangements. As he had the  benefit  of
    an extant visit visa, the appellant returned to the  UK  on  29th  June
    2016, so that he could be looked after by his daughter and  son-in-law,
    in the aftermath of his wife's death.


 3. In January 2017, an application made by the appellant was  received  by
    the respondent. The application was accompanied by a  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors, dated 29th December 2016.  The covering  letter
    describes the application as an application for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside of the immigration rules on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's exceptional circumstances that have led to his private  and
    family life in the UK. The application was refused  by  the  respondent
    for the reasons that set out in a decision dated 11th April 2018.  That
    decision gave rise to an appeal before FtT Judge Place.  The FtT  Judge
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds for the reasons set  out  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26th September 2018.  It is that decision  that
    is the subject of the appeal before me.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 4. The appeal was heard by FtT Judge Place on  10th  September  2018.  The
    appellant attended the  hearing  and  was  represented.  There  was  no
    appearance on behalf of the respondent. The focus  of  the  appeal  was
    upon the appellant's relationship with his daughter, Mrs Kulwant  Kaur,
    and his son-in-law, Mr Palwinder Singh.


 5. At paragraphs [8] to [13]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  records  the
    evidence that was given by the appellant, his daughter, and his son-in-
    law.  The Judge's findings of fact  and  conclusions  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [14] to [28] of the decision.


 6. The FtT Judge found that the  appellant  has  been  cared  for  by  his
    daughter and family, since the death of his wife and his diagnosis with
    liver  cancer.   The  Judge  noted,  at  [15],  the  requirement  under
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  that  the  appellant  must   establish   very
    significant obstacles to the appellant' integration  into  India.   The
    Judge found that the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The Judge went on to consider the  Article  8
    claim outside the immigration rules and found that the  appellant  does
    enjoy family life  with  his  daughter  for  the  reasons  set  out  in
    paragraph [20] of the decision. The Judge noted that the  question  for
    him is that of proportionality. The Judge  had  regard  to  the  public
    interest considerations set out in s117B of the  2002  Act,  and  noted
    that the  appellant  cannot  speak  English,  and  is  not  financially
    independent. At paragraphs [26] and [27], the Judge states:


         "26. I have taken into account the state of the appellant's  health
         relying on the letter of 23rd August 2018 from his  GP.  Though  it
         has been suggested by the witnesses that the appellant is suffering
         from a terminal illness, that is not backed up by the GP's  letter.
         I find that the appellant is currently free from liver cancer.  His
         other  health  conditions  appear  to  be  kept  under  control  by
         medication. He is frail and in need of support but that health care
         is available in India and the support he requires could be provided
         to an adequate standard, even if not to the standard of  a  devoted
         daughter which Mrs Kaur gives, by paid professionals.


         27.  I take into account the  understandable  reluctance  that  the
         appellant has to return to his former home in India which  will  be
         full of memories of his life with his  wife.  I  do,  though,  find
         merit in the respondent's argument  in  the  refusal  letter  that,
         though the appellant's circumstances are sad, grief and loss are  a
         part  of  life  and  there  is  nothing  particularly  unusual   or
         compelling about being left alone as a widower."


 7.  At  paragraph  [28],  the  Judge  concluded  that  the   question   of
    proportionality is finely balanced and  that  there  are  factors  that
    weigh both for and against the appellant. The Judge found that the fact
    that the family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his  daughter  was
    established while the appellant was in the UK legally, and in difficult
    circumstances that were beyond anybody's  control,  together  with  the
    absence of any family life in India,  just  tips  the  balance  in  the
    appellant's favour.





The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 8. The respondent claims  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality by failing to have proper regard to the public interest
    considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act.  The respondent claims
    that the matters that the FtT Judge was bound to  have  regard  to,  in
    considering the public interest are  matters  that  weigh  against  the
    appellant. His immigration status has always been precarious. He cannot
    speak English and he is not financially independent.  Furthermore,  the
    FtT Judge erred in concluding that there is no family support available
    to the appellant in India. There is no doubt  that  the  former  family
    home remains in India and would be available to the appellant. The  FtT
    Judge also refers, at paragraph [10] of the decision, to a brother that
    remains in India. Although that brother may be unable to care  for  the
    appellant, given his own health, the Judge found,  at  [26],  that  the
    appellant is currently free from liver  cancer  and  his  other  health
    conditions appear to be kept under control by  medication.  Any  health
    needs are available in India, and could  be  provided  to  an  adequate
    standard.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  Judge  Bird  on  2nd  November
    2018.  The matter comes before me to determine whether the decision  of
    the FtT Judge contains a material error of law, and if  so,  to  remake
    the decision.


10. Before me, on behalf of the respondent,  Mrs  Young  submits  that  the
    Judge's conclusion that  the  question  of  proportionality  is  finely
    balanced, and the balance is just tipped in the appellant's favour,  is
    irrational. It was open to the FtT Judge to find that the appellant has
    established a family life with his daughter, but having concluded  that
    the appellant is unable to satisfy the requirements of the  immigration
    rules, and that the public interest considerations at set out in  s117B
    of the 2002 weigh against the appellant, the Judge fails to  adequately
    explain why removal of the appellant to India, where he has a home  and
    relatives, is disproportionate. Mrs Young submits that the Judge  fails
    to consider whether the family life that existed between the appellant,
    his daughter and her family, could continue as it obviously had, for  a
    number of years previously.


11. In reply, Mr Singh submits  that  the  Judge  had  the  opportunity  of
    hearing the appellant and his witnesses give evidence,  and  forming  a
    view of them. In light of the unexpected  death  of  his  wife,  it  is
    understandable that  the  appellant  would  wish  to  remain  with  his
    daughter, who has provided a significant amount of support to him.   Mr
    Singh submits that on the  evidence,  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that the balance is just tipped in the appellant's favour.


Discussion


12. I remind myself that it is now well established that  a  finding  might
    only be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity  if  it
    was irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was
    wholly unsupported by the  evidence.  On  appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should not overturn a judgment at  first  instance,  unless  it  really
    cannot understand the original judge's thought process when  the  Judge
    was making material findings.


13. The FtT Judge found that the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    cannot be met by the appellant. The judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that  the  rules
    cannot be met, does not absolve decision makers  from  carrying  out  a
    full merits-based assessment outside the rules under Article  8,  where
    the ultimate issue is whether a fair balance has  been  struck  between
    the individual and public interest, giving due weight to the provisions
    of the Rules.


14. The Judge adopted the five-stage approach set out in Razgar.  The Judge
    was satisfied  that  the  appellant  enjoys  a  family  life  with  his
    daughter.  The respondent does not challenge  that  finding.   The  FtT
    Judge also found that the decision to refuse leave to remain  may  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8, and that the respondent has acted  in  accordance  with  the
    law. The ultimate question in Article 8 cases is whether a fair balance
    has been struck between the competing public and  individual  interests
    involved, applying a proportionality test.


15. It is now well established that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1)  of
    the immigration rules are said to  reflect  how  the  balance  will  be
    struck under Article 8 between the right to  respect  for  private  and
    family life, and the legitimate aims listed in article 8(2), so that if
    an applicant fails to meet the requirements of  the  Rules,  it  should
    only be in genuinely exceptional circumstances that refusing them leave
    and removing them from the UK, would breach Article 8.


16. Here, I am satisfied that the Judge's analysis  of  proportionality  is
    irrational. The Judge refers to s117B of the 2002 Act, and  noted  that
    the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest. The Judge noted that the appellant cannot speak  English  and
    is not financially independent. The Judge found that the  appellant  is
    currently free from liver  cancer,  and  his  other  health  conditions
    appear to be kept under control by medication. The Judge noted that the
    appellant is frail and in need of support, but found that  health  care
    is available in India, and the support he requires, could  be  provided
    to  an  adequate  standard  by  paid  professionals.  In  reaching  his
    conclusion that the question of proportionality is finely balanced,  it
    is difficult to see what it  is  in  the  factual  matrix,  or  in  the
    evidence, that tips the balance in favour of  the  appellant.  One  has
    some sympathy, as the FtT Judge did, with the  circumstances  that  the
    appellant found himself in following  the  unfortunate  and  unexpected
    death of his wife. It is entirely understandable that his daughter  and
    son-in-law would wish to support him in the aftermath, particularly  at
    a time when the appellant himself went through a period of  ill-health.
    That sympathy is not sufficient to establish  an  Article  8  right  to
    remain in the UK, when the requirements of the rules cannot be met, and
    factors relevant to the question of proportionality, weigh against  the
    appellant.


17. In my judgement, in reaching the decision, the FtT Judge also failed to
    consider the support that would be available to the appellant in India.
     At paragraph [10] of the decision, the Judge refers to the family that
    the appellant has remaining in India. He has a brother who is  said  to
    have suffered a stroke and is under constant care.  Although it may  be
    correct  that  the  appellants  brother  is  unable  to  care  for  the
    appellant, that is not to say that the appellant would be  without  any
    support whatsoever, and would be isolated.


18. It is difficult to identify any exceptional  circumstances  capable  of
    establishing a breach of Article 8, where the Judge has found that  the
    requirements of the rules cannot be  met  by  the  appellant,  and  the
    relevant public interest  considerations  set  out  in  statute,  weigh
    against the appellant. Reviewing the decision of FtT Judge Place  as  a
    whole, I have reached the conclusion that the Judge's finding that  the
    decision to refuse leave to remain is disproportionate,  was,  for  the
    reasons given  by  the  Judge,  irrational.   It  follows  that  in  my
    judgment, the FtT Judge erred in law such  that  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the decision and it must be set aside.


19. I remake the decision having regard to the findings  made  by  the  FtT
    Judge. It is uncontroversial that  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  does   not
    challenge the finding that the appellant has established a family  life
    with his daughter in the UK.  The issue in this appeal, as is often the
    case, is whether the interference is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved.


20. The FtT Judge found that the appellant is  currently  free  from  liver
    cancer and his other health conditions appear to be kept under  control
    by medication. The health care that he needs is available in India  and
    the support he requires could be provided to an adequate standard.  The
    maintenance of proper immigration control is in the public interest and
    the public interest considerations set out in s117B  of  the  2002  all
    weigh against the appellant.  There is no evidence before me as to when
    the appellant's daughter married and  came  to  the  UK.  There  is  no
    evidence before me as to when she was granted British  citizenship,  or
    indeed, as to the way in which the appellant  maintained  contact  with
    his daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren, whilst  he  was  living  in
    India with his wife previously. There  is  no  evidence  before  me  to
    suggest that the family life enjoyed previously,  could  not  continue.
    The FtT Judge accepted Mrs Kaur's evidence that she could not return to
    India with the appellant and care for him there, because she could  not
    leave her children who are settled in the UK. That is not to  say  that
    the appellant would be  unable  to  maintain  communications  with  his
    daughter, son-in-law,  and  his  grandchildren,  or  that  they  cannot
    continue the relationship through  visits  to  and  from  India.   Only
    little weight can be attached to the private life  that  the  appellant
    has established with the wider community whilst he has been in the  UK.
    The visit visa granted to him permitted him to travel to the UK  for  a
    short  period,  and  his  immigration  status  has   throughout,   been
    precarious.


21. Having carefully considered the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    interference with family life in this case  is  proportionate,  and  it
    follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


22. The appeal by the SSHD is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge  Place
    is set aside.


23. I remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal on  Article  8
    grounds.


    Signed                                  Date          15th May 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.

