
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09555/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     sC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R de Mello, Counsel, instructed by Whitefield
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought with permission granted by the Upper Tribunal
    on 22 October 2019 against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckley who following a hearing in Manchester on 25 July 2019 dismissed
    the appellant's human rights appeal.  That appeal was  brought  in  the
    context of the respondent's  decision  that  the  appellant  should  be
    deported from the United Kingdom as a foreign criminal.  On  5  October
    2018 the appellant was convicted of assault occasioning  actual  bodily
    harm on his wife, to be with whom he had come to  the  United  Kingdom,
    following marriage; and also possession of extreme pornographic images,
    including intercourse/oral sex with dead/alive animals.

 2. The appellant was on 12 November 2018 sentenced to a term of 22 months'
    imprisonment for the assault offence and he  received  consecutively  a
    sentence of six months' imprisonment  for  the  possession  of  extreme
    pornography.  A restraining order for a period  of  twelve  months  was
    also made against him in respect of contact with his wife.

 3. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  were  that  his  removal  would  be
    incompatible with the right to respect for his private and family  life
    which he enjoyed in the United Kingdom, in particular with his children
    of the marriage; and also that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  those
    children to be expected to live in Pakistan.

 4. The judge made a series of findings contrary to the appellant.  Some of
    those findings relate to his relationship with his  wife,  to  which  I
    will return in due course.

 5. The ground upon which permission was  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contends that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in declining  to
    place any weight on the witness statement of the  appellant's  wife  in
    drawing an adverse inference from her non-attendance  at  the  hearing.
    It was said that on 19 June 2019 the appellant wrote to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, asking for the hearing to be adjourned because his wife would
    like to give supporting  evidence  in  relation  to  the  matter.   The
    request was made by a letter that suggested the adjournment  should  be
    until after the restraining order against the appellant was removed, as
    the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  wife  would  be   of   significant
    importance.

 6. On 3  July  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  the  adjournment
    application, saying that the wife could provide evidence via a  witness
    statement and that the appeal was to proceed.  This decision was  taken
    by a Tribunal caseworker.  The caseworker's decision  referred  to  the
    right of the appellant to ask for the matter to be  reconsidered  by  a
    judge.

 7. On 4 July 2019, the appellant's solicitors sent a letter to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, reiterating that the appellant's  wife  wished  to  give
    evidence and that it would be extremely important to  his  appeal.   As
    far as I can see from the bundle and from the case file, there  was  no
    reconsideration of the refusal to adjourn before the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Certainly, my attention has not been  drawn
    to anything in that regard.

 8. The judge's decision does not refer to any application to adjourn being
    made to him.  In the light of what I have just said, that  is  of  some
    significance.

 9. The judge had this to say about the witness statement from the wife, in
    which she indicated a wish to reconcile with the appellant:-

         "40.  It  is  in  the  context  of  this  controlling  and  abusive
             relationship that I am unable  to  place  any  weight  on  the
             Appellant's wife's witness statement.  It is  noted  that  she
             did not attend to give  evidence.   Although  the  restraining
             order is in place, practical arrangements could have been made
             for the Appellant's wife to give evidence in  the  absence  of
             the Appellant.  However, the proposed plans to reconcile  need
             to be considered in the context that the Appellant's wife is a
             victim of domestic violence, and sadly it is not uncommon  for
             victims of domestic violence to seek reconciliation  following
             incidents of control and abuse.  Further, although it  is  the
             intention of the couple to reconcile  and  live  as  a  family
             unit,  it  cannot  happen  upon  release  by  virtue  of   the
             restraining order being in  place  until  November  2018.   In
             addition, the children have been  deemed  to  be  at  risk  of
             emotional harm by social services, as  a  consequence  of  the
             parental relationship and behaviour of the  Appellant,  and  a
             child protection plan is in place.  I do not have the  details
             of the child protection plan, and neither did  the  Appellant,
             but this will be in  place  to  safeguard  the  children  from
             experiencing further incidents of domestic abuse."

10. The judge went on at paragraph 41 to note that the  appellant  did  not
    have either a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  eldest  son
    or his wife.  The appellant  has  yet  to  meet  his  daughter  and  no
    relationship, other than a biological  one,  currently  existed  there.
    The judge then found as follows at paragraph 42:-

         "42. In relation to the relationship with his wife, further  to  my
             findings above regarding  the  control  and  violence  in  the
             relationship, I agree with the  Respondent  that  despite  the
             couple's  current  intentions,  it   is   not   a   subsisting
             relationship.  The evidence confirms that the couple have only
             lived together for just over a year,  throughout  a  nearly  7
             year marriage.  During the Appellant's time in the UK, I  have
             found in accordance with HHJ Newell's sentencing remarks, that
             the  marriage  was  a  controlling  one,  which  significantly
             impacted, for  example,  on  the  Appellant's  wife's  working
             abilities and attitude.  Further, the restraining order is  in
             place until November 2018 and no application has been made  to
             reduce this time, and as  such  prevents  the  Appellant  from
             having any contact with his wife."

11. The reference to the sentencing judge's remarks is a reference to  this
    passage from them, quoted by the judge at paragraph 39:-

         "There was an argument between you (the Appellant and his wife)  in
         the morning, it was heard by neighbours, it disturbed them and also
         which your father-in-law attended.  The dispute turned to violence,
         there was barging and manhandling, punches thrown by  you  at  your
         wife, she was dragged by her hair, put on the floor and  strangled,
         there were kicks to  the  body  and  the  stomach,  a  particularly
         aggravating feature, you  (the Appellant) knowing that she  was  in
         the early stages of pregnancy..."

12. The grounds of challenge contend that, having refused to adjourn on the
    basis that the wife's evidence could be given by a  witness  statement,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong in  law  to  hold  against  the
    appellant the fact that his wife had not  attended  to  speak  to  that
    statement. In particular, the judge said  that  practical  arrangements
    could have been made for the wife to give evidence in  the  absence  of
    the appellant.  What the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have done, it
    is contended in the grounds, was to adjourn the hearing.

13. Mr De Mello, who appears for the appellant before me, was unaware of  a
    letter dated 17 July 2019, sent by the  appellant's  solicitors.   This
    letter does not  find  reference  in  the  grounds,  to  which  I  have
    referred.  The letter of 17 July 2019 said that  the  appellant  had  a
    scheduled hearing at the First-tier Tribunal  on  25  July  2019.   The
    First-tier Tribunal had, it seems, on  15  July  sent  the  appellant's
    solicitors the notice of hearing and some  pro  forma  directions.   In
    those  directions,  the  appellant  was  required  to  say  whether  an
    interpreter would be needed at the hearing.  The letter of 17 July 2019
    said that the writer was currently unaware that the appellant would  be
    produced to give evidence at the hearing, but if he were produced, then
    he would require an interpreter in Punjabi.  If the appellant  was  not
    produced, then an interpreter would  not  be  required.   It  was  then
    stated that the appellant's wife  "also  wishes  to  give  evidence  in
    support of her husband's appeal.  She speaks fluent  English  and  does
    not require an interpreter".  The letter ended by hoping  that  it  had
    provided clarification of the Tribunal's enquiry.

14. That letter's omission from ground 1 is in my view significant.  It  is
    significant because it was written after  the  application  to  adjourn
    and, indeed,  after  what  appears  to  have  been  a  request  by  the
    solicitors to have the caseworker's adjournment refusal reconsidered by
    a judge.  There is no indication in the  letter  that  there  were  any
    difficulties in  producing  the  wife.   On  the  contrary,  the  clear
    impression given was that the wife would be  attending,  presumably  in
    some way compatibly with the order of the court.

15. Shortly before the hearing this morning, Mr  McVeety,  who  appears  on
    behalf of the respondent, filed and served on Mr De Mello  the  minutes
    of the hearing compiled by his colleague, Presenting Officer Zoe Young.
     Ms Young compiled her minutes on 29 July 2019, four  days  after  the
    hearing.  The minutes state as follows:-

         "The Rep asked if it was ok for the family  members  to  come  into
         court apart from the wife and the IJ asked if they were going to be
         witnesses and the rep said no.  The IJ said  well  I  can't  object
         then.  The wife did not come into the hearing as the A  would  have
         breached the Restraining order.  The IJ did  say  there  were  ways
         around the restraining if the rep wanted to call the witness and he
         said he did not and would proceed without her evidence.

         There were no further preliminary issues."

16. Mr De  Mello  was  given  the  opportunity  by  me  of  contacting  his
    instructing solicitors regarding the letter of 17  July  2019  and  the
    Presenting Officer's note. Having done so,  Mr De Mello informs me that
    his instructing solicitors had made contact with the  Counsel  who  had
    appeared on 25 July 2019 before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  that
    Counsel denied having spoken to the judge in the terms described by  Ms
    Young and that, furthermore, the wife was not present  at  the  hearing
    centre at all, let alone in the hearing room.

17. There has been no application before me to adjourn on the basis of what
    I have  just  described.   Indeed,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be
    appropriate in terms of the overriding objective for me to do so.   The
    letter of 17 July  2019  gives,  in  my  view,  some  credence  to  the
    description of the preliminary issues in Ms Young's  note  of  29  July
    2019, in that the letter of 17 July 2019 at  least  suggests  that  the
    wife would be going to the hearing.

18. The Presenting Officer's note also in my  view,  importantly  coincides
    with what the judge said in his decision, which  would  not  have  been
    available to the parties when Ms Young made her note.  As I have noted,
    the judge observed that although a  restraining  order  was  in  place,
    practical arrangements could have been made for the appellant's wife to
    give evidence in the absence of the appellant. That fits  very  closely
    with the terminology used by Ms Young.

19. I find on balance, on the state of the evidence, that Ms  Young's  note
    is more likely than not to represent the truth of the matter.  In those
    circumstances, as Mr De Mello rightly acknowledged, the sole  remaining
    ground of appeal is in difficulty.

20. However, I consider that a  proper  reading  of  the  judge's  decision
    discloses the following.  The caseworker's refusal to  adjourn  on  the
    basis that the witness  statement  of  the  wife  could  stand  as  her
    evidence, even if not affected by the  events  to  which  I  have  made
    reference, was plainly not an indication from the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the wife's witness  statement  would  be  given  material  weight,
    irrespective of the totality of the evidence.

21. As we have seen from paragraph 40 of the decision, the judge noted that
    the appellant's wife had been the victim of domestic violence.  It  was
    often in the nature of such victims to seek reconciliation.  There  was
    also considerable reference made in the decision to the controlling way
    in which the appellant had treated his wife during the time  that  they
    were living together.

22. It seems to me that, properly read, the  judge's  decision  is  to  the
    effect that the wife's evidence had to be read in the  light  of  those
    highly important matters.  It also had to be read in the light  of  the
    fact that the children had been deemed to be at risk of emotional  harm
    by Social Services.

23. At  paragraph  42,  the  judge  did  not  doubt  the  couple's  current
    intentions, which must in part have derived from the witness  statement
    of the wife.  The judge nevertheless found that  the  relationship  was
    not subsisting.

24. For those reasons, even leaving aside the procedural matters to which I
    have referred, the judge has given  adequate  reasons  for  placing  no
    material weight on the witness statement of the wife.

25. The sole ground  of  challenge  therefore  fails  and  this  appeal  is
    accordingly dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 13 December 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



