
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09530/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 September 2018                          |On 31 October 2018              |
|                                              |                                |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O J R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bexson, Counsel, instructed by Mordi And Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 May 2018 allowing the appeal of R
against the Secretary of State's decision of 18 August 2017 refusing his
human rights claim and maintaining the decision to deport him.  An
anonymity direction was made.  We shall refer hereafter to R as the
appellant, as he was before the judge, and to the Secretary of State as the
respondent, as he was before the judge.

2.   On his account, the appellant has been in the United Kingdom since
2000, initially on a student visa.  He has a series of convictions, mainly
for possession of cannabis/cannabis resin, between 2006 and 2015.  On 14
May 2009 he was issued with a certificate of approval for marriage and
granted discretionary leave to remain until 20 May 2013.  He was thereafter
granted further leave to remain which was granted until 2 July 2016.  He
was served with a decision to deport on 6 February 2015 and a human rights
claim was refused on 7 April 2015 and certified, but subsequently on 18
August the respondent withdrew her decisions and reconsidered his human
rights claim and the subsequent refusal decision is the decision that was
under appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant has three children, AR, CR and SR.  AR and CR are his
children by IH, his former partner, and SR is his daughter with his wife,
SH.

4.   The judge observed that the only issue in the appeal was whether it
would be unduly harsh for the appellant's British citizen children (all
three of them) to leave the United Kingdom or for them to remain in the
United Kingdom without their father.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and from SH, both of whom
she found to be credible.  She also found credible evidence submitted in
the form of a statement from IH.  The judge accepted that the appellant had
shown that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with AR and CR, and
the Secretary of State had accepted that it would be unduly harsh for AR
and CR to leave the United Kingdom.  The judge was satisfied that remaining
in the United Kingdom and losing direct regular contact each week would be
contrary to their best interests.  She noted that their best interests were
not decisive but were a primary consideration.

6.   The judge was satisfied that SR had a genuine and subsisting
relationship with her father and was deeply attached to him and that it
would be contrary to her best interests to be separated from him.  The
judge noted medical evidence about SR, who was said to have appeared "in a
highly anxious and indeed traumatised state with comments of self-blame,
the fear of and thoughts of a bleak future" and having spoken of killing
herself.  She was also assessed by a psychologist as suffering from a
moderate level of depression, a mild level of anger and irritability and
severe levels of anxiety and the risk of her acting on suicidal thoughts
and ideation was high.  The judge was satisfied that the appellant's
incarceration had a serious detrimental impact on all three children and
also had a very negative effect on SH.

7.   The judge also considered medical evidence concerning SH.  A
specialist nurse said that SH's condition would become slowly worse, set
out details of the assistance SH required with daily living tasks and
confirmed that she relied on her husband for assistance for herself and
their child.  The nurse considered that SH's dependency on others might
become greater over time and she was currently obviously unable to manage
in the kitchen and concluded that it was not unreasonable to anticipate
that she would need assistance up and down the stairs and even out of the
bath.  The judge considered that whilst SH might be able to access some
medical treatment in Jamaica, it would be unreasonable to expect her to
leave the support network she had established in the UK and also her
family.  She was born in the UK and is a British citizen.  The judge was
satisfied that without her husband's daily help SH would not be able to
maintain her lifestyle and independence.  There was no evidence that Social
Services or the NHS could replace his assistance, which was available 24
hours a day, and she did not find it reasonably likely that they could do
so.  There was a strong possibility that SR would become her full-time
carer.  On the evidence as a whole the judge found that it would be
unreasonable to expect SH to leave the UK or remain in the UK without the
daily assistance provided by the appellant, on which she had come to rely.
The judge was entirely satisfied that it would be unreasonable to expect SR
to leave the United Kingdom and make a new life in Jamaica.  The judge had
no doubt that the appellant's continued presence was very significant for
the support and development of each of the children.

8.   The judge gave full consideration to the appellant's history of
offending and his immigration history.  She accepted that the appellant was
a persistent offender and accepted evidence that he had finally
rehabilitated.  She noted also that his offending did not escalate and his
offences were relatively minor.  She took into account of the guidance in
NA (Pakistan), in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA
Civ, and noted also from ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 that the best
interests of the children were a primary consideration but not decisive in
the balancing exercise and had to be weighed against the respondent's
important public duties of punishing crime, protecting the public,
expressing society's revulsion at crime and maintaining effective
immigration control and attached importance to all of these weighty
matters.  Balancing the competing interests of the appellant against the
public interest in removing him, she found that Exception 2 under section
117C(5) of the 2002 Act applied because the appellant had genuine and
subsisting relationships with his wife and three children and his removal
would be unduly harsh for each of them.  The appeal was therefore allowed.

9.   The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to appeal on
the basis first that the judge had failed adequately to reason her findings
in respect of the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the children
to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant, having focused, it
was said, solely on the best interests of the child, and having failed to
make a finding on the undue harshness threshold in respect of the child in
order to satisfy the test.  It was said that there was no suggestion that
the appellant's wife would be unwilling to care and provide for their child
and no indication that it would not be possible to care for the child on
her own and that as a consequence the circumstances of the case failed to
meet the undue harshness high hurdle.  It was noted that in a deportation
context the splitting of families might well be proportionate, however
contrary to the best interests of the children.

10.  It was also argued with respect to the appellant's wife that there had
been a conflict in the evidence which the judge had not resolved as regards
to her family members' support and support networks, the fact that she
could use DLA to continue with her lifestyle and independence as currently
in place and noting the fact that she works four days a week.  It was also
argued that the judge had found the appellant to have been rehabilitated
and that was not a matter upon which weight was to be placed.

11.  In his submissions Mr Deller adopted and relied on the grounds of
appeal.  We are grateful to him for taking matters as carefully and
thoroughly as he did and placing the arguments for an error of law as
highly as they could be put.  We are also very grateful to Ms Bexson for
her Rule 24 response.  In the event, we did not find it necessary to call
on Ms Bexson.  We are satisfied that the grounds of appeal are a matter of
disagreement only.  The judge clearly gave very careful and thorough
attention to the evidence in the context of the appropriate legal tests.
She did not treat the best interests of the children as dispositive of the
appeal but rightly noted that it was a matter of primary significance only.
 It is not possible to equate impossibility with undue harshness.  The test
is not so high as to require it to be impossible for a person to manage.
Clearly, deportation does involve the splitting of families, however the
law does allow, as the Rules and the terms of the Act make clear, for
extreme cases where an appeal may be successful because of the significance
of the impact on the family members of the split.  We are satisfied that
the judge properly identified those circumstances in this case.  She
correctly balanced the circumstances of the appellant's wife and child,
both of whom have significant medical difficulties, against the public
interest in this case, properly bearing in mind the appellant's criminal
and immigration histories.  She applied the correct tests to the case and
came to a conclusion that was fully open to her.  Accordingly, the
Secretary of State's challenge to the judge's decision fails, and the
decision allowing the appeal under Article 8 is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
