
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09306/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th September 2017                 |On 12th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 zeena limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kharid, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer in New  Delhi  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble in which she  allowed
    the Appellant's appeal against refusal of entry  clearance  on  private
    and family life grounds.

 2. This case is somewhat unusual. The Appellant's  father  was  a  Ghurkha
    soldier who had served in the British Army but had not been allowed  to
    settle in the United Kingdom.  The unusual aspect of the case  is  that
    he never settled or resided in the United Kingdom.  His wife,  however,
    was granted leave to do so.  Tragically, her husband  (the  appellant's
    father) was later killed whilst working in Afghanistan.

 3. The Appellant's mother, to whom I shall refer  as  "the  Sponsor",  has
    four children.  Only the Appellant remains in Nepal.  Her siblings have
    since emigrated to Hong Kong and I think in  one  case  to  the  United
    States of America.

 4. The judge found that but for the historic injustice in  preventing  the
    Appellant's late father from settling in the United Kingdom she  would,
    as his youngest child, by now having joined him and been settled in the
    United Kingdom.   In  conducting  the  proportionality  exercise  under
    Article 8,  she  attached  very  significant  weight  to  this  factor,
    concluding that it outweighed the public interest in  maintaining  firm
    immigration control in order to protect the economic wellbeing  of  the
    country.  In doing so, she relied heavily upon the decision in  Ghising
    [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC), which in turn summarised  earlier  jurisprudence
    including that to be found in the case of Gurung  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8.
    The judge set out the entire head note of the case of Ghising. However,
    for present purposes it is necessary only to refer to paragraph (4):-

         Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,  but
         for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled  in
         the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of  the
         Article 8 proportionality  assessment  in  an  Appellant's  favour,
         where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  Entry
         Clearance  Officer  consists  solely  of  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy.

 5. The first matter that the judge had to consider, and  did  consider  at
    paragraphs 24 and 25 of her decision, was whether family  life  existed
    and whether the consequences of the decision were such as to engage the
    potential operation of Article 8. No criticism is made in  the  grounds
    of the reasons given by the judge for answering both these questions in
    the appellant's favour. Rather,  the  criticism  contained  within  the
    first ground of appeal focuses entirely upon the Tribunal's analysis of
    the proportionality of the appellant's exclusion from the UK to which I
    now turn.

 6. Firstly, it is said that the Tribunal attached insufficient  weight  to
    the Appellant's lack of facility in the English language. Secondly,  it
    is said that it attached insufficient weight to the appellant's lack of
    self-sufficiency.   However,  these  are  both  factors  which  in   my
    judgement come under the more general heading of 'the  public  interest
    in maintaining firm  immigration  control'.   To  use  the  lexicon  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, they relate to what are known  as
    the 'eligibility requirements'.  However, as  was  made  clear  in  the
    passage that I have cited above from the decision in Ghising, something
    more than this is needed in order to outweigh  the  significant  weight
    attaching to the historic injustice. Examples cited by the Tribunal  in
    Ghising include an adverse immigration history and criminal  behaviour.
    In my judgement, this  equates  to  past  conduct  that  would  require
    refusal of the application  under  the  'suitability  requirements'  of
    Appendix FM of the Rules. It was not however  suggested  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that the Appellant should be excluded from the United
    Kingdom on this basis. I therefore conclude that the  first  ground  of
    appeal has not been made out.

 7. Secondly, whilst I do not pretend fully to understand paragraphs 2  and
    3 of the grounds, it appears to be suggested that as a  result  of  the
    Appellant joining the Sponsor in the United Kingdom the  Sponsor  would
    receive a reduction in her Housing Benefit.  Quite why such a potential
    consequence is said to  add  weight  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's continued exclusion from the UK  is  not  explained.  There
    appears in any event to have been no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that that the appellant's admission to the UK would have  such
    an impact upon her mother's state benefits.  I cannot therefore see how
    it can be said to have been "irrational" for the judge to have left  it
    out of account.

 8. Thirdly, at paragraph 4 of  the  grounds,  it  is  suggested  that  the
    Tribunal speculated (at paragraph 32) as to the Appellant's ability  to
    be financially self-sufficient in the United Kingdom. However, I cannot
    find any such speculation, whether at paragraph 32 or elsewhere in  the
    decision.   On  the  contrary,  the  entire  decision  appears  to   be
    predicated upon the Appellant  not  being  financially  self-sufficient
    upon arrival in the United Kingdom.

 9. Finally, in paragraph 5 of the grounds, it is argued that the  Tribunal
    failed to have regard to the fact that the Sponsor  chose  to  emigrate
    from Nepal to the United Kingdom in 2011 and that,  accordingly,  there
    was no obligation upon the Entry Clearance Officer to facilitate  entry
    clearance for the appellant to join her mother when she was  unable  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  criticism  here
    appears to be - albeit not made explicitly - that the  Tribunal  failed
    to have regard to the possibility of family life between the  Appellant
    and her mother being enjoyed in Nepal. However, given that the  judge's
    decision was based upon  the  premise  that  the  'historic  injustice'
    outweighed what may otherwise have been the  reasonableness  of  family
    life continuing in Nepal, I fail to see how this argument advances  the
    respondent's case any further.

10. I therefore conclude that the Tribunal did not make an  error  of  law,
    material or otherwise, in  reaching  its  conclusion  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date: 11th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
