
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09928/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 09 April 2019                     |On 19 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr I. Hussain of Syeds Law Office Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 27  April  2018
    to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of   deportation
    proceedings (refusal to revoke a deportation order).

2.    The appellant entered the UK on 30 October 2004  and  claimed  asylum.
    The protection claim was refused and a subsequent appeal was dismissed.
    His appeal rights came to an end on 18 May 2005. On 24 July 2006 he was
    sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment for using a false  instrument  with
    intent and was recommended for deportation. At the time, the  appellant
    was liable to removal in any event. A deportation order was  signed  on
    09 January 2007. The appellant was removed to Iran, with  his  consent,
    on 28 February 2007.

3.    The appellant returned to the UK in breach of  the  deportation  order
    and made a further protection claim on 05 July  2008.  The  application
    was refused on  12  August  2008.  A  series  of  further  submissions,
    applications for leave to remain and decisions refusing leave to remain
    followed between 2009 and 2017.

4.    On 15 August 2017 the appellant applied for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds based on his relationship  with  a  British  citizen  of
    Iranian origin who was formerly recognised as a refugee. The respondent
    treated it as an application to revoke the deportation order  on  human
    rights grounds. The application was  refused  on  27  April  2018.  The
    decision is the subject of this appeal.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 28 September 2018.  The judge  described  the
    decision under appeal as a decision "to refuse a human rights claim  by
    virtue of  Section  5(2)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971".  The  judge
    summarised the evidence given by the appellant and his partner  at  the
    hearing. He began his findings by stating that the  appellant  appealed
    the decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order. The judge  only
    referred obliquely to the relevant legal framework by way of a  summary
    of the submissions made by the appellant's representative.

         "26.     Mr de  Mello  conceded  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet
             Paragraph [399]. Briefly, and for the avoidance of doubt, that
             must  be  the  case  he  cannot  meet  [399](b)  because   the
             relationship he has formed with the sponsor was at a time when
             he was unlawfully in the UK. He cannot meet 339A(a) because he
             has not been lawfully in the UK most of his life.

         27.      Having regard to Paragraph 339D the appellant's submission
             under Article 8 can only succeed if there are very exceptional
             circumstances over and above the  circumstances  described  in
             the exceptions to deportation.

         28.      It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that  there  are
             exceptional circumstances; the sponsor cannot return  to  Iran
             and the appellant's association with the sponsor is  known  to
             the authorities in Iran or even if it is not known he will  be
             at risk of enquiry on return to Iran. He will be  at  risk  of
             enquiry all the more so because he left Iran illegally."

6.    The judge went on  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim, apparently only raised for the first time at the  hearing,  that
    he would be at risk on return  because  of  his  association  with  his
    partner, who was previously recognised to have a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Iran. The judge concluded:

         "43.     I cannot find that the decision to  refuse  the  appellant
             leave to remain and not to revoke  the  deportation  order  is
             disproportionate  having  regard   to   the   maintenance   of
             immigration control."

7.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

    (i)    The judge failed to consider paragraph 391  of  the  immigration
         rules, which was relevant to an application to revoke a deportation
         order. The judge failed to consider whether the fact that 10  years
         had passed since the making of the deportation order was a relevant
         factor. The test under paragraph 391 was arguably  lower  than  the
         test of 'very exceptional circumstances' seemingly applied  by  the
         judge under 399D.

    (ii)   The judge unfairly took against the appellant the fact  that  he
         did not mention being questioned at the airport on return  to  Iran
         or his flight  from  the  airport  previously  without  giving  the
         appellant an opportunity to provide an explanation. In fact, it  is
         asserted, the appellant mentioned this fact in the asylum interview
         in 2008.

    (iii)  It is asserted that the judge erred by misrecording the evidence
         given by the appellant's partner.

Legal framework

8.    The following paragraphs of the immigration  rules  were  relevant  to
    the revocation of the deportation order.

         A362.    Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
              under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8  will
              only succeed where the requirements of these rules as  at  28
              July 2014 are met, regardless of when the notice of intention
              to deport or  the  deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
              served.

         362.     A deportation order requires  the  subject  to  leave  the
              United Kingdom and  authorises  his  detention  until  he  is
              removed. It also prohibits him from re-entering  the  country
              for as long as it is in force and invalidates  any  leave  to
              enter or remain in the United Kingdom given  him  before  the
              Order is made or while it is in force.

         ...

         388.     Where a person returns to the UK when a deportation  order
              is in force  against  him,  he  may  be  deported  under  the
              original order. The Secretary of State  will  consider  every
              such case in the light  of  all  the  relevant  circumstances
              before deciding whether to enforce the order.

         ...

         390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
              be considered in the light of all the circumstances including
              the following:

              (i)      the grounds on which the order was made;

              (ii)     any representations made in support of revocation;

              (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
                   maintenance of an effective immigration control;

              (iv)      the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including  any
                   compassionate circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
              consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it
              does not, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
              the public interest in maintaining the deportation order will
              be outweighed by other factors.

         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
              conviction for a criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
              deportation order against that  person  will  be  the  proper
              course:

              (a)      in the case of a conviction for an offence for which
                   the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                   less than 4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the
                   making of the deportation order, when, if an  application
                   for revocation is received, consideration will  be  given
                   on a case by case basis to whether the deportation  order
                   should be maintained; or

              (b)      in the case of a conviction for an offence for which
                   the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                   at least 4 years, at any time,

              Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to
              the Human Rights Convention or the  Convention  and  Protocol
              Relating to the  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are  other
              exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation  is
              outweighed by compelling factors.

         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
              be  authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been  materially
              altered, either by a change of circumstances since the  order
              was made, or by fresh information coming to light  which  was
              not before the appellate  authorities  or  the  Secretary  of
              State. The passage of time since the person was deported  may
              also in itself amount to such a change of circumstances as to
              warrant revocation of the order.

         392.     Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle  the
              person concerned to re-enter the United Kingdom;  it  renders
              him eligible to apply for  admission  under  the  Immigration
              Rules. Application for revocation of the order may be made to
              the Entry Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.

9.    Paragraph 390A makes clear that  where  a  person  claims  that  their
      deportation would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention paragraph 398 of the immigration  rules
      would be considered. Paragraph 398, 399 and 399A contain the Secretary
      of State's policy as to where  a  fair  balance  is  struck  in  cases
      involving deportation of foreign criminals. Those provisions are  also
      put on a statutory footing by way of section 117C of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002").

10.   Finally, under the heading,  "Deportation  and  Article  8"  paragraph
      399D of the immigration rules was introduced by way  of  Statement  of
      Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 532, which came into force  on  28
      July 2014.

         399D.    Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the
              United Kingdom in breach of a deportation  order  enforcement
              of the deportation order is in the public interest  and  will
              be   implemented   unless   there   are   very    exceptional
              circumstances.

11.   In Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of deportation  order)  [2017]
      UKUT 00166 the Upper Tribunal considered the terms of the  immigration
      rules and reviewed the Court of Appeal decisions in SSHD v ZP  (India)
      [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 and IT (Jamaica)  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  932
      before setting out the following general guidance.

          i) In cases involving convictions for an offence  for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, the Secretary of  State's  policy,  as  expressed  in
             paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration Rules, is that the  public
             interest does not require continuation of a deportation  order
             after a period of ten years has elapsed.

         ii) However, paragraph 391(a) allows the  Secretary  of  State  to
             consider on a case by case basis whether a  deportation  order
             should be maintained. The mere fact  of  past  convictions  is
             unlikely  to  be  sufficient  to  maintain  an  order  if  the
             'prescribed period' has elapsed. Strong public policy  reasons
             would be  needed  to  justify  continuing  an  order  in  such
             circumstances.

        iii) Paragraph 391(a) will only be engaged in a  'post-deportation'
             case if the person is applying for  revocation  of  the  order
             from outside the UK. Nothing in the strict wording of the rule
             requires the ten-year period  to  be  spent  outside  the  UK.
             However, the main purpose  of  deportation  is  to  exclude  a
             person from the UK. Any breach of  the  deportation  order  is
             likely to be a strong public policy ground for maintaining the
             order even though a period of ten years has elapsed  since  it
             was made.

         iv) In 'post-deportation' applications involving sentences of less
             than four years made before the end of  the  ten-year  period,
             and 'post-deportation'  applications  involving  sentences  of
             four years or more, appropriate weight should be given to  the
             Secretary of State's policy as expressed in  the  'Conventions
             exception'  and  'sweep-up  exception'   with   reference   to
             paragraphs 398-399A and 390A of the Immigration Rules.

Decision and reasons

12.   It is necessary to put the background to this appeal in  context.  The
      decision the appellant seeks to appeal is a response to an application
      made on 15 August 2017 for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of
      a British citizen. The application  was  made  on  form  FLR(FP).  The
      representations that accompanied the application were dated 14  August
      2017. They also made clear that the application was  confined  to  the
      appellant's family life with his unmarried partner.

         "This is an application for further leave to  remain  on  basis  of
         unmarried partnership. It is submitted that  our  client  is  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner who is present
         and settled in the UK. There are insurmountable obstacles to family
         life continuing outside of UK as his partner is a political refugee
         from Iran and it has already been accepted by the Home Office  that
         she has a genuine fear of death and  persecution  upon  return  and
         accordingly Home Office cannot expect her to go and live  with  him
         in Iran."

13.   The representations went on to say:

         "In relation to paragraph 353, please note that our client's asylum
         claim has no involvement in this case. Therefore the  consideration
         is whether there would be a realistic prospect notwithstanding  the
         reasons for refusal. In that respect we  submit  that  there  is  a
         realistic prospect due to the fact that this  case  may  ultimately
         come down to the consideration of EX.1 and a  tribunal  could  find
         insurmountable obstacles where our client's  spouse  is  a  refugee
         from the same country where she is now being  expected  to  go  and
         live with our client."

14.   Although the representations  recognised  that  the  applicant  had  a
      previous  conviction,  they  argued  that  it  was  spent  under   the
      Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974. Nowhere in  the  representations
      was there any recognition of the fact that the appellant  was  removed
      subject to a deportation order and had returned to the UK in breach of
      the order. The application was  put  squarely  on  the  basis  of  the
      immigration rules without any recognition of the deportation  elements
      involved in the case and without making submissions on the  revocation
      of the existing deportation order.

15.   What was made expressly clear in the initial representations was  that
      the appellant was not relying on protection issues. In so far  as  his
      partner was previously recognised as a refugee from Iran the issue was
      argued squarely with reference to the 'insurmountable obstacles'  test
      contained in paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.  In  other  words,  the
      application was made solely on grounds  relating  to  the  applicant's
      right to family life under Article 8 of the European Convention.

16.   The respondent treated the application as  an  application  to  revoke
      the deportation order. This was the correct approach  given  that  the
      applicant was remaining in the UK in breach of a deportation order.

17.   The starting point for consideration of an  application  to  revoke  a
      deportation order in the  case  of  a  person  who  has  already  been
      deported (a 'post deportation' case) is paragraphs 390 and 391 of  the
      immigration rules. In this case  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of less  than  four  years.  The  Secretary  of
      State's policy set  out  in  paragraph  391(a)  states  that  he  will
      consider an application from outside the UK to revoke the  deportation
      order in such cases when a period of 10 years has  elapsed  since  the
      making of the deportation order. Consideration will be given on a case
      by case basis to whether the deportation order should  be  maintained.
      Paragraph 391 states that  consideration  will  be  given  to  whether
      continuation of the order would be contrary to the  Refugee  or  Human
      Rights Conventions ("the Conventions exception") or whether there  are
      other exceptional circumstances to show that continuation of the order
      is outweighed by compelling factors ("the sweep up exception").

18.   The appellant explicitly did not argue that he would  be  at  risk  on
      return  to  Iran  with  reference  to  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
      application for leave to remain, which was treated as  an  application
      to revoke the deportation order, relied solely on  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention. In  such  circumstances,  paragraph  391  of  the
      immigration rules states that the Secretary  of  State  will  consider
      whether continuation of the order would be contrary  to  the  European
      Convention. In doing so, it was open to the respondent to consider the
      provisions  contained  in  the  immigration  rules  relating  to   the
      assessment of Article 8 in cases involving deportation. The provisions
      are found at paragraphs A398-400 of the immigration  rules  under  the
      heading "Deportation and Article 8".

19.   This section of the rules applies when a foreign criminal claims  that
      his deportation would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
      Act 1998 ("the HRA 1998") because it would  breach  his  rights  under
      Article 8 of the European Convention. Paragraph 399D is to be read  in
      this context. As the Upper Tribunal in Smith noted at [25],  the  fact
      that a person returns to the UK in breach of a deportation order is  a
      serious matter that should be given significant weight  in  favour  of
      the public interest in maintaining the order. The more stringent  test
      of  "very  exceptional  circumstances"  outlined  in  paragraph   399D
      reflects the significant weight that must be given to  the  breach  of
      the deportation order in favour of the public interest when  a  person
      claims that the continuation of the order would breach  Article  8  of
      the European Convention.

20.   Having outlined the context in which the application was made and  the
      relevant legal framework I turn to consider  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision.

21.   It appears that the appellant raised for the first time in this  claim
      the possibility that he might be at risk on return because he left the
      airport without permission when he returned to Iran and because of his
      association with his partner, who  was  recognised  to  have  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution in Iran. It is not clear whether this  was
      argued to be a breach of Article 3 or Article 8. If it was  argued  as
      an Article 3  issue  it  would  come  squarely  within  the  realm  of
      paragraph 391 of the immigration rules. If it  was  argued  to  be  an
      exceptional  circumstance  that  outweighed  the  public  interest  in
      maintaining the deportation order for the purpose  of  Article  8,  it
      would come within the realm of paragraph 399D.

22.   Given that the judge concluded that the  appellant  would  not  be  at
      risk on return,  it  makes  sense  to  consider  whether  his  factual
      findings were sustainable before considering whether  he  applied  the
      correct legal framework. The appellant only relies on  two  points  in
      order to argue that the judge's findings were not sustainable.

23.   It is difficult to see  how  the  first  point  could  have  made  any
      material difference to the judge's overall conclusion  regarding  risk
      on return. Even if the  appellant  mentioned  the  fact  that  he  was
      questioned at the airport in the asylum interview in  2008,  it  seems
      that he was, as a matter of fact, able to enter  Iran  and  to  remain
      there for a number of months without coming to the  attention  of  the
      authorities before returning to the UK. The mere fact that the Iranian
      authorities sought to question him after his removal from the UK  does
      not necessarily indicate that he was of interest to  the  authorities.
      It is understandable that they might want to question the appellant in
      the circumstances. Although this claimed incident happened  after  the
      first determination of this asylum claim in 2005, it was open to First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lodge to take as a starting point  the  fact  that
      the appellant was not found to be a reliable or honest witness by  the
      previous judge.

24.   Nothing in the subsequent decisions made by the Home  Office  relating
      to the further submissions made in 2008  or  2011  suggest  that  this
      formed any meaningful part of the claim made after his return  to  the
      UK in which he asserted that he  would  be  at  risk  because  of  his
      claimed sexual orientation. Although the appellant prepared a  witness
      statement in support of this appeal the issue  was  not  raised  as  a
      reason why the deportation order should be revoked.  No  copy  of  the
      interview record is adduced in evidence to support what is said in the
      grounds of appeal. Some of his responses in  interview  in  2008  were
      summarised in the respondent's decision dated 07/5/14  but  they  only
      serve  to  undermine  the   appellant's   credibility   even   further
      [paragraphs 28-33, pg. G4 respondent's bundle]. They indicate  a  lack
      of seriousness in interview about the core aspect of the claim he made
      at that time i.e. that he would be at  risk  because  of  his  claimed
      sexual orientation. Even if the claim that he mentioned  the  incident
      at the airport in interview is taken  at  its  highest,  the  evidence
      suggests that it would have made no material difference to the judge's
      assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility  as  a  witness  or  the
      likelihood of risk on return.

25.   The second point relates to the judge's summary of the evidence  given
      by the appellant's partner as to whether the authorities  were  likely
      to be aware of her relationship with the appellant. The judge made the
      following findings:

         "35.     In evidence before me [his partner] said  her  father  was
             being persecuted by the authorities. Initially she  said  that
             the Iranian authorities would know about her relationship with
             the appellant because they monitored phone calls  between  her
             and her parents, "they are listening to phone calls". When she
             was pressed, however, she said that communication  took  place
             usually  over  WhatsApp  and  the  internet  which  were   not
             monitored.  She  then  added  that   her   father   had   been
             interrogated and had revealed to the authorities that she  was
             in a relationship "with someone". That interrogation  happened
             in February 2018. He had  been  arrested  a  number  of  times
             before that but had never said anything "because  he  did  not
             want to give information to the  authorities  about  me".  She
             said he did give information, however, because  he  was  being
             assaulted. The authorities knew  the  appellant's  name.  Once
             again I note that this appears to be the first time that  this
             evidence  has  been  forthcoming.  There  is  nothing  in  the
             sponsor's witness statement about her father being  persecuted
             by the authorities and the authorities knowing the appellant's
             name.

         36.      I am at a loss to understand why it was not  part  of  his
             FLR application. I appreciate that the  application  is  dated
             14th August 2017 before the assault but on  the  evidence  the
             authorities have been monitoring the phone calls before August
             2017 and so the sponsor and the appellant were aware that  the
             appellant's association with the  sponsor  was  known  to  the
             authorities.

         37.      I reject the sponsor's evidence. On her account her father
             has been arrested several times before and never mentioned the
             appellant's name and the fact that he was  in  a  relationship
             with his daughter. I cannot accept he would have it beaten out
             of him. I cannot accept that the authorities would go  to  the
             trouble of beating it out of him if they  already  knew  about
             the relationship because the phone calls were being monitored.



         38.      Having said that I cannot accept that the sponsor would be
             naming the appellant in her phone calls when  she  knew  as  a
             refugee and asylum seeker and someone  who  has  had  problems
             with the authorities that they were likely  to  be  monitoring
             the phone calls. I cannot accept that  in  a  phone  call  she
             would be mentioning the  appellant  with  his  surname.  Am  I
             supposed to imagine that in conversations with her parents she
             refers to her relationship with [appellant's name]? She  would
             simply say my partner [H] and I are doing this or that.

         39.      What, however, finally gives the  lie  to  this  concocted
             tale is that the appellant's family live in Iran and have  not
             been the subject of any attention from the  authorities.  That
             was the evidence of the sponsor, and  the  appellant  has  not
             suggested  that  his  family  have  been  contacted   by   the
             authorities because of his relationship with the sponsor."

26.   In a further statement submitted with the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
      Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant's  partner   says   that   the   judge
      misunderstood her evidence. She said that the authorities in Iran knew
      about her relationship with  the  appellant  because  members  of  his
      family spoke with her family members over the phone and it was  likely
      that those calls were monitored. The difficulty, as the judge  pointed
      out, is that if this was an important aspect of the claim,  it  should
      have been set out clearly in a witness statement. It was  clearly  not
      considered to be at the date when the appellant's partner prepared her
      initial statement on 03 September 2018 shortly before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal appeal. It was open to the judge to take this into account in
      assessing the plausibility of this aspect of the evidence given by the
      appellant's partner. The appellant's partner  makes  statements  about
      what her evidence was at the hearing, but they are not supported by  a
      note from counsel or any other contemporaneous note of  the  evidence.
      Even if the evidence she gives in the subsequent statement is taken at
      its highest, it would still have been open to the judge to reject this
      aspect of their account for the reasons given at [39].

27.   For these reasons I conclude that the  judge's  findings  relating  to
      the credibility of the witnesses do not disclose  any  errors  of  law
      that would  have  made  any  material  difference  to  his  conclusion
      relating to risk on return. Having found that the appellant would  not
      be at risk under Article 3 of the  European  Convention,  which  could
      only be relevant to the Conventions exception under paragraph  391  of
      the immigration rules, the third point made in the grounds  of  appeal
      cannot succeed.

28.   In  assessing  whether  the  Conventions  exception  applied  for  the
      purpose of Article 8 of the European Convention, the judge was obliged
      to  consider  the   more   stringent   test   of   'very   exceptional
      circumstances' contained in paragraph 399D of the  immigration  rules.
      The appellant's partner entered into a relationship with him at a time
      when he knew that his immigration status was precarious and he  should
      have known that he re-entered the UK in breach of a deportation order.
      Even if his partner could not return to Iran because of her  own  fear
      of persecution, having found that the appellant was not likely  to  be
      at risk on return, the  facts  of  the  case  did  not  disclose  very
      exceptional circumstances that might  otherwise  outweigh  the  public
      interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  given  the  appellant
      spent most of the 10 year exclusion period living in the UK in  breach
      of the order. Deportation would not necessarily  lead  to  a  complete
      severance of the relationship when it might still be possible for  the
      couple to continue their relationship  through  meetings  in  a  third
      country.  Any  interference  with  the  appellant's  family  life   is
      justified and proportionate given the significant weight that must  be
      placed on the public interest in maintaining a deportation order  when
      a person has breached its conditions in such a wholesale way.

29.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
      making of an error of law that would have made any material difference
      to the outcome of the appeal. The decision shall stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law.


Signed      [pic]      Date 13 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

