
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09581/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 4 May 2018                 |
|(Delivered Orally at Hearing)                 |                              |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 edris salim
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, instructed by VIP Legal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of Judge Aujla sent on 7 September 2017 in which  he
    allowed the appeal of Edris Salim (whom I shall hereafter refer  to  as
    "the claimant") against a decision of the Secretary of State  taken  on
    22 March 2016 refusing to grant him further leave to remain.



Background

 2. The claimant's history is set out in full in Judge Aujla's judgment  at
    paras 2 to 13.

 3. The claimant, who is a citizen of  Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on 9 October 2000 when  he  was  17  years  of  age.   He
    claimed asylum shortly thereafter on 13 November 2000.  That claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State  on  26  March  2002.   The  claimant
    appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on  29
    January  2003  and  subsequently  permission  to  appeal  against   the
    dismissal of his appeal was refused.

 4.  On  1  December  2006  the  claimant  submitted  an   Iraqi   Judgment
    Consideration which was refused by the  respondent,  the  Secretary  of
    State, on 9 January 2009.  The claimant appealed against  that  refusal
    and that appeal was heard by Judge Parker.  In a determination sent  on
    6 March 2009, she allowed the claimant's appeal  under  Art  8  of  the
    European Convention on human right  ("ECHR").   As  a  result  of  that
    decision the claimant was granted discretionary leave to  remain  valid
    from 13 August 2009 until 12 August 2012 under,  it  is  accepted,  the
    (then) Asylum Policy Instruction ("API") on discretionary leave.

 5. On 23 July 2012 he made a further application for leave and was granted
    discretionary leave from 24 September  2013  until  23  September  2016
    again under the relevant API.

 6. On 11 August 2015 he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his circumstances, and in particular that he had completed six
    years'  residence  with  discretionary  leave  under  the   API.    His
    application was refused on 22 March 2016 and it is that decision  which
    was appealed to Judge Aujla.

The Judge's Decision

 7. In his decision, Judge Aujla considered the decision  of  Judge  Parker
    and the basis upon which she had allowed his appeal which  had  led  to
    the grant of discretionary leave.  The reason for this was that  before
    Judge  Aujla  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  Secretary  of   State's
    discretionary leave policy in section 10.1.  This provides  as  follows
    (it suffices to set out the first three paragraphs):

         "Those granted leave under the DL policy in  force  before  9  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original DL was granted  (normally  they
         will be eligible to apply for settlement after  accruing  6  years'
         continuous DL (or where appropriate a combination of DL  and  LOTR,
         see section 8 above)), unless at the date  of  decision  they  fall
         within the restricted leave policy.

         Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of the
         decision. If the circumstances remain the same, the individual does
         not fall within the restricted leave  policy  and  the  criminality
         thresholds do not apply, a further period of  3  years'  DL  should
         normally be granted. Caseworkers must consider  whether  there  are
         any circumstances that may  warrant  departure  from  the  standard
         period of leave. See section 5.4.

         If there have been significant changes that mean the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality (see criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the further leave application  should  be
         refused." (my emphasis)

 8. In his decision Judge Aujla dealt with the application of the first  of
    those paragraphs at paras 36-40 as follows:

         "36. The Appellant came to United Kingdom in 2010 when  he  was  17
             years old.  By the time the judge  made  his  findings  on  06
             March 2009, the Appellant had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
             for nearly 9 years.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  had
             put down significant roots in the United Kingdom.  His private
             life therefore only strengthened between  2009  and  22  March
             2016, the date of the Respondent's decision.

         37.  The Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application  because
             family life between him and his girlfriend no longer  existed.
             The Respondent did not consider the matter on the basis of the
             Appellant's established private life.  Instead, she considered
             the private life claim as if it was a fresh claim and  decided
             it under paragraph 276ADE, without reference to the fact  that
             the Appellant had had the benefit of  discretionary  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of both family  life
             and private life for over 6 years.  It is  my  view  that  her
             consideration  of  private  life  as   a   fresh   issue   was
             inappropriate, unfair and possibly unlawful.

         38.  The Appellant was not granted discretionary  leave  to  remain
             solely on family life  grounds.   The  leave  was  granted  on
             family life as well is (sic) private life grounds.  Therefore,
             the fact that family life no longer existed was not in my view
             fatal to the success of his application since his private life
             still  continued.   By  the  time  the  Appellant   made   his
             application,  he  had   already   completed   six   years   of
             discretionary leave on the basis of  private  life  and  party
             family life.

         39.  I have considered the Respondent's policy a copy of which  was
             relied upon and placed before me by Ms Revill.  Paragraph 10.1
             of the same these as follows (sic):

              '10.1 Applicants granted DL before 9 July 2012

              Those granted leave under the DL policy in force  before  July
                  2012 will normally continue to be dealt  with  under  that
                  policy through to settlement if they continue  to  qualify
                  for further leave on the basis  as  the  original  DL  was
                  granted (normally they  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for
                  settlement after accruing 6 years' continuous DL (or where
                  appropriate a combination of DL and LOTR,  see  section  8
                  above)), unless at the date of decision they  fall  within
                  the restricted leave policy.'

         40.  The Appellant was granted discretionary  leave  on  13  August
             2009, before 9 July 2012.  The leave was granted on the  basis
             of both private life and  family  life.   The  fact  that  the
             Appellant had separated from his girlfriend and therefore  did
             not enjoy family life any longer with her was not in  my  view
             fatal to the success of his  application  and  therefore  this
             appeal,  since  his  long-established  private  life,   having
             arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a  minor  aged  17,  still
             continued.  In the circumstances, I have no reason  to  reject
             Ms  Revill's  submission  that  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
             requirements of the policy, having enjoyed discretionary leave
             in the United Kingdom for over 6 years."

 9. It will be clear from those paragraphs, in  particular  para  40,  that
    Judge Aujla took the view that the decision of  Judge  Parker  was  not
    based solely on the family life that then existed between the  claimant
    and his partner, but was also on the basis of his  private  life  which
    continued at the time of the decision.  As a result of that Judge Aujla
    decided that the policy continued to apply and in para 41 concluded:

         "I find that the Respondent's decision was not  sustainable  as  it
         was in breach of  the  Appellant's  right  to  private  life  under
         article 8.  The Appellant satisfied the requirements of the policy.
          This appeal is therefore allowed on article 8 grounds."

The Submissions

10. In her grounds, the Secretary of State contends that the judge erred in
    law in concluding that the policy continued to apply and therefore that
    the appeal should be allowed under Art 8.

11. In his submissions, Mr Kotas who represented  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted in essence that the  basis  of  the  original  grant  for  DL
    following the decision  of  Judge  Parker  was  on  the  basis  of  the
    claimant's private and family life.  The latter no longer  existed,  as
    was accepted before Judge Aujla, and therefore it  could  not  be  said
    that the claimant continued to qualify for further leave  on  the  same
    basis that DL was originally granted.

12. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Fripp in his  helpful  skeleton  argument
    and submissions submitted that Judge Aujla was entitled  to  find  that
    Judge Parker's decision to allow the claimant's appeal was  not  solely
    on the basis of family life but also on  the  basis  of  private  life,
    which sufficiently continued and indeed, given the effluxion of time is
    perhaps enhanced today, such that it was not irrational for Judge Aujla
    to consider that the policy applied.

Discussion

13. There is no doubt on reading  Judge  Parker's  determination  that  her
    decision was based on both the claimant's family life with  his  (then)
    partner, as well as his private life.  I was taken to passages  in  her
    determination starting at para 41 and running on to para  55  in  which
    she refers to the claimant's  circumstances  relevant  to  his  private
    life, both in the UK and as it would be if he were  returned  to  Iraq,
    but also as regards his family life with  his  partner.   There  is  no
    gainsaying the fact that she was influenced by  both  in  reaching  her
    decision that the Secretary of State's decision breached Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.  Equally, it is clear that both were material  to  her  decision,
    for example, at para 44 she said:

         "I accept that he has a private including family life in the United
         Kingdom.  I am satisfied that there would be interference  to  this
         if he were to be required to leave.  This is particularly the  case
         for his relationship with his partner, which is a close one.   They
         are living together and would like to marry and I am satisfied that
         they are genuine about  this.   They  see  their  long-term  future
         together and in  such  circumstances  there  would  clearly  be  an
         interference if the appellant were required to leave."

14. Similarly, at para 54 she refers to the issue of proportionality of the
    claimant's removal in terms of "the impact that this would have on  his
    family and private life".

15. In my judgment it is simply not  permissible  to  read  Judge  Parker's
    determination as being based on anything other than a  claim  involving
    an amalgam of issues arising from the claimant's family life  with  his
    then partner and his private life.

16. The Secretary of State's policy only applies so that it would have  the
    effect that Judge Aujla gave to it in allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
    under Art 8 if the claimant continued to qualify for further leave  "on
    the same basis as [his] original DL was granted".  In the extract  from
    section 10.1 of the policy, which set out above, the  second  paragraph
    makes  clear  what  that  is  intended  to  encompass  and  it  is  the
    "circumstances prevailing at the time of the original grant  of  leave"
    and whether they "continue at the  date  of  decision".   As  Mr  Fripp
    submitted, of course,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  the  circumstances
    prevailing, perhaps three years after an original grant of DL  will  be
    precisely the same.  In some cases, the circumstances will  have  moved
    on in favour of a claimant  with  a  deepening  of  a  relationship  or
    private life.  In others, and this is one such case, a  part  of  their
    Art 8 claim as originally brought may no  longer  pertain,  here,  that
    based on the applicant's  relationship  with  his  then  partner.   The
    policy itself recognises that a sensible and reasonable approach has to
    be taken to whether or not the same basis exists today  as  existed  at
    the time of the original grant of DL, so para 3 which I set  out  above
    refers to "significant changes"  which  may  lead  to  the  policy  not
    applying.

17. Mr Kotas handed up the Secretary of State's  decision  under  challenge
    which refers in para 4 to the original grant being on the basis of  the
    claimant's family  life.   Mr  Fripp  handed  up  the  original  letter
    granting leave which says nothing about the basis of  the  grant  other
    than it is accepted, of course, that it  was  on  the  basis  of  Judge
    Parker's decision.  Judge Parker's decision was not solely based on the
    claimant's family life, it was based upon a combination of that  family
    life and his private life and the impact of his removal on that amalgam
    of his private and family life in the UK.

18. In my judgment, Judge Aujla could not reasonably come to the conclusion
    that, once the relationship between the claimant and his  then  partner
    was no longer present, the circumstances prevailing at the date of  the
    Secretary of State's decision under challenge in this appeal  were  the
    same (so as to "continue") as those that prevailed at the time of Judge
    Parker's  decision,  and  perhaps  more  importantly,  the   grant   of
    discretionary leave on that basis.

Decision

19. For these reasons, Judge Aujla materially erred in  law  in  concluding
    that the Secretary of State's DL policy applied  and  thereby  allowing
    the appeal under Art 8 on that basis.  His decision cannot stand and is
    set aside.

20. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    rehearing on Art 8 not to heard by Judge Aujla.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  2 May 2018
