

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09167/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 October 2017                         |On 31 October 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Raval
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Mr C. Bates, Home Office Presenting
Officer, instructed by
For the respondent:        Mr P. Lewis Counsel instructed by Kidd Rapinet,
Solicitors

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Majid.  However, for the sake of  continuity,  I
       shall refer to Mr Raval as the appellant as he was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.


    2. Regrettably, the parties accepted that the determination  could  not
       stand.


    3. This is one of 4 cases in my  list  today  all  of  which  concerned
       determinations   made   by   First-tier   Tribunal    Judge    Majid
       (HU/08143/2015;    HU/08745/2015;    HU/09167/2015;    IA/45841    &
       48501/2014).


    4. In each of the cases the appeal was determined  in  the  appellant's
       favour to the effect that the Judge was persuaded that the appellant
       came within the relevant Immigration Rules sometimes by reference to
       having the  benefit  of  a  discretion  (which  the  Judge  did  not
       possess).

    5. All the determinations are strikingly  similar.   The  bulk  of  the
       determination contains general comments, touching upon the  law  but
       in terms that no specific legal thread is identified that bears upon
       the appellant's case.  Some of it is anecdotal  [paragraph  20]  and
       some is simply wrong [paragraphs 16].  The effect is that  I  cannot
       with confidence rely upon the process of decision making as a whole.

    6. The determination does not  adequately  reveal  the  nature  of  the
       application or the respondent's approach to it.  The legal framework
       is not referred to.  We would scarcely know that this  was  a  claim
       made by the applicant for further leave to remain on the basis  that
       removal would violate  his  protected  private  life;  that  it  was
       governed by  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  and  that  the
       applicant in order to comply with the public interest  criteria  had
       to establish a continuous period of 10 years lawful leave  and  that
       'continuous  residence'  was  defined  in  paragraph  276A(a).   The
       Secretary of State relied  upon  a  period  of  49  days  after  the
       appellant's prior leave  had  ceased  as  breaking  the  continuity.
       Neither the presence of his partner nor his  son  (neither  of  whom
       were British subjects) permitted the appellant to remain  under  the
       so-called partner or parent route.

    7. Regrettably,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  write  a
       determination that properly dealt with the legal and factual  issues
       he was tasked to resolve.  I set aside the decision  and  remit  the
       matter to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be remade.

DECISION

The Judge made an error on a point  of  law  and  I  set  the  determination
aside.  I remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  enable  the
decision to be re-made.









                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             26 October 2017




