
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09450/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2019                          |On 01 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           Sara zaky giRgis SALIB
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat, Solicitor, Gulbenkian Andonian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  on  inadequate  reasoning  and/or  procedural
    unfairness grounds from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    SH Smith sitting at Hatton Cross on 1  November  2018)  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse to grant her leave to remain on
    human rights grounds following the refusal of her application for leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 4 July 2016, a decision
    which was upheld on 9 August 2016 after the appellant had  applied  for
    administrative review.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  such  a  direction  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, who entered the UK  on  25  August
    2009 with valid entry clearance as a  student.   She  was  subsequently
    granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant from 15  May
    2013 to 15 May 2016.  The appellant made  an  in-time  application  for
    further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  Migrant  but,  as
    previously stated, the application was refused and maintained following
    an administrative review.

 3. On 5 September 2016 the appellant applied for leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds.  On 5 April 2018 the Department gave their reasons  for
    refusing the application.  In her application dated 5  September  2016,
    she had submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS.  ETS had  undertaken  a
    check of her test and confirmed with the Secretary of State that  there
    was  sufficient  evidence  to  conclude  that   her   certificate   was
    fraudulently obtained by the use of a  proxy  test-taker.   Her  scores
    from the test taken on 16 May 2012 at  Colwell  College  had  now  been
    cancelled by ETS.  On the basis of information  provided  by  ETS,  the
    Department was satisfied that her certificate was fraudulently obtained
    and that she had used deception in her application of 16 October  2012.
    The attached printout entitled "ETS Lookup" linked her case to the  use
    of an invalid  certificate.   Consequently,  she  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements of S-LTR 1.6.  Her presence in the UK was  not
    conducive to the public good because her conduct made it undesirable to
    allow her to remain in the UK.

 4. She also did not meet the eligibility requirements for leave to  remain
    on private life grounds under Rule 276ADE(1).  She  had  visited  Egypt
    for two weeks in 2015 and she had stated that she  was  able  to  speak
    Arabic as well as English.  Her parents, sister,  brothers,  uncle  and
    aunt continued to live in Egypt.  So, they would be able  to  help  her
    adjust to life in her home country once more.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Smith.   Mr  Farhat
    appeared on behalf of the appellant.

 6. In his subsequent decision, the Judge gave very  detailed  reasons  for
    finding that the Department had not discharged the  burden  of  proving
    that the appellant had used a proxy test-taker in order to achieve  her
    speaking test result.  As the result, he  found  that  the  suitability
    concerns raised in the refusal letter fell away.

 7. But he agreed that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  Rule
    276ADE.   She  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles  to   her
    reintegration in Egypt.  She had lived in Egypt until the  age  of  28.
    She spoke Arabic, and she had had the opportunity  to  develop  English
    language skills while  living  here.   She  had  demonstrated  business
    acumen in establishing a  successful  food  business.   She  still  had
    family in Egypt.

 8. The Judge turned to consider an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  The
    crux of Mr Farhat's case was that, in the light of the  historic  wrong
    the appellant had suffered by virtue of the Department wrongly accusing
    her of engaging in deception, and therefore having refused her  Tier  1
    application on erroneous  grounds,  the  private  life  which  she  had
    established through her business should be afforded significant  weight
    when assessing the proportionality of her removal.  In support of  that
    contention, Mr Farhat had relied on Onwuje and Onwuje -v-  SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 331.

 9. The Judge said at paragraph [41] that in principle he  agreed  with  Mr
    Farhat's submissions.  At paragraph [42], he  held  that  if  the  sole
    reason for her early applications being refused was on the  suitability
    ground which he had now found to have no merit, "that would be historic
    wrong which would attract considerable, if not determinative, weight in
    the proportionality balancing exercise."  However,  he  held  that  the
    difficulty for the appellant was that she had not provided  a  copy  of
    the earlier Tier 1 refusal, or the administrative review  which  upheld
    it.  Although she wrote in her statement that this was the  sole  basis
    on which it was refused, in the absence of confirmation in the form  of
    the refusal letter - a document which should be  readily  available  to
    her - he was unable to find that the sole reason  for  the  appellant's
    earlier refusal was this historic wrong.  The appellant had not applied
    to adjourn the proceedings to obtain such documentation.  Indeed, in  a
    letter to the Tribunal dated 29 October 2018,  those  representing  the
    appellant  had  written  that   they   had   experienced   considerable
    difficulties obtaining documents "from her".

10. The Judge went on to  find  that  the  reasons  in  favour  of  removal
    outweighed those in favour of the appellant remaining  here.   Although
    he accepted that the appellant had suffered an historical wrong, he had
    been unable to find that that  was  the  sole  factor  in  the  earlier
    refusals of her applications for leave to remain.  Taken in  isolation,
    therefore, the Department's error in relation  to  the  allegations  of
    deception could not be determinative of the  public  interest  on  this
    occasion.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 27 December 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth  granted
    permission to appeal inter alia for the following reasons:

         "The respondent did not appear at the  hearing  before  the  Judge.
         The  Judge  was  not  in  a  position  to  obtain  help  from   any
         representative of the  respondent.   The  appellant  clarified  the
         basis on which the application had been refused.  It was submitted,
         on the appellant's behalf, that this assertion was sufficient.  The
         Judge rejected that.  The Judge went on to state at paragraph 43 of
         the decision the Tier 1 regime  especially  in  relation  to  small
         businesses was extremely complex and the  matter  could  have  been
         refused on any number of technical  bases.   The  approach  by  the
         Judge was arguably wrong, leaving aside the question of unfairness.
          It is made clear in the permission application that the  appellant
         had made a pleading of fact in her original application as this  is
         described which was not contested or challenged at any stage in the
         process either in the application process or the  appeals  process.
         It is arguable, given the absence of any representative on the part
         of the respondent and the potentially central nature of  the  issue
         to the outcome of the  proportionality  exercise,  that  the  Judge
         should have taken a different approach to the question of obtaining
         the original refusal letter or letters which were of concern."

The Rule 24 Response

12. Christopher Bates of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  a  Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal. In his response dated 30 January 2019, Mr
    Bates submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  directed
    himself appropriately.  The burden of proof lay  on  the  appellant  to
    make good the assertion that the allegation of deception was  the  only
    basis upon which her previous application had been refused.  To  assist
    the Court, a copy of the refusal of 4 July 2016 was now attached to the
    response.   This made it clear that, far  from  suitability  being  the
    only basis for the refusal, there were in reality  "multiple  failings"
    in evidencing compliance with the Tier 1 application criteria.

The New Material that was not before the First-tier Tribunal

13. In the event, the Specialist Appeals Team provided both a copy  of  the
    refusal decision of 4 July 2016 and a copy of the administrative review
    of 9 August 2016.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Farhat explained that he had received the Rule 24 response very
    late, and the copies of the two decisions of 2016  even  later.   As  a
    consequence, he had only been able to take instructions today from  his
    client on their contents.  She now recalled that the refusals  of  2016
    had not been  solely  based  upon  an  asserted  failure  to  meet  the
    suitability requirement, but  she  had  been  so  upset  that  she  had
    forgotten this, and the evidence which she had given to the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had been given in good faith.

15. Although he acknowledged that the case he had put forward on her behalf
    before the First-tier Tribunal was mistaken, Mr Farhat  submitted  that
    nonetheless the Judge had erred in law for the  reasons  identified  in
    the permission application.  Having regard to  the  procedural  history
    and the evidence that was before him, the Judge had erred in law in not
    accepting the case that was put to him.   Alternatively,  even  if  the
    Judge had been right to find that there were technical issues with  the
    appellant's Tier 1 application, there had  been  procedural  unfairness
    because the Judge had not been able to perform a proper proportionality
    assessment in accordance with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal
    in the Onwuje case, without having sight of  the  detailed  grounds  of
    refusal and/or in the absence of assistance from a Presenting Officer.

Discussion

16. In E&R -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  QB  1044,
    Carnwath LJ said at paragraph [66]:

         "In our view, the time has now come to accept  a  mistake  of  fact
         giving rise to unfairness is a separate head  of  challenge  in  an
         appeal on a point of law, at  least  in  those  statutory  contexts
         where the parties share an interest in cooperating to  achieve  the
         correct result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an  area.   Without
         seeking to lay down a precise code, the ordinary requirements for a
         finding of unfairness are apparent from the above analysis  of  the
         Criminal Injuries Compensation Board case.  First, there must  have
         been a mistake as to the existing fact, including a mistake  as  to
         the availability of evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the
         factual evidence must have been "established", in the sense that it
         was  uncontentious  and  objectively  verifiable.    Thirdly,   the
         appellant (or his advisors) must not have been responsible for  the
         mistake.  Fourthly, the mistake must have played  a  material  (not
         necessarily decisive) part in the tribunal's reasoning."

17. Carnwath LJ went on  to  say  in  paragraph  [68]  that,  assuming  the
    relevance of showing a mistake of  fact  in  the  Tribunal's  decision,
    there may need to be evidence to prove it.  The Court had discretion to
    admit new evidence, but it was normally exercised subject to  Ladd  -v-
    Marshall principles, raising in particular the  issue  of  whether  the
    material could and should have been made available before the decision.

18. In this case, the Tribunal is faced with a reverse situation. The First-
    Tier Judge was right on the facts, but it is argued that  he  ought  to
    have decided the case on a factual basis which is now  accepted  to  be
    false.

19. The fact that the Judge has been vindicated in his  assessment  of  the
    facts - in particular in his refusal to take the appellant's  word  for
    it that the refusal  decisions  of  2016  were  solely  based  upon  an
    allegation of deception - makes  it  difficult  for  the  appellant  to
    maintain the error of law challenge which is pleaded in the  permission
    application.

20. But even if I put myself in the position of Judge Smith,  who  did  not
    have sight of the refusals, I do not  consider  that  his  decision  is
    vitiated by inadequate reasoning or by procedural unfairness.

21. The nub of the case advanced by Mr Gilbert is contained  in  paragraphs
    19 and 20 of the permission application.  The following are  stated  to
    be clearly sufficient for the Judge to have  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellant: (a) an assertion in the original application (cover letter);
    (b) the assertion went unchallenged and was not disputed in  the  RFRL;
    (c) the respondent formulated her bundle (i.e.  her  evidence)  without
    disputing this assertion; (d) the respondent, despite  having  received
    the appellant's witness statement in advance, did not seek to challenge
    her witness statement.

22. I consider that Mr Gilbert's case breaks down at the first stage.   The
    cover letter settled by Reiss Edwards did not  contain  an  unequivocal
    assertion that the sole ground of refusal of the Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    migrant application made earlier in 2016 was  a  failure  to  meet  the
    suitability requirement.  It would have been surprising if it had  done
    so, as Reiss Edwards were the legal representatives who had  acted  for
    the appellant in the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) migrant application, and  so
    they were well aware (as Mr Gilbert accepted) that the application  had
    been refused  on  its  merits  as  well  as  on  the  ground  that  the
    suitability requirement was not met.

23. The representation made in the cover letter was as follows: "It is  our
    submission that the evidence with this  application  is  sufficient  in
    showing that the applicant genuinely established her business which she
    is successfully running."

24. It is apparent from the documents listed at the end of the cover letter
    that the representatives submitted with the  private  life  application
    additional documentary evidence relating to the business that  was  not
    provided for the Tier 1 application.  Thus, for example,  the  list  of
    documents includes an SSE statement of account for the applicant  dated
    15 July 2016, and a Lloyds Bank statement for her covering  the  period
    21 July 2016 through to 19 August 2016.  This underscores the fact that
    the appellant was not representing in  her  current  application  that,
    absent the suitability issue, she had met all the relevant requirements
    for the grant of leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  migrant  -
    still less that the Department had previously conceded this fact.   All
    that was being represented was that  the  evidence  provided  with  the
    current application was sufficient  to  show  that  the  appellant  had
    genuinely established her business which she was successfully running.

25. Given this starting point, the appellant had no legitimate  expectation
    that the refusal letter would engage with an assertion  which  had  not
    been made in the first place.  In addition, looking at the matter  more
    broadly, the appellant had no legitimate expectation that  the  refusal
    letter would rehearse the reasons why  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) migrant had been refused.   From  the
    prospective of the Department, this  was  completely  irrelevant.   The
    only relevant issue that required  to  be  addressed  was  whether  the
    appellant qualified for  leave  to  remain  on  private  life  grounds.
    Identical considerations apply to the formulation of  the  Home  Office
    bundle.

26. I accept that, by serving the appellant's witness statement in  advance
    of the hearing, the appellant's representatives put the  Department  on
    notice that the appellant was going to  give  evidence  that  the  sole
    ground of refusal of her Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) migrant application  was
    the allegation of deception.  But the burden of proof did  not  thereby
    shift to the Department to produce documentary evidence in rebuttal  of
    what is now accepted to be a false assertion.  As a general  principle,
    he who asserts must prove.  The burden of proof always rested with  the
    appellant to prove any and all facts material to her case that were not
    conceded by the Department.

27. Accordingly, procedural fairness did not demand that the  Judge  should
    accept the appellant's unsupported assertion.  Sitting as a Judge of  a
    specialist Tribunal, it was open to  him  to  be  sceptical  about  her
    claim, applying his specialist knowledge of the difficulties  faced  by
    the applicants in satisfying the technical criteria for  the  grant  of
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  It  was  also  open  to  the
    Judge to find that the earlier refusal  letter  was  a  document  which
    should be readily available to her, and that the fact that she had  not
    produced it meant that she had not discharged the burden of proof.

28. Turing to Mr  Gilbert's  alternative  case,  the  Judge  recognised  at
    paragraph [40] of his decision that Onwuje confirmed that in  principle
    the private life limb of Article 8 can be engaged  by  an  individual's
    ownership of, and involvement in, his or her business.

29. The Judge accepted that one dimension of private life the appellant had
    established in the UK was her business.  He found that she ran it  with
    her brother and that she interacted with large numbers of people  on  a
    daily basis.  He accepted that she had invested a  considerable  amount
    of her own time and money in the business.

30. Later on, when compiling a balance sheet of factors in  favour  of  her
    removal as against factors in favour of her remaining here,  the  Judge
    identified as the primary factor in favour of her  remaining  here  the
    fact that she had established a business which was a going concern, and
    which  relied  for  its  day-to-day   functioning   on   her   personal
    involvement.

31. Accordingly, I do not consider that the appellant can be said to be the
    victim of procedural unfairness on the alternative basis put forward by
    Mr Gilbert.  The  Judge  accepted  that  her  private  life  claim  was
    fortified by the evidence about her business, and the detailed  reasons
    which underlay the refusal of the earlier Tier 1 application  were  not
    reasonably capable of making any  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    proportionality assessment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed
Date 23 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

