
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09393/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 April 2021                     |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Mr Kadir Ali
                      (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN PLACE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss T Srindran, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Miss S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
21 February 2018 to refuse his human rights claim consequent on the making
of a deportation order against him pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK
Borders Act 2007.  His appeal against that decision was allowed by the
First-tier Tribunal for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 23
April 2020.  For the reasons set out in my decision of 22 December 2020
that decision was set aside although the findings of fact were preserved.

Background

There is little dispute as to the underlying facts of this case.

The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6 May 1986.  He entered
the United Kingdom on 4 June 1988 with his mother on family entrance
clearance and on 21 January 1997 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.
 He has remained in the United Kingdom since then with the exception of
spending nine months in Bangladesh in 2000 and a subsequent visit for two
weeks in 2011 for a wedding.

The appellant was married on 20 March 2016 to Miss Boshir, a British
citizen.  The couple have two children who are British citizens.  His
mother lives in the United Kingdom as does his brother and family and two
sisters.

The appellant has been convicted of numerous offences on several different
occasions.  On 24 March 2006 he was convicted of possessing an offensive
weapon in a public place and given a conditional charge of 24 months.  On
24 May 2006 he was convicted of driving whilst uninsured, driving otherwise
than in accordance with a licence, failure to give a name and address and
failure to surrender to bail, resulting in a fine and six penalty points.
He was fined a further �50 which was not paid, resulting in a sentence of
one day's imprisonment.

In February 2006 he was convicted at Croydon Crown Court of possessing a
controlled drug with intent to supply (heroin) and was sentenced to two
years' imprisonment in a Young Offenders Institute.  On 28 November 2007 he
was convicted at Inner London Crown Court of possession with intent to
supply cannabis, resulting in a further sentence of two years'
imprisonment.

In 2008 the appellant was served with notice of an intention of liability
to deport and he appealed against that decision.  On 30 October 2008 his
appeal against that decision was allowed.  Subsequent to that he was
informed that deportation action would not take place but he was also
warned that should he come to adverse notice in the future, the Secretary
of State would be obliged to give further consideration as to whether he
should be deported.  His indefinite leave to remain was revoked on 24
November 2008 and consideration was to be given to a grant of discretionary
leave.

On 8 June 2009 the appellant was convicted at Harrow Crown Court, resulting
in two months' imprisonment and ten months' imprisonment to run
concurrently and on 23 June 2009 he was convicted of possession of heroin
and fined �500.

The appellant was again on 28 October 2009 served with intention of
liability to deport and he was again on 19 November 2009 told that
deportation would not take place on that occasion but warned that he could
face deportation in the future were he to come again to adverse attention.

On 9 June 2010 the appellant was convicted of driving offences, resulting
in a suspended imprisonment term of sixteen weeks amongst other penalties
and on 15 August 2013 he was convicted of burglary with intent to steal and
sentenced to 34 months' imprisonment.

On 18 September 2013 the respondent deemed the appellant's deportation to
be conducive to the public good.  He was served with an intention of
liability to deport.  A deportation order was signed on 26 February 2014.
He appealed against that decision and it was dismissed.  His application
for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was unsuccessful and finally
he became appeal rights exhausted on 2 March 2017.  At that point his
deportation order came into force but he did not leave the United Kingdom.

On 26 September 2017 an application was made for his deportation order to
be revoked.  That application was refused and his deportation order was
made.

The appellant's case is that:-

He is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his two
children and it would be unduly harsh for them to live in Bangladesh and/or
it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom when he
is deported;

that he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and

the relationship was formed at a time when his immigration status was not
precarious,

it would be unduly harsh for her to live in Bangladesh because of
compelling circumstances over and above those described in paragraph EX.2
of Appendix FM and

it would be unduly harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom without
the appellant.

The appellant also asserts that he has been lawfully resident in the United
Kingdom for most of his life, is socially and culturally integrated into
the United Kingdom and there would be very significant obstacles to his
integration into Bangladesh.

The respondent's case is that although it is accepted that he is in a
genuine and parental relationship with his children it was not accepted
that it would be unduly harsh for them to live in Bangladesh nor would it
be unduly harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom with their mother
when he was deported.  The Secretary of State was also of the view that the
appellant's relationship with his partner had been formed when his status
was precarious: his mother had contacted his wife's parents to ask for her
hand in marriage and initially this had been refused because of the threat
of deportation.  She also considered in any event that it would not be
unduly harsh for his wife to live in Bangladesh, given that she had
cultural ties to the country, nor would it be unduly harsh for her to
remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant were deported.

The Secretary of State considered also that although the appellant had been
lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life he was not
socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom, given his
serious offending which includes possession of controlled drugs with intent
to supply, his failure to see the error of his ways and his continued
offending despite receiving two warning letters about his future conduct as
well as his setting up a business when subject to a deportation order. It
was not accepted that there would be very significant obstacles to his
integration into Bangladesh.

The Secretary of State did not consider either that there were very
compelling circumstances such that he should not be deported, noting that
there was a significant public interest in deporting him because of his
eight criminal convictions indicating a propensity to reoffend, relying
significantly on his unsuccessful appeal in August 2014.

Having had regard to paragraphs 390 and 390A and 391A of the Immigration
Rules, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that it would be
appropriate to revoke the deportation order.

The Hearing

I heard evidence from the appellant, the appellant's wife, two of the
appellant's sisters, the appellant's brother and two other witnesses who
gave evidence in support.  In addition, I heard submissions from both
representatives, both of whom relied on written submissions.  I also had
before me the following:

      1) Respondent's bundle.

      2) Appellant's bundle.

      3) Appellant's supplementary bundle.

The appellant adopted his witness statement, confirming that he had worked
in ASDA part-time as a first job and so he had not required any prior
experience.  He had become experienced in customer services, which is why
the managers from that shop moved on and he was later able to get another
job at ASDA in a customer service role.  He said it had been hard to get a
job, and he had gone door to door handing out CVs in shops but that this
had not been successful.  The appellant said that if his appeal is
successful he would look for work albeit nightshift or weekends but he says
he has only been able to work recently in 2018 cash in hand as the Home
Office had his passport and he was not allowed to work.

Asked about the index offence, the burglary, he said he accepted that he
had broken into the house and that he had considered the repercussions for
the victim.  He said that in 2013 he had become separated from his friends,
then ended up with the wrong people in whose company he had committed the
offence.  He was separated from his peer group.

The appellant said that after being released from prison on that occasion
he had been able to get a job at Heathrow through the uncle of somebody he
had been in prison with.  It had not worked out as it had been too far to
travel and he had been on a tag, which made it difficult.  He said it was
no longer his intention to do business studies.

The appellant's wife gave evidence, adopting her witness statement, adding
that her original family all live in Cardiff.  She said that they had
visited often although not recently owing to COVID.  She said she had been
a teacher for ten years, initially in Cardiff, now in London.  She said she
did not have any family left in Bangladesh as they are all here and she had
not been there since 1991.  She said she spoke broken Bengali and although
she understood more she was not fluent.  She said she could not read or
write Bengali as her mother had been illiterate and there was no
possibility for her to have learnt growing up in Cardiff.  She said she was
trying to teach her children Bengali but that it was hard.

She said that she had continuing back problems and the school had provided
adjustments for her in the forms of a footstool, chair, cushions etc., and
that they had been very understanding.  She said that she got anxious about
the possibility of the appellant being deported to Bangladesh as they had
not discussed or made plans about this.  She said that she and the children
would not go to Bangladesh.  She said that she had made a lot of sacrifices
and worked extremely hard to reach the position she had as a teacher.  She
had fought to go to university and had gone through a lot of struggles and
she did want to give that up to go to Bangladesh nor did she want her
children not to have the opportunities they would have in the United
Kingdom.  She said that the children had not gone into a nursery initially
although, as a key worker, this would have been possible as she thought it
would be better for them to be at home with their father and they had been
able to put things up in the garden to keep them occupied.

I heard evidence from the appellant's sister Silfiah Khatun, who adopted
her witness statement.  I then heard evidence from the appellant's brother,
who adopted his witness statement.  He said he is not in a position at
present to buy a house, it would be difficult for him to support him and
they would not be able to afford the cost of travelling there to visit.
There were very few family left in Bangladesh, only distant.

I then heard evidence from Shiria Khatun, who again adopted her witness
statement and was cross-examined.  She says at present the appellant and
his family were not paying rent to live in the house which was owned by her
and her mother.  She said that she owned her own house and that her husband
works part-time three days a week so that he could look after the children.
 She said he does not have family in Bangladesh and she had no present
intention to visit there.  She accepted it was culturally normal to take
family there to view the children and to show them to family but they could
not afford to do so.  She said that her brother (the appellant) was a
sociable person and likeable but she was not sure that that was what
despite his convictions allowed him to get a job.

I heard evidence from Mr Rubal, the appellant's wife's brother.  He adopted
his witness statement.  He said he lived with his parents and that it was
expected of him to support them, which he did.  He also paid maintenance
for his child.  He said that he did help some distant relatives in
Bangladesh and that it was common for people in the United Kingdom to
receive letters for help from relatives even if they were not closely
related or from villagers in the assumption that people who live in the
United Kingdom are wealthy and could do so.  He said he did give some money
by way of charity from time to time.

I then heard evidence from the final witness, who adopted his witness
statement and was cross-examined.  He said he was a friend of the
appellant, they had known each other as they had met volunteering at the
London Borough of Newham.

I then heard submissions.  Miss Cunha stated that the Secretary of State
was no longer arguing that it would not be unduly harsh to expect the
appellant's wife or children to relocate to Bangladesh but was submitting
that it would not be unduly harsh to expect them to remain in the United
Kingdom and for the appellant to be deported.  She submitted also that the
appellant had not shown that there were very significant obstacles to his
integration into Bangladesh.

Miss Cunha submitted that the appellant would get the assistance of his own
community in Bangladesh and that he had family who had things there.  She
submitted that insofar there is an impact on the wife, she is highly
educated, had a job which she could change if she wanted to and she would
be able to go to live again in Cardiff with the support of her family.

She submitted that in any event the appellant's wife would be able to
continue living in London with the children and the assistance of what was
clearly a close and loving family.  She submitted that as the children were
now at nursery there was no reason why the appellant's wife would not be
able to continue in her employment or, as the school had been flexible in
the past, she could reduce her hours (again, this was not put to her).
Miss Cunha submitted also that it was considered that the appellant's wife
and children would be able to continue living in the house which is rent-
free and it was owned by the family.

Turning to the social work report in respect of the children, Miss Cunha
submitted that it was accepted that there was a strong relationship with
the appellant and significant  that the children had a close bond with
their father.  She submitted the breach of this, even if it was contrary to
the best interests of the children, would not amount to undue harshness
which did not arise on the facts of this case.

She submitted further that there would not be very significant obstacles
for the appellant on return to Bangladesh properly understood as he would
have the mechanisms to integrate.

Miss Srindran relied on her submissions, submitting that account should be
taken of the long gap since the appellant had last offended.  She submitted
that it would be unduly harsh on the particular facts of this case for the
father to be separated from the children, given the closeness of the bond
which had deepened during the last year during lockdown as he had become
very much the primary carer for the children most of the time as the mother
had gone out to work.  She submitted further on the basis of the expert
report that the appellant would have very significant obstacles to re-
integration.

The Law

 1. Section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides as follows:

         "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

              (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,

              (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

              (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

              ...

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
             into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
             the reason for the decision was the offence or offences for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

The Immigration Rules provide, so far as is relevant, as follows:

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

Paragraph 399 and 399A provide:

         This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision;

         and in either case

             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported; or

         ...

      399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if
      -

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

With respect to Section 117C and paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules the
key issue here is undue harshness.  The law on this is summarised in TD
(Albania) [2021] EWCA Civ 619 at [20]ff:

         "20. In KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath, with whom the other members of
         the Supreme Court agreed, explained the nature of the test of undue
         harshness:

             "23  On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence..."

         21.  The appeals in HA (Iraq) arose from  decisions  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal giving guidance on the application of  KO  (Nigeria).  The
         decision of this court underlined that  what  is  required  in  all
         cases is an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect of
         deportation on a child or partner would  be  unduly  harsh  in  the
         context of the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. The leading judgment of  Underhill  V-P  contains  these
         passages:

             "51  ... The underlying question for tribunals is whether  the
             harshness which the deportation will  cause  for  the  partner
             and/or child is of a sufficiently elevated degree to  outweigh
             that public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals."

             "53  ... It is inherent in the nature of an  exercise  of  the
             kind required by section 117C(5) that Parliament intended that
             tribunals should in each  case  make  an  informed  evaluative
             assessment of whether the effect of  the  deportation  of  the
             parent or partner on their child or partner would  be  "unduly
             harsh" in the context of the strong  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of foreign criminals; and  further  exposition  of
             that phrase will never be of more than limited value."

             "56  ... if tribunals treat the essential  question  as  being
             "is this level of harshness out of the ordinary?" they may  be
             tempted to find that Exception 2 does not apply simply on  the
             basis that the situation fits into  some  commonly-encountered
             pattern. That would be dangerous. How a child will be affected
             by a parent's deportation will depend on an almost  infinitely
             variable range of circumstances and  it  is  not  possible  to
             identify a  baseline  of  "ordinariness".  Simply  by  way  of
             example, the degree of harshness of the impact may be affected
             by the child's age; by whether the parent lives with them  (NB
             that a divorced or separated father may still have  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship with a child who  lives  with  the
             mother); by the degree of the child's emotional dependence  on
             the parent; by the financial consequences of his  deportation;
             by the availability of emotional and financial support from  a
             remaining  parent   and   other   family   members;   by   the
             practicability of maintaining a relationship with the deported
             parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of
             the child.

             57   ... Tribunals considering the parent case under Exception
             2 should not err  in  law  if  in  each  case  they  carefully
             evaluate the likely effect of the parent's deportation on  the
             particular child and then decide whether that  effect  is  not
             merely  harsh  but  unduly  harsh  applying  KO  (Nigeria)  in
             accordance with the guidance at paras 50-53 above."

         22.  The decision in HA (Iraq) does no more than explain that what
         is required is a case-specific approach in which the decision-maker
         addresses the reality of the child's situation and fairly balances
         the justification for deportation and its consequences. It warns of
         the danger of substituting for the statutory test a generalised
         comparison between the child's situation and a baseline of notional
         ordinariness. It affirms that this is not what KO (Nigeria),
         properly understood, requires."

I note further that the issue in this case the best interests of the
children but the best interests of the children are simply a factor to be
weighed when assessing proportionality.

    Paragraph 399A

The First-tier Tribunal's findings that the appellant has lived most of his
life lawfully in the United Kingdom and that he is socially and culturally
integrated here are preserved, the sole issue under this paragraph being
whether there are very significant obstacles to the appellant re-
integrating into Bangladesh.

In considering that issue, I bear in mind the observation in Kamara v SSHD
[2016] EWCA Civ 813 at [14]:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not appropriate to treat the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on and a
         capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time
         a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
         individual's private or family life."

The starting point is the facts as preserved by the First-tier Tribunal.
These are as follows:-

         "37.  I found the appellant gave his evidence in a restrained and
         calm way and did not seek to exaggerate. I accept that he has
         uncles in Bangladesh. He has said that it is a difficult
         relationship and that they are somewhat estranged, following the
         death of his grandparents. He has also said that they look to his
         mother for financial support. My conclusion is that he does have
         some ties to Bangladesh, and he has uncles living there. I accept
         that they may be able to give him some support. However, given the
         length of time he has lived in the UK, and what he says about his
         very limited relationship with them, I find that this support would
         be extremely limited.

         ...

         39. The evidence about his work in the UK is not comprehensive - he
         has had various jobs in retail and security and in construction.
         The UT judge in 2015 made findings at paragraphs 8 and 9 about
         employment after his release. He did not complete his school
         education in the UK but has studied for various NVQs and other IT
         qualifications.

         40.  I have adopted a balance sheet approach. The obstacles to
         integration I find are:

             (a)  He has lived in the United Kingdom since approximately
                  the age of 2.

             (b)  He has grown up in this country, and gone through the
                  education system.

             (c)  He has never lived beyond the age of 2 in Bangladesh,
                  apart from 9 months when he was aged 14 and other
                  occasional short visits. He has not visited since 2011
                  when he went for two weeks for his sister's wedding.

             (d)  He cannot read or write Sylheti, although I accept he
                  could reasonably learn within a reasonable time scale.

             (e)  All his close family are in the United Kingdom

             (f)  While he has some uncles in Bangladesh, as above I find
                  the likely support would be very limited.

             (g)  I have found that he is socially and culturally
                  integrated in the UK.

             (h)  I find that his real knowledge of current culture and
                  society in Bangladesh will be limited."

I bear in mind that he left Bangladesh at the age of 2 and has had limited
exposure to that country.  Nonetheless, he does have some connections in
the form of relatives, albeit distant, but equally, there is no evidence
from the witnesses from whom I have heard indicating that these relatives
would now be able to support him.  Nor is there evidence that they will be
able to assist him in getting employment. I accept the evidence that there
is little or no contact between the appellant and relatives in Bangladesh.

I bear in mind that the appellant speaks some Bengali, particularly the
Sylheti dialect, but equally, there is no reason why his language skills
would not improve after a relatively short time in the country.  I accept,
however, that he is not literate in Bengali and it would time to become so.
 This would, I accept, limit his ability to obtain employment at anything
but the lowest level at least initially.

I accept that there may well be some support from relatives in Bangladesh,
but I find that the consistent and reliable evidence of the witnesses,
including his wife's family, is that over the years, contact has
diminished, and is often initiated when those in Bangladesh want money.
There is little indication of any reciprocity of support; if anything, it
appears that relative get in contact from Bangladesh only when they want
something. And there is little or no willingness shown that they would
offer accommodation or assist in finding employment.

The appellant has, clearly, grown up in the British Bangladeshi community.
But it does not necessarily follow that he would easily fit into
Bangladeshi society. As became clear in cross-examination, several members
of the family have, through getting divorced and in women becoming the main
breadwinner, moved away from cultural traditions.  The country that they or
their parents left is no longer the same, and they have now lived in a
different country effectively the whole of their lives.

The respondent takes issue with the expert report from Dr Amundsen,
submitting that it cannot be relied upon. Contrary to what is averred by
the respondent, it is the case that he has no professional skills or
lengthy professional experience. The conclusions are properly explained at
page 19 but it is an exaggeration to say that he has no formal education
(report, page 18). Equally, the observations that he would find it
difficult to support his children and wife are not relevant here, given the
concession that it would be unduly harsh for them to relocate to
Bangladesh.

That said, the conclusions regarding a huge rise in unemployment in
Bangladesh as a result of COVID are properly sourced (page 19) as is the
observation that those at the bottom end of the employment scale are worse
affected.

I consider that, in reality, the report is not authority for the
proposition that the appellant's criminal record will be a problem, given
that it is unlikely that employers of the low-skilled would undertake
checks (page 20, fn 10).  But, I accept that the appellant's lack of
language skills will put him at a serious disadvantage in getting a job,
even with family support. I accept the evidence in Dr Amundsen's report
that in a society like Bangladesh, it is hard to get a job (or
accommodation) without family support and contacts.  Equally, I accept that
without that, there is no real safety net in terms of social support.

That then leads back to the extent to which family will be able to support
the appellant. I bear in mind the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal
at [48] but the situation has changed since then.  I accept that the
witnesses have an interest in the appellant being able to remain in the
United Kingdom, and emotional attachments to him but, taking all of the
evidence into account, I am satisfied that they have told the truth about
the extent of ties to Bangladesh. I am satisfied also that, were the
appellant to go to Bangladesh, it would be difficult for his wife to
maintain her employment with a consequent reduction in available funds.
Some support for her and the children would I find be forthcoming from the
family, but that would in turn make less available for the appellant.

Accordingly, viewing all of these factors and taking them into account, I
am satisfied that the appellant would face very significant obstacles to
integration into Bangladesh and I find that he meets the requirements of
paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

    Family life exception

Given the changes in circumstances since the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal, and the clarifications set out in HA (Iraq), I consider that it
is necessary to revisit the findings on this issue, as set out in my error
of law decision. The findings at [49] are, in consequence, not sustainable.


In assessing the effects of deportation on the children, I have had regard
to the report from a social worker.  However, I note the Secretary of
State's submissions that in terms of the family law the best interests
consideration is on a different basis in that it is the primary
consideration rather than a primary consideration.  That does not, however,
for the reasons set out above materially affect the import of the report
insofar as it sets out the consequences to the children.  In doing so I
note and I accept the evidence that during lockdown the appellant has
become in effect the sole carer from Monday to Friday as his wife has said
(see witness statement at [8]).  I accept that they have become more
reliant than previously, which is perhaps inevitable, and have become
particularly dependent on him.  I accept that Miss Boshir has been
suffering from chronic back pain and migraines due to increased screen
time, which has also aggravated her sciatica.

It is evident from her evidence that Miss Boshir said that she would have
to give up employment as there was no-one to look after the children.  This
was not the subject of any cross-examination by the respondent, still less
is there any room for the submission that she could go to live in Cardiff.
This was simply not put to her.  I accept also that the appellant's
departure would have an adverse impact on her wellbeing, given that she is
and has been reliant on him significantly.

In terms of the social work report, the report is recent, dated 7 April
2021.  Owing to current restrictions that it was carried out by videolink.
That is not ideal but I do note also that the social worker had previously
prepared a report on the family.  I note also that the majority of the
session was spent in the boys' bedrooms.  The social worker observed that
the older child could not think of any adult other than his parents looking
after him and that clearly his primary caregiver since Miss Boshir returned
to teaching is the appellant.  She stated:-

"Any assumption that (the older boy) will not be significantly impacted
upon if his father was not present and could not look after him is evident
in how perplexed he was when I asked about alternative care.  I also     my
session in reliance on Mr Ali.  The children did not interrupt me nearly as
much as when I spoke with mum, however would seek Mr Ali out of choice or
try and follow even when Mrs Begum endeavoured to distract/entertain both
children."

In respect of the younger child she said:-

"Like his older brother his attachment to his father was evidenced much
more demonstratively than to his mother.  However, like his brother they
responded to request some boundary setting for mum."

She noted also that the children have a strong and affectionate bond with
their father and a behaviour which fell to deteriorate when he is not
present.

"The children insist on Mr Ali reading books and putting them to bed at
night.  Mrs Begum  is really open about how she felt about having a second
child so soon after the first and her experience of postnatal depression.
There is significant evidence that poor parental mental health has a
deleterious effect on child development, however, a protective factor of a
second available parent can negate some of the negative outcome.  Mr Ali
clearly has been that protective factor."

Asked how the children would cope or not in the absence of their father,
she said that it would be difficult to predict but that the impact of
separation being an ongoing life event and not something that can be
contained to a single period, particularly where, as here, the children are
currently unaware that there is a possibility of separation.

With regard to deportation of the appellant and that effect on Miss Boshir
the social worker said:-

"Mrs Begum is clear that she would have no other option but to leave her
current employment in order to provide full-time care to the children.
This would clearly be a significant change for both Mrs Begum and her
financially independence and impact on the children as I have previously
referred to.  Mr Ali is a proactive parent, he has a warmth when in his
children's presence and when he is speaking about his role as a parent
which having met Mr Ali previously has not changed since the children were
much younger."

It is noted that the family's quality of life would change, given that
there would be a drop in income.  I accept that there is little evidence to
show that the rest of the family would be able to make that up.  I note
also the observation that there is no-one else available in the family to
help with the childcare during Mrs Boshir's working hours as communication
between the children and their grandmother is extremely limited and
requests are often lost in translation as they do not understand each
other.

The social worker observed also that there would be a significant impact on
Mrs Boshir's mental health were she to be separated from her husband and
that in his absence, the appellant's actions as a father could not be
equalled or replicated by alternative childcare either practically or
financially.

The social worker also noted that the children are reluctant to be cared
for by anyone but their father, who was their full-time carer.

I conclude that the particular factors in this case with respect to the
relationship between the appellant and his children have changed as a
result of them being in effect in his sole care in the unusual situations
of the COVID lockdown.

As required, I must undertake a detailed analysis of the likely effect on
the children.  In this case, on the basis of the evidence, I am satisfied
that the children live as part of a close knit family group encompassing
them and their parents at its core. It is not possible or correct to treat
the children in isolation from their mother; the effects of deportation on
her would impact on her ability to parent, and their distress would affect
her.

I am satisfied also that, as a result of him being their main carer, in
terms of time spent with them, that the children have a very close bond
with their father.  The effect of his removal from them would, I find, have
a serious and traumatic effect. They are clearly very dependant and
orientated to him. They are simply too young to understand why their father
has been taken from them. He is a major factor in their life, more so (and
unusually) than their mother who has had to work very long hours in the
past year.  That is a long time for such young children. Further, it cannot
be said that telephone calls or video calls could in any way make up for
hugs, cuddles and tactile interaction with a parent.

I consider that it is unlikely that there could be many visits to the
father, given the cost of travel to Bangladesh which, for a family during
school holiday would, I accept be high. I accept the evidence from the
family which is consistent that they have not been able to travel, owing to
the cost, for many years and contact with extended or remaining family
Bangladesh is limited and has, understandably, diminished over years.

There would, I accept, be emotional support from the mother, but she is I
accept, equally likely to be affected by the removal of her husband. She
has overcome many difficulties to build a career as a teacher, and has a
number of health difficulties which, although not serious in themselves,
make it less likely that she would be able to make up the deficit and
emotional upset that would flow from the appellant's removal.  I consider
that there would be an effect on her mental health making it difficult even
to start making up for the removal of the father.

That removal is, I find, likely to be at least very long lasting and not of
finite duration. The children have not experienced that, and I accept the
evidence from the social worker that they would find it difficult, if not
impossible, to understand. His absence and daily presence is not something
which can be replicated by relatives. Indeed, there are difficulties with
them interacting with their grandmother owing to language barriers.

As regards the financial effect of removal, I am satisfied from the
evidence of the relatives that they would not be able to help. The
appellant's family is fortunate in that they do not have to meet the costs
of accommodation, but the appellant's wife works full time. There is no
evidential basis for suggesting that she could reduce her hours or work
part-time as a teacher; that was not put to her nor was the submission that
she could return to Cardiff to live with her family there and get a job.
That submission is speculative and does not take into account that she
would then have to find a job and accommodation such that she may well be
financially in a worse position.

If the appellant's wife gave up work, that would have an impact on her
mentally, given the extent to which I accept from her evidence she had
strived and overcome many difficulties to train as a teacher, a job she
loves and to which she is dedicated. This would, I find, impact on her
emotional ability to be a strong parent. I find that, in effect, she would
be compelled to give up her job, at least for some years, to look after the
children given their ages and the effect on them of the appellant being
deported.

Having heard evidence from the family members, I am satisfied that they do
not have the spare funds to support the appellant in Bangladesh and to make
up for what would happen when the wife were to give up employment.

Taking all of these factors into account, and while no single one of them
is determinative, I am satisfied that on the particular facts of this case,
that the impact on the children, given their age and significant dependence
on their father as their full-time carer, would be unduly harsh and is, on
the basis of the report of the social worker, likely to impact
significantly on their development as children.  and taking all these
factors into account, I am satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for them
to be separated from him. Accordingly, I am satisfied that Exception 2 is
made out.

Having found that Exception 2 is made out, it is unnecessary for me to
consider whether Exception 1 is made out; and, in any event, that is not
part of the appeal to be remade.

Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant meets the
requirements of the Immigration Rules and Exceptions 1 and 2 as set out in
Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, I am satisfied on the particular
facts of this case that deportation would be disproportionate and therefore
I allow his appeal.

The appellant should, however, be under no illusions that should he offend
again there is a real likelihood of him being deported.



Notice of Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds.



There is no anonymity order in place.


Signed                                  Date     18 May 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09393/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2020                   |                                     |
|Extempore                            |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                Mr Kadir Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Ms T Srindran, Counsel instructed by Paramount
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Roots promulgated on 23 April 2020.  The
    judge allowed Mr Kadir Ali's appeal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State not to revoke a deportation order against him, the judge
    finding that he met the requirements of paragraph 399A of the
    Immigration Rules and thus fell within Exception 1 within Section 117C
    of the 2002 Act.

With respect to Mr Ali, it is evident that he has a long immigration
history in this country and has a poor record of convictions, albeit that
it is now seven years since his last conviction.

I refer to Mr Ali as the appellant as he was below for ease, although he is
the respondent to the Secretary of State's application. His case is that it
would not be proportionate to deport him, given that he has been lawfully
resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life, is socially and
culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and that there would be very
significant obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh where it is
proposed to deport him.  It was also his case that he was in a genuine and
subsisting relationship with a qualified person and children and that the
effect of deportation on them would be unduly harsh.

The Secretary of State did not accept that although did not dispute that he
had been lawfully resident for most of his life and was culturally and
socially integrated into the United Kingdom, the remaining issue being
whether there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into
Bangladesh where he was to be deported.

The judge heard evidence and directed himself as to the case law from
paragraphs 14 to 18.  In particular, he directed himself in line with
Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, Treebhawon and Others [2017] UKUT and Parveen v
The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 932, citing
in his decision [9] passages from the latter commenting on Treebhawon.

The judge heard evidence from the appellant, took account of the previous
findings of the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal, applying
Devaseelan, then went on to consider Exception 1.  The judge addressed
whether there were very significant obstacles to integration from
paragraphs 29 onwards, setting out a balance sheet approach in paragraphs
40 to 41.  The judge then found that there would be very significant
obstacles to integration at paragraph 42.  The judge did, however, find
that Exception 2 was not made out but allowed the appeal on human rights
grounds.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, stating it was not
disputed that the appellant had lived lawfully in the United Kingdom for
more than half his life nor that he was socially and culturally integrated
into the United Kingdom but it is submitted first that the judge had
diluted the requisite test and whilst having rehearsed case law on matter
failed to have regard to established case law, second, that the appellant's
circumstances were akin to those of Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship
with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) and that there were in short inadequate
findings as to why he would not be able to integrate into Bangladesh.  The
grounds also make reference to his long history of offending and also to OH
(Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694.  On 6 May 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge
Boyes granted permission.

As I outlined at the beginning of the hearing, there are a number of
difficulties with the grounds.  What I have to say about them is in no way
a criticism of Mrs Pettersen, who has been put into a difficult position by
poorly drafted grounds.  The first problem is that the case law cited at
paragraph 4 is not identified.  It is in fact extracted from Treebhawon, at
least as regards the first six lines.  The second part of what appears to
be a quotation refers to a "cultural nexus to Zambia", which is not a
phrase which appears in Treebhawon, nor have I been taken to any case in
which the phrase "cultural nexus" appears.  As I explained to Mrs
Pettersen, having prepared for this case beforehand, I was unable to find
any other deportation appeal as to which Zambia is raised certainly as
regards reported decisions other than JZ, a Court of Appeal decision, which
is entirely different on its fact and which in any event, JZ's case was
upheld..

A further problem arises from what is said at paragraphs 7 and 8.  It is,
as Mrs Pettersen rightly said, established since KO (Nigeria) that in a
case where, as here, the sentencing falls in the middle range, that is
between twelve months and four years, the test of the public interest is
satisfied by the unduly harsh or in this case the very significant
obstacles to integration part of the test.  There is no further
consideration over and above the public interest in removal proportionate
to the seriousness of offending.  That makes paragraph 7 of the grounds
problematic and indeed the reference to OH (Serbia) is of little relevance
in this case as a result.

I note also that the passage pleaded in aid in paragraph 4 from Treebhawon
refers to very significant obstacles as a "self-evidently elevated
threshold".  That test was expressly rejected in Parveen as the judge
noted.  I appreciate that this puts Mrs Pettersen in a difficult position
and it is perhaps surprising that the grounds do not refer to the decision
of Kamara, which is a decision of the Court of Appeal which deals at some
length with the issue of integration.

That said, I do consider that the grounds sufficiently raise the issue that
the judge erred in his assessment  as to  what the obstacles to integration
would be and what integration would be, that is what the appellant would
have to do to integrate into Bangladesh in the sense that is meant in
Kamara and that this was not adequately resasoned.

I therefore turn what the judge has said in terms of integration.  The
judge noted at paragraph 40 that the appellant had lived in the United
Kingdom since at the age of 2, had grown up here, gone through the
education system and has made only a nine month visit to Bangladesh at the
age of 14 and other short visits, not having visited since 2011 when he
went for a wedding.  The judge also sets out at 41 the factors suggesting
that he would be able to integrate but these are relatively limited. But
what the judge does not do is factor in that the uncles would be providing
some limited support.  It does not make sense as to why that is an obstacle
to integration when equally of course some limited support would be a
factor in favour of integration.

Further, as regards employment and accommodation there are simply no
findings at all.  The judge does not make findings as to the possibility of
finding work in Bangladesh, stating at 38 only that, "I accept that the
appellant has produced no evidence of this.  However he has never worked in
Bangladesh.  I find he has no knowledge or experience of working in
Bangladesh". He does not make any findings as to whether he would be able
to find work with or without the assistance for example of uncles or other
relatives.

I appreciate the points made by Ms Srindran that he would have difficulty
in getting a job because of the market there but the judge makes no mention
of that nor is there evidence regarding that.  Similarly, when it comes to
the issue of integration the judge sets out a balance sheet, but does not
really properly explain what weight is attached to those factors.  He does,
however, and fairly say that coming to the United Kingdom at the age of 2
is a very significant factor and he note that the visits had been short;
but he does not, in my view, properly answer the question what would be
needed to integrate and what are the obstacles to doing so.  A large part
of the factors said to be in favour of the appellant are not necessarily
obstacles to integration without further explanation.  One can be socially
and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom, that does not mean that
one cannot also be integrated into Bangladesh, nor is it clear why having
all close family in the United Kingdom is an obstacle to integration or one
to which weight can be attached, particularly in light of the findings with
regard to family life, Exception 2.

For these reasons, taking all these factors into account, I consider that
the Secretary of State has satisfied me that the judge has erred in his
approach to the "very significant obstacles to integration" test in this
case for the reasons given above and accordingly, I set the decision aside
as I am satisfied that those errors are material.  Whilst I note Ms
Srindran's submission that another Tribunal could have come to the
decision, I consider that no other judge could in reality have come to the
decision that this judge came to on the basis of the factors as identified
in paragraphs 40 and 41 and for these reasons I consider that the decision
should be set aside and should be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

The findings of fact at [35] to [37 are preserved. The issue of the
appellant's ability to find work requires findings to be made, as does the
level of support he could receive in Bangladesh as will the conclusion
reached at [42].

I am satisfied also that, in the light of HA(Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 and
AA(Nigeria) [2020] EWCA Civ 1296, that it will be necessary to consider
again whether or not exception 2 applies and thus the finding that
exception 2 is not met will need to be reconsidered at a fresh hearing.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Any additional material upon which the parties wish to rely must be served
at least 21 days before the hearing.

The appellant must, within 14 days of the issue of this decision inform the
Upper Tribunal how many witnesses are to be called, and whether an
interpreter is needed.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 18 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

