
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09816/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 10 February 2020           |On Tuesday 3 March 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                PANKAJ ARORA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton, Legal Representative of Bhogal
Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Mathews  promulgated  on  27  August  2019  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
         dated 20 May 2019 refusing his human  rights  claim  based  on  his
         private life in the UK and his relationship with his girlfriend.

      2. The Appellant is a national of India who came to  the  UK  in  June
         2012 with leave as a student valid to 28 August 2013.   An  in-time
         application to extend that leave  was  refused  on  10  June  2014,
         apparently in reliance  on  the  Respondent's  assertion  that  the
         Appellant had cheated in an English language test by using a  proxy
         test-taker ("the ETS allegation").   An  application  was  made  to
         reconsider that decision which  culminated  in  a  judicial  review
         application in 2017 dismissed  on  5  March  2018.   The  Appellant
         claims to know nothing of those proceedings.

      3. Judge Mathews refused a request to adjourn the hearing before  him.
         That request was made on the basis that  the  Appellant  wished  to
         adduce further evidence concerning the ETS allegation.   The  Judge
         heard oral evidence from the Appellant.   He  did  not  accept  the
         Appellant's explanation in  relation  to  the  ETS  allegation  and
         therefore upheld the Respondent's conclusion that the Appellant did
         not satisfy the suitability requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
         ("the Rules").  In any event, the Judge found  that  the  Appellant
         could not meet the Rules based on his relationship or otherwise and
         that  the  Respondent's  decision   to   refuse   leave   was   not
         disproportionate.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

      4. The Appellant challenges the Decision on four grounds.   First,  he
         says that it was procedurally unfair for the  Judge  to  refuse  to
         adjourn the hearing.  Second, it is said that the  Judge  erred  by
         rejecting the Appellant's account and/or  failed  to  consider  the
         matter adequately.  Third, he says that  the  Judge  has  erred  by
         failing to take into account relevant case law.   Fourth,  he  says
         that the Judge has  erred  by  not  considering  the  discretionary
         elements of the suitability requirements of the Rules.

      5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane
         on 12 December 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "...  2.   The  grounds  assert  in  summary  that  the  Judge
             materially erred in procedural fairness in that an application
             to adjourn was made on the grounds that the appellant's bundle
             and witness statement (and the statements of his  partner  and
             partner's mother in support) did not  adequately  address  the
             issue of the alleged fraud regarding the ETS English  language
             test certificate dated 14 July 2013 obtained from Eden College
             International.  This test certificate was submitted in support
             of an application for leave to remain (as Tier 4 Student) made
             on 22 August 2013 and which was refused on 10  June  2014.   A
             copy of that refusal letter was not produced by  either  party
             at  the  appeal  and  it  is  not  known  on  what  basis  the
             application of 22 August 2013 was refused.

             3.    There  is  an  arguable  error  of  law  that  has  been
             identified which  merits  further  consideration.   The  judge
             arguably perpetrated a procedural irregularity  affecting  the
             outcome of the appeal and the fairness of the  proceedings  in
             exercising  his  discretion  to  refuse  the  request  of   an
             adjournment.  The  evidence  which  the  Appellant  wished  to
             adduce was arguably significant and the effect of  the  judges
             decision was inevitably  to  exclude  such  evidence.   It  is
             arguable that  an  important  factor  in  the  proportionality
             assessment, the length of the appellant's residence in the UK,
             has subject [sic] to contradictory findings of the Judge."

      6. The matter comes before me to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
         contain any error of law and, if I so conclude, either  to  re-make
         the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
         making.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

    GROUNDS ONE AND TWO

      7. The circumstances of the adjournment request and  refusal  are  set
         out at [7] to [13] of the Decision:

             "7.  At the outset of the appeal an application to adjourn was
                  made,  it  was  put  on  the  grounds  that  the   witness
                  statements provided had not addressed all pertinent issues
                  , and that his girlfriend's mother,  Ms  [MN],  wished  to
                  give evidence and required a Hindi interpreter.

               8. The application was resisted on the basis that  there  had
                  been more than adequate time to prepare the case already.

               9. I allowed Mr Joseph as much time  as  he  sought  to  take
                  instructions by putting the appeal back  in  my  list.   I
                  indicated that all matters in issue could be  fully  aired
                  in evidence and that it was unnecessary to adjourn  simply
                  for fuller witness statements when  there  was  more  than
                  sufficient hearing time to hear all matters.

              10. I had a signed witness statement from Ms [MN],  Miss  Quan
                  confirmed  that  she  had  no  cross-examination  for  the
                  witness, her witness statement contained a declaration  as
                  to its truth, and the witness was able  with  the  English
                  she does possess, to confirm its truth and adopt it as her
                  evidence in chief.  Mr Joseph was content to deal with  Ms
                  [MN]'s evidence in that way and so I did not  adjourn  for
                  an interpreter to be found.

              11.  The  appellant  gave  evidence  before  me  as  did   his
                  girlfriend Miss [DN] and her mother Ms [MN].

              12. I have taken into account  the  following  documents  that
                  have been placed before me, the respondent's  bundle,  the
                  appellant's bundles (the witness statements followed in  a
                  later bundle), and all evidence, documents and submissions
                  made at the hearing.  I admitted from the  appellant  some
                  documents, an employer's letter for Miss [DN],  a  Pearson
                  examination   appointment   letter,   student   attendance
                  details,  and  a  home  office  costs  letter,  that  were
                  provided at the hearing.

              13. There was no objection to their introduction, I  found  no
                  prejudice in such a  course,  and  I  allowed  their  late
                  admission given their potential relevance to the issues in
                  the case."

      8. I have regard when deciding this  issue  to  the  case  of  Nwaigwe
         (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where the following
         guidance was given:

             "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

      9. In order to deal with ground one, it is necessary to  consider  the
         basis on which an adjournment was sought and why  its  refusal  was
         said to be unfair.   That  has  a  considerable  overlap  with  the
         Appellant's ground two which concerns the substance of the  Judge's
         findings on the ETS allegation.  For that reason,  I  consider  the
         substance of the ETS allegation before considering the challenge to
         the adjournment refusal.

     10. The ETS allegation stems from a test which the Appellant is said to
         have taken at Eden College International  on  24  July  2013.   The
         Respondent's bundle contains the following  documents  relating  to
         that test:

           . At [E1] an analysis record giving the date and  place  of  the
             test, the certificate number and that the speaking  score  was
             200 and the writing score was 190.

           . The analysis record cross-refers to an Excel spreadsheet entry
             at [F1] which confirms the information and scores  and  states
             that the test was "invalid".

           .  There  is  then  produced  at  [G1]  an  extract   from   the
             Respondent's CID notes produced on 29 May 2014 in relation  to
             the Appellant's application of 22 August 2013 which states  as
             follows:

                  "English language

                  English language (EL) level required is: B2

                      Is a Secure English Language Test (SELT) required  to
                      evidence EL level? YES

                      If Yes, has the SELT been submitted? YES

                      Is the SELT valid? NO (Test taken on: 24/07/13)

                      Test provider: Eden College International

                      Reading: 425

                      Writing: 190

                      Speaking: 200

                      Listening: 445

                      Is the required EL level met? NO

                      If No, explain why  -  TOEIC  certificate  have  been
                      deemed unacceptable

                      Progression"

             Although I accept that the refusal of the Appellant's  earlier
             application for leave to remain rejected in June 2014  is  not
             in evidence, it can be inferred  from  these  notes  that  the
             reason for the refusal was the ETS allegation.

           . At [H1-10] and [I1-14] appears what has come to  be  known  as
             the  Respondent's  "generic  evidence"   being   the   witness
             statements of Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington.

           . At [K1-2] the Respondent has provided the witness statement of
             Adam Sewell, a Home Office analyst dealing with the results of
             the relevant test centre.

     11. In addition to  that  material,  the  Respondent's  decision  under
         appeal contains a significant amount of information about  the  ETS
         allegation, including the date and place  of  the  test  which  was
         considered invalid, the certificate number and the analysis of  the
         Eden College International scores.  The  decision  also  refers  to
         case law concerning ETS allegations more generally and  the  expert
         evidence produced in the litigation concerning  those  allegations.
         The information in that regard runs to  nearly  three  pages.   The
         decision is also worthy of note  in  its  reference  to  the  TOEIC
         certificate having been produced in support of the application made
         for leave to remain on 22 August 2013, tending to  corroborate  the
         CID note showing that the ETS allegation was at least  one  if  not
         the only reason for refusal of the earlier application for leave to
         remain. As it will become relevant in due course, I reiterate  that
         the Respondent's decision under appeal is dated 20 May 2019 and  is
         addressed to the solicitors with conduct of this appeal.

     12. The Respondent also submitted a separate ETS  bundle  containing  a
         witness statement from Professor French, one of the  experts  whose
         evidence has been relied upon in some of the ETS litigation.   That
         bundle also contains a document entitled "Project Fa�ade - criminal
         inquiry into  abuse  of  the  TOEIC:  Eden  College  International"
         produced   by   Criminal   Investigations    (Immigration)    which
         corroborates the Respondent's analysis of the scores emanating from
         that college.

     13. Separately from the material regarding the ETS allegation  and  one
         of the documents referred to by the Judge  when  dealing  with  the
         adjournment request is a document being  a  letter  from  the  Home
         Office addressed to the Appellant in person concerning recovery  of
         costs dated 11 June  2018  and  relating  to  the  judicial  review
         application.  Attached to that is a notice  of  hearing,  similarly
         addressed to  the  Appellant  in  person,  giving  details  of  the
         judicial review renewed permission hearing on 5 March 2018.

     14. I turn then to the Appellant's application  to  remain  in  the  UK
         which is at [A1-13] and the covering letter to that application  at
         [C1-9].  Those documents are not  generally  relevant  to  the  ETS
         allegation,  first  because  the  application  is  based   on   the
         Appellant's relationship with Miss [DN] and second because  neither
         document mentions the ETS allegation.  However, the application  in
         particular  is  worthy  of  note  for  its  confirmation  that  the
         Appellant had been refused a  visa  and  had  remained  beyond  the
         validity of his visa and reference to the cover letter dealing with
         those matters.  Although the cover letter refers to  the  Appellant
         being in the UK without leave, it is  entirely  silent  as  to  the
         refusal of further leave or the reasons therefor.  The  Appellant's
         solicitors, even if not acting at that time (which is  not  clear),
         must have been aware from the application itself that the Appellant
         had been refused leave to remain and that they  needed  to  enquire
         about that (particularly  following  receipt  of  the  Respondent's
         decision).

     15. I turn then to the evidence in the Appellant's bundle.  I begin  by
         noting, as I pointed out to  Ms  Charlton  at  the  outset  of  the
         hearing, that the Appellant's grounds of appeal make  no  reference
         at all to the ETS allegation. The Appellant  does  not  take  issue
         with the Respondent's refusal on suitability grounds.   That  is  a
         fundamental point in this appeal.   Since  the  Appellant  did  not
         challenge that aspect of the Respondent's decision, on one view  at
         least, the Judge did not have to deal with  it  at  all.   However,
         since the Judge did in fact deal with it, I go on to  consider  the
         other evidence which was before the Judge.

     16. The majority of the Appellant's bundle otherwise is taken  up  with
         photographs, cinema ticket confirmations, and a Travellodge booking
         confirmation.  The bundle was submitted by fax  on  19  July  2019,
         five days  before  the  hearing.   It  is  said  that  the  witness
         statements would follow.  Those were served late in the day  before
         the hearing.  The statements, from the  Appellant,  his  girlfriend
         and her mother, deal entirely  with  the  Appellant's  relationship
         with his girlfriend. There is no mention of the ETS allegation.

     17. The complaint regarding the Judge's refusal to adjourn concerns the
         evidence as to the ETS allegation  and  not  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's girlfriend's mother.  It is therefore next necessary to
         set out the oral evidence which the Judge received as  to  the  ETS
         allegation (and including the Appellant's immigration history)  and
         his findings in that regard as  appear  at  [23]  to  [39]  of  the
         Decision as follows:

             "23. The appellant's immigration history is disputed, in  oral
             evidence before me he indicated that a previous representative
             had not informed him  of  the  fact  that  in  June  2014  his
             application for leave  then  refused,  had  made  applications
             without his knowledge and had  not  shown  him  all  documents
             relating to his immigration position.

             24.  I do  not  have  before  me  any  record  of  any  formal
             complaint by this man about such a representative, and I  note
             that the applicant could at any time have  sought  to  confirm
             his own immigration status since  he  knew  that  his  initial
             leave had ended in August 2013.  I am not  persuaded  to  find
             that the appellant was unaware of  his  immigration  position,
             given his failure to  make  his  own  enquiries  and  lack  of
             previous formal complaint about his previous representatives.

             25.  Turning to the disputed examination results,  I  keep  in
             mind the well-established case of SM & Qadir  v  SSHD  (ETS  -
             evidence - burden of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC).  The
             judgment in  that  case  provides  valued  guidance  which  is
             applied in the assessment of this appellant's appeal.

             26.  In appeals such as this there is an initial  burden  upon
             the respondent to  establish  by  way  of  evidence  that  the
             appellant  engaged  in  deception  in  obtaining   his   TOEIC
             certificate.

             27.  The first  appellant  states  he  is  proficient  in  the
             English language and  that  he  has  been  proficient  in  the
             English language for some considerable time.  He has  obtained
             academic accounting qualifications in the UK which were taught
             in English.  He did not employ a proxy test taker and sat  the
             test himself.

             28.  The appellant explains that he took an  English  test  at
             Pearson College on 9th  July  2013,  it  was  a  4  part  test
             involving speaking, listening, writing  and  reading,  and  he
             passed all sections other than reading, which he failed  by  2
             points.  His agent then told him to  attend  a  test  at  Eden
             College, he duly did, having  been  sent  back  on  the  first
             occasion to attend again few days later, and was  told  simply
             to complete a reading paper.   A  test  certificate  was  then
             simply sent to his agent and submitted  with  the  appellant's
             application for leave.

             29.  I have a copy notice of an exam appointment for  the  9th
             July 2013 at Pearson, the appointment is shown  on  an  online
             account with the appellant's name as the signed  in  name.   I
             find from it that there was such an  appointment,  however  in
             the absence of any documents showing the results of that test,
             I am not persuaded to find that the appellant passed three out
             of four papers as asserted.

             30.  On the appellant's own  account  he  only  completed  one
             paper at Eden College, yet the respondent's 'generic  evidence
             in this case' sets out, as is not disputed by Mr Joseph,  that
             the test contained 4 components, and the appellant cannot have
             submitted a genuine set of results if he only completed one of
             four test areas.

             31.  Just as in the case of SM & Qadir the  respondent  relies
             upon the generic statement evidence of Ms Rebecca Collings  in
             a statement dated 23 July 2014 and Mr Peter  Millington  in  a
             statement of the same date.  The  Upper  Tribunal  found  that
             both Ms Collings and Mr Millington gave truthful evidence  but
             that their  evidence  suffered  from  multiple  frailties  and
             shortcomings which were identified in that judgment.  However,
             even in the case of SM & Qadir the Upper Tribunal  found  that
             the respondent had discharged the evidential burden  of  proof
             (albeit narrowly)  of  establishing  a  prima  facie  case  of
             deception on the part of the appellant.   However,  the  Upper
             Tribunal  accepted  the  appellants'  prima   facie   innocent
             explanations.  Therefore, the legal burden  of  proof  falling
             upon the respondent to establish deception on the part of  the
             appellants had not been discharged.

             32.   The  respondent's  evidence  from  Ms  Collings  and  Mr
             Millington is precisely similar in this appeal.

             33.  The respondent has adduced additional  evidence  in  this
             appeal in the form of a report dated 20 April 2016 prepared by
             Professor Peter French.  Professor French in  the  preparation
             of that report considered the  evidence  of  Dr  Harrison  who
             produced the expert report on behalf of the appellants in  the
             case of SM & Qadir.  Professor French concludes that

                  'If the 2% error rate  established  for  the  TOEFL  pilot
                  recordings were to apply to the TOEIC recordings,  then  I
                  would estimate the rate of  false  positives  to  be  very
                  substantially less than 1% after the process of assessment
                  by trained listeners had been applied.  This is because:

                   a) There was stringent criteria for verification by  the
                      trained listeners;

                   b) The trained listeners  had  potentially  more  speech
                      available from the tests than that processed  by  the
                      ASR;

                   c) The trained listeners  had  available  a  much  wider
                      range of speech  features  on  which  to  base  their
                      Decisions  than  just  vocal  tracked  resonances  as
                      reflected in an MFCC analysis performed by the ASR.

                   d) Even if the TOEIC recordings were on average somewhat
                      shorter and poorer in quality than the  TOEFL,  pilot
                      test recordings, on the basis of the information that
                      has been provided, I would still estimate the  number
                      of false positives emanating from the overall process
                      of ASR analysis followed by assessment by two trained
                      listeners to be very small'

             34.  Having read the  witness  statement  of  Professor  Peter
             French, I have no hesitation in assessing  him  as  a  genuine
             expert witness.  The report  of  Professor  French  is  cogent
             evidence but is as generic as the evidence of Ms Collings  and
             Mr Millington.  The conclusions of  Professor  French  include
             caveats  such  as,  'if  (my  emphasis)  the  2%  error   rate
             established for the TOEFL pilot recordings were  to  apply  to
             the TOEIC recordings, then I would estimate the rate of  false
             positives to be ...'

             Additionally, at paragraph  4  of  his  conclusions  Professor
             French reports that, '... I would still estimate the number of
             false positives emanating from  the  overall  process  of  ASR
             analysis followed by assessment by two trained listeners to be
             very small.'

             I find that his evidence focuses upon the general position and
             not the specifics of the appeal.  Therefore, I find  that  the
             evidence  of   Professor   French   positively   assists   the
             respondent's case in establishing a prima facie indication  of
             deception on the part of the appellant but that I also have to
             assess the particular evidence of the appellant himself.

             35.  In his oral evidence the  first  appellant  set  out  the
             matters above.  On his own account he did not  complete  three
             of the four papers at  Eden  College,  and  yet  he  submitted
             results purporting to show  a  fully  and  properly  completed
             assessment.

             36.  I do find that the evidence served by the  respondent  in
             this case has discharged the evidential  burden  of  proof  of
             establishing a prima facie case of deception on  the  part  of
             the appellant.

             37.  Considering  all  the  evidence  as  a  whole  upon  this
             important issue, I am not satisfied that the evidence given by
             the appellant  establishes  to  the  appropriate  standard  an
             innocent explanation to the prima facie  case  raised  by  the
             respondent.  I am not  satisfied  that  this  first  appellant
             himself sat  either  a  Pearson  test  or  Eden  College  test
             himself, indeed he accepts not having done three of  the  four
             Eden papers.  I am not persuaded as to his account of  results
             from the Pearson  Test  given  the  lack  of  copies  of  such
             results.

             38.  It follows from what I have said that I am not  satisfied
             that the appellant fulfils the suitability requirements of the
             Immigration Rules as  set  out  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
             letter.

             39.  I find that the respondent has made  out  a  prima  facie
             case of cheating on the  part  of  the  appellant.   Moreover,
             considering all the evidence as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
             appellant  committed  a  fraud  in  relation  to  his  English
             language tests and that he has failed to meet the  suitability
             requirements set out in the Immigration Rules.   The  lack  of
             copies  of  Pearson  results,  the  lack  of  complaint  about
             previous representatives blamed by the appellant, the lack  of
             detail as to the actual test, or agent said to have guided the
             appellant in the way alleged, all combine to prevent  me  from
             finding that the appellant was innocently duped into  a  fraud
             as he sought to suggest in his evidence."

     18. Turning then to the Appellant's challenge to the Judge's refusal to
         adjourn, as I have already noted, this must be  considered  in  the
         context of the fact that the Appellant did not  raise  this  as  an
         issue in  the  grounds  of  appeal  before  Judge  Mathews.    That
         undermines the Appellant's case to  have  had  inadequate  time  to
         prepare for the case.

     19. Also undermining of that point is that the Appellant was on  notice
         at the latest following receipt of the Respondent's decision  under
         appeal of the ETS allegation.  That was over two  months  prior  to
         the hearing.  The Appellant's assertion in the grounds before  this
         Tribunal that the Respondent had not produced  sufficient  evidence
         to deal with the ETS allegation does not  withstand  scrutiny  when
         the content of the Respondent's decision is  considered.   Even  if
         that was information rather than evidence, most of what  was  later
         produced by the Respondent is evidence which was readily  available
         in the public domain.  The specific allegations  were  sufficiently
         particularised for the Appellant to deal with them (as to date  and
         place of the test) and I  reiterate  that  the  Appellant  did  not
         challenge the allegations (at least within this  appeal)  prior  to
         the hearing before Judge Mathews.  The Appellant's  assertion  that
         he was unaware of the previous  refusal  of  leave  and  subsequent
         allegations does not withstand scrutiny either, given the fact that
         the Appellant issued the judicial review proceedings himself.

     20. That brings me on to the assertion that the Appellant  was  unaware
         of the reason for the refusal of the  earlier  application.   I  am
         unable to accept that this is the case.  There is evidence  in  the
         form of the CID notes which indicates that the 2013 application was
         refused based on the ETS allegation.  That the Appellant was  aware
         of that refusal is shown by the judicial review application  issued
         by him which, although it challenged (as I understand it) a refusal
         to reconsider the refusal of the 2013 application, must have led to
         him being aware of the reasons for refusal of that application even
         if he was not earlier (and, as the Judge points out, there is  only
         the Appellant's word that he was  not  so  aware  and  he  has  not
         provided details of the representatives who he says were at fault).



     21. I accept that one (although not the only and probably not the main)
         reason for the Judge's rejection of  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
         lack of supporting documentation.  However, that brings  me  on  to
         the second fundamental difficulty  with  the  Appellant's  case  on
         ground one, namely the failure to provide any such evidence  since.
         There has been no  application  to  adduce  further  evidence.   Ms
         Charlton indicated that she had not been provided with any  further
         documents  by  the  Appellant.   Although  she  did   indicate   on
         instructions from the Appellant at the hearing before  me  that  he
         has some other documents including possibly the  certificates  from
         the Pearson test centre, no attempt has been made to produce  those
         since the hearing before Judge Mathews which took place some  seven
         months ago.  The Decision under challenge was promulgated over five
         months ago.  There is no explanation why those documents could  not
         have been  submitted  by  way  of  application  to  adduce  further
         evidence since those dates.  That is undermining of the Appellant's
         case that he has been seriously disadvantaged  by  the  refusal  to
         adjourn.

     22. The Appellant was  given  the  opportunity  and  did  provide  oral
         evidence at the hearing notwithstanding the failure  to  raise  the
         ETS allegation as an issue or  to  deal  with  it  in  his  witness
         statement.  The Judge showed considerable latitude in  putting  the
         hearing back to enable the Appellant's legal representative to take
         instructions and provide any additional evidence.

     23. For those reasons, I am entirely satisfied in the circumstances  of
         this case that the Appellant was given a fair hearing of his  case.
         He had the opportunity to challenge the  Respondent's  decision  in
         the way in which he and his advisers saw fit.  That they  did  not,
         for whatever reason, see fit to challenge the ETS allegation  until
         the eleventh hour is unexplained but, having left  it  until  late,
         they should at least have taken steps to ensure that they  had  the
         necessary evidence prepared in order to  do  so.   The  Judge  took
         steps to ensure that the hearing was fair by giving  the  Appellant
         additional time  to  prepare  on  the  day  of  the  hearing.   The
         Appellant was able to give oral evidence in support  of  his  case.
         That this was not accepted does not indicate that the  hearing  was
         unfair.  Moreover,  there  has  been  a  complete  failure  by  the
         Appellant and his advisers to put forward any documentary  evidence
         on which they say that the Appellant could have relied,  even  now.
         Ground one therefore fails.

     24. In relation to ground two, that largely overlaps with ground one in
         relation to, for example, the Appellant's case that he did not  sit
         all four parts of the test at  Eden  College  International  having
         already sat a test at Pearson College.  There is no failure by  the
         Judge to consider that aspect of the Appellant's case.  Nor  is  it
         irrational to find that the Appellant did not sit (or at least  did
         not pass) the test at Pearson College.  There may be all manner  of
         reasons why, having booked a test, the Appellant did not attend it,
         or he may have attended and failed. Indeed, his  case  is  that  he
         failed one of the papers and yet on his account was able to pass it
         only a couple of weeks later at a different college.  The Appellant
         did not deny that he had attended  Eden  College  International  to
         take a test; he did not provide evidence to  counter  the  evidence
         produced by  the  Respondent  showing  that  the  only  certificate
         provided was that from Eden College which showed  results  for  all
         four papers.  It was for the Appellant to explain how that  was  so
         if he did not sit all four papers.  That evidence undermines rather
         than supports his case.

     25. The Judge also considered the Appellant's evidence that he was  the
         victim of fraud.  He deals with that case in particular at [39]  of
         the  Decision  where  he  provides  reasons   for   rejecting   it,
         specifically due to the lack of any detail as to those who are said
         to have duped him or failed to keep him  informed.   I  note  again
         that it is the Appellant's case that he was unaware of the  earlier
         proceedings including the judicial review  application  challenging
         the Respondent's refusal to reconsider the earlier refusal and  yet
         he cannot have been unaware because  he  issued  those  proceedings
         himself.

     26. The Appellant does not and could not say that the Judge has  failed
         to apply the correct legal test.  It was open to the Judge to reach
         the findings he did for the reasons he  gave.   Those  reasons  are
         adequate.  Ground two therefore fails.

    GROUND THREE

     27. That brings me on to the third ground which  concerns  the  general
         ETS litigation.  As I have noted above, it is not asserted, and nor
         could it be, that the Judge has failed to apply the  correct  legal
         test as  to  burdens  and  standards  when  dealing  with  the  ETS
         allegation.  What is said under this head is that the Judge  failed
         to consider a particular ETS  case  when  looking  at  the  general
         position. The case in question is Khan  &  others  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1684.

     28. I note first that there is no indication that either party drew the
         Judge's attention to  this  authority.   The  Appellant  had  legal
         representation at the hearing.  His legal representative could have
         produced this authority if he considered it material.   It  appears
         suggested by this ground that the Judge should have had  regard  to
         the decision of his own volition because he referred to the case of
         SM & Qadir.

     29. There is no conceivable merit in  this  ground  for  the  following
         reasons.  First, the reason the Judge had regard to SM &  Qadir  is
         because the Respondent relied upon it but also and more importantly
         because that case gives guidance as to the appropriate legal  test.
         It therefore concerns a matter of principle at the  heart  of  this
         case.  Second, and as the Judge points out at [31] of the Decision,
         that case does not wholly favour  the  Respondent.   In  fact,  the
         Tribunal found that the Respondent  had  failed  to  discharge  the
         legal burden  in  that  case.   Third,  and  fundamentally,  it  is
         difficult to see how the judgment in Khan has any bearing  on  this
         Appellant's  case.   Those  appeals   were   concerned   with   ETS
         allegations raised in decisions which could only be  challenged  by
         way of judicial review.  The appeals to the Court  of  Appeal  were
         compromised by the Respondent on  the  basis  that  the  appellants
         should be given the opportunity to appeal.  Neither the  compromise
         nor the judgment says anything about the quality of the evidence or
         anything which casts doubt on the evidence on which the  Respondent
         relies.  The guidance given in SM & Qadir that the generic evidence
         meets the evidential burden remains good law.  That is the basis of
         the Judge's reliance on that case.

    GROUND FOUR

     30. The Appellant also says that the Judge has failed to  consider  the
         discretionary nature of  the  suitability  requirements  under  the
         Rules.  I can deal with this shortly.   First,  and  reiterating  a
         point I  have  now  made  several  times,  the  Appellant  did  not
         challenge the Respondent's refusal on suitability grounds let alone
         on the basis that discretion should  have  been  exercised  in  his
         favour even if the  ETS  allegation  was  made  out.   Second,  and
         flowing from this, there is nothing to suggest that this was raised
         as an  issue  for  the  Judge  to  determine  and  therefore,  more
         importantly, there is nothing to show why the Appellant  says  that
         discretion ought to have been exercised in his favour  if,  as  the
         Judge found, the ETS allegation was made out.  It is  said  in  the
         grounds that "[i]t is not inevitable even if there is  no  material
         error in the FTTJ's findings that the Appellant committed fraud  in
         relation to his English language tests, he  should  be  refused  on
         grounds of suitability".  That  may  be  so,  but  it  is  for  the
         Appellant to put forward  the  reasons  why  discretion  should  be
         exercised in his favour notwithstanding the finding of deception.

     31. That brings me on  to  a  final  point  and  that  is  whether  the
         Appellant could ever have succeeded in this  appeal  based  on  the
         other findings which are not challenged and therefore  whether  any
         of the grounds challenging the ETS allegation findings  could  have
         been material even if made out (which I am satisfied they are not).
           That  is  because  the  core  of  the  Appellant's  case  was  an
         entitlement to remain based  on  his  relationship.   However,  the
         Judge  found  at  [41]  of  the  Decision,  that  the   Appellant's
         girlfriend did not qualify as his "partner" under the  Rules.   The
         Appellant could not, for that reason, satisfy the  Rules  based  on
         his family life.

     32. It could not sensibly be said  that  the  Appellant  could  succeed
         under the Rules based on his private life.  In that regard I do not
         understand the  point  made  by  Judge  Keane  that  there  is  any
         inconsistency as to the Appellant's period of residence which it is
         common ground stems only from July 2012.   The  Appellant's  status
         throughout has been either precarious or unlawful.

     33. The Appellant has not  challenged  any  of  the  findings  made  in
         relation to his family and private life.  The only challenge is  as
         to the reliance on suitability grounds as a reason for refusal  and
         the reliance on the ETS allegation as enhancing the public interest
         (at [53] of the Decision).  However, if those factors are taken out
         of the equation and having in mind that this is an  appeal  against
         the refusal of a human rights claim, it is difficult to see how the
         Appellant could possibly succeed based on  the  other  findings  at
         [40] to [57] of the Decision. I am in any event satisfied that  the
         Appellant has failed to show  any  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
         findings as to the ETS allegation or the  suitability  requirements
         under the Rules.

    CONCLUSION

     34. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  there  is  no  material
         error of law disclosed by  the  grounds  of  appeal.   I  therefore
         uphold the Decision  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
         appeal remains dismissed.




    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mathews
    promulgated on 27 August 2019 with the consequence that the Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed


    Signed   [pic]    Dated: 20 February 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
