
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09246/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th June 2021                            |On 10th August 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr T N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Sackville House London)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Housego dated 2nd December 2020 which refused the appellant's appeal
against the decision by the respondent (dated 14th September 2017) to
refuse his human rights claim and deport him to Afghanistan, on the grounds
that he has erred in fact and law and failed to take account of material
subjective and objective evidence.

It is not known when the appellant entered the United Kingdom but he
claimed asylum in April 2008.  On 30th October 2008 the appellant's asylum
claim was refused.  He was granted discretionary leave from 15th November
2011 to 14 November 2014. In July 2014 he was convicted of motoring
offences and sentenced to 18 weeks imprisonment. On 29th April 2016 he was
convicted of robbery and on 27th May 2016 sentenced to a term of 5 years
imprisonment.   He challenged his deportation on the basis of his Article 8
family life with his wife and child.  A fresh decision was made refusing
the appellant's human rights claim.

On 3rd July 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson refused his claim on
protection and human rights grounds, recording that the Secretary of State
did not object to protection matters being raised. That decision, however,
was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane on 30th November 2018.  On
25th July 2019 Duncan Lewis submitted amended grounds of appeal to include
protection grounds.   The substantive hearing was converted to a Case
Management Review on 15th November 2019.  At a further hearing, before
First-tier Tribunal Kimnell on 5th December 2019 who recorded that the
appeal was on protection and human rights grounds, it was decided that the
appellant had never, as asserted, been granted refugee status.  The
pandemic followed and the appeal was not heard until 17th November 2020.

In particular, the grounds of challenge to First-tier Tribunal Judge
Housego's decision were that the judge

          i) failed to give adequate reasons and failed to consider witness
             evidence in finding that the appellant lacked credibility.

         ii) failed fully to consider subjective and objective evidence,
             erroneously finding that the appellant was not receiving
             medical treatment and that his return would not breach his
             human rights and further, the judge's findings were
             irrational.

        iii) erred in law in his application of AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC
             17 when considering medical evidence and the risk of suicide.



         iv) failed to take into account the evidence of the appellant's
             probation officer in finding that the appellant was not
             rehabilitated.

          v) made errors of fact and law in considering whether the
             appellant faced a risk on return.  In particular, the First-
             tier Tribunal at paragraph 62 stated that whilst Afghanistan
             was not a "good or safe place to live", that did not mean that
             a breach of Article 3 arose, given the appellant was a
             "foreign criminal with a serious offending past".  That was
             wrong in law and his offending history was of no relevance
             within Article 3.

         vi)  the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law when considering
             whether there were very compelling circumstances.  As set out
             in NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Section 117C did not
             require that an offender met all the elements of Exception 1
             or 2 to demonstrate very compelling circumstances.

             "It will then be necessary to look to see whether any of the
             factors falling within Exceptions 1 and 2 are of such force,
             whether by themselves or taken in conjunction with any other
             relevant factors not covered by the circumstances described in
             Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test in Section 117C(6).
             (paragraph 37 of NA)."

At the hearing before me Mr Bundock relied on a lengthy skeleton argument
setting out in detail his criticism of the decision and expanding on the
grounds of appeal.  He requested that the notes of the hearing compiled by
Miss Walker might be submitted and Miss Walker, during the currency of the
hearing, provided a witness statement together with her notes.  I
considered this to be a last minute provision of the witness statement but,
bearing in mind the elements cited in her grounds of appeal drafted by her
appeared to coincide with the Record of Proceedings which are located in
the third file, those documents were admitted and without demur from Mr
Melvin.

Mr Bundock contested that the judge's conclusion that the appellant was not
a reliable witness was not adequately reasoned, albeit I pointed out that
the appellant was convicted of an offence of dishonesty in 2016.  Mr
Bundock criticised the judge's use of the variety of accounts that the
appellant had given on his journey when making adverse credibility
findings.  Mr Bundock submitted that  the appellant had fled Afghanistan as
a child and had been sexually assaulted and was interviewed without a
lawyer present and the judge failed to consider this when addressing the
appellant's credibility.  Nor had the judge taken into account that the
appellant had a diagnosis of complex PTSD and his probation officer stated
that he had behaved extremely well throughout his time in incarceration.
Further, the judge appeared to misunderstand that the appellant's asylum
claim had been concluded in previous appeals and  that his asylum appeal
was unsuccessful, albeit that previous appeals  had been determined in his
favour and the substance of his asylum claim had never been determined by
the Tribunal.  I did point out that the Secretary of State had refused the
appellant's asylum claim and there had been no successful challenge and the
appeal was on the basis of humanitarian protection and human rights.

In relation to grounds 2, 3 and 5 Mr Bundock submitted that the judge
failed to take into account and give adequate treatment to the expert
assessment of Dr Byrne, Clinical Psychologist, dated 8th November 2019 and
merely dismissed it out of hand as being out of date when the report was
extensive and compelling and identified that the appellant's presentation
was too complex to receive treatment through a primary care service.
Indeed, Dr Byrne recorded that the appellant was receiving treatment and
his medical records from the community showed that following a release he
had been medicated with quetiapine, an antipsychotic.  This was relevant
evidence which was not taken into account.  Nor did the judge take into
account the Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust letter or that the appellant had
previously attempted suicide, which was documented in the report of Dr
Byrne.  That report detailed the intensity and consistency of the
appellant's mental illness and presentation and similarly his suicidal and
self-harming behaviour.  The evidence of the appellant's wife, Ms Ali, was
also not given adequate consideration.

The approach in relation to Article 3 was a misdirection because the
appellant's offending behaviour was clearly taken into account in
considering a breach of Article 3.  Further, the judge further considered
that a suicide case could not meet the (Paposhvili v Belgium, 13 December
2016, ECtHR (Application No 41738/10) test and thus misdirected himself in
relation to the Article 3 test at paragraph 68.   Paposhvili extended to
cases of mental illness and this was the Secretary of State's own position
in her public policy.  The test was clear that there was a real risk of
either serious, rapid and irreversible decline in mental health resulting
in intense suffering or a significant reduction in life expectancy.  The
judge apparently excluded suicide risk because it was not a situation where
absence of treatment would inevitably cause a reduction in lifespan but
this was wrong in law.  Alternatively, even if the judge was right about
Paposhvili, there was still a requirement to analyse the appellant's case
in the light of the domestic authorities of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629
and Y & Z v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 but he failed to do so, and he failed
to consider the extent to which the appellant's psychiatric vulnerability
and risk of suicide would arise from his mistreatment in Afghanistan.  The
judge also erred in his approach regarding the access to treatment.

There were errors of law in relation to the evidence regarding the
treatment of risk in Afghanistan.  When considering this risk, the judge
failed to take relevant considerations into account with regard to
medication and failed to address the issue of the counterfeit medication in
Afghanistan as evidenced in the report of Dr Giustozzi.  Secondly, the
judge failed to consider or gave limited weight to Dr Giustozzi's report
because it was eighteen months old at the time of the hearing and had
predated AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130 (IAC). The
judge did not consider the extent to which Dr Giustozzi's evidence was
consistent or inconsistent with the evidence heard and accepted by the
Tribunal in AS [2020], bearing in mind that the Tribunal found there had
been no material change in circumstances in relation to mental health care
since AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC)  and the
reason given was not a rational reason therefore to reduce the weight given
to Dr Giustozzi's report.

Further, there were contradictory findings in relation to the evidence
given in relation to the wife.  At [80], the judge reasoned that the
appellant could be reminded to take medication from the UK but at paragraph
67 found that his wife would not be able to support him because the
relationship may not endure and thus these findings were irreconcilable.
Finally, when considering that the appellant could access his family it
failed to take into account relevant considerations that the appellant had
left Afghanistan fifteen years ago and his relatives had lived in a country
and a region ravaged by indiscriminate violence.

In relation to Article 8, the errors listed above were also relevant to the
assessment under Article 8.  There was an error in the approach to Section
117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was clear
that the judge considered circumstances in Afghanistan particularly
relating to the appellant's mental health and consequences of it to fall
outwith the Article 8 assessment, stating that they properly fell to be
considered under Article 3.  That was an error of law.

The judge also adopted a relativised approach to Section 117C(5) and the
test of undue harshness when referring to the appellant's serious offences.
 That approach was conclusively rejected by the Supreme Court in KO
(Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 at paragraph 32.

Mr Bundock then advanced that the judge had failed to make any adequate
assessment of the best interests of the young son.  I stopped Mr Bundock at
this stage and pointed out that these were not part of Miss Walker's
grounds and could not be advanced at this stage in the proceedings.

By way of response, Mr Melvin relied on his response to the Tribunal under
Rule 24 dated 7th January 2021.  He argued that the judge was entitled to
make a finding on the appellant's credibility at ground 1 and failed to see
the materiality of that ground as the appeal was not based on an asylum
claim but based on human rights which involved a deportation issue and
Article 3.  In relation to ground 2, that the argument that the judge
failed to properly assess the medical evidence and medical treatment, it
was submitted that the judge had adequately assessed the expert evidence
and the current treatment.  In relation to ground 3, the judge had fully
considered AM (Zimbabwe).  In relation to ground 4, the judge had found the
appellant to be a serious criminal and upheld the Section 72 certificate
that the appellant was a danger to the public and it was unclear how a
probation officer's opinion could detract from the finding that the
appellant was a serious violent criminal who had been sentenced to a period
of five years' imprisonment.  The judge could not be expected to comment on
every piece of evidence before him and the starting point was that he had
been sentenced to four years' imprisonment and was expected to be deported
unless there were very compelling circumstances over and above those set
out in the exceptions.  In relation to ground 5, the judge had made a
finding that the appellant would have family support on return and given
his reasons for doing so and in ground 6, the judge had made findings on
very compelling circumstances.  Overall, it was submitted that the grounds
were no more than an attempt to re-argue the appeal and revealed no
material errors in law.

I stated at the hearing that I found that there was indeed an error of law.
 As I pointed out at the hearing, the appellant was convicted of an offence
of dishonesty and sentenced to five years' imprisonment for robbery and
found that the judge had given adequate reasons for considering that the
appellant was not "a reliable witness".  That said, I found that the judge
failed to address the medical report of Dr Byrne, which was a detailed
report, and appeared to consider that the appellant was not currently in
receipt of any therapy or treatment, which appears to be incorrect.  The
evidence of the Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust was evidence of ongoing
engagement with the mental health authorities and further, Dr Byrne's
report provided a detailed summary of the appellant's community medical
records following his release from detention up to October 2019 and
assessed that appellant's presentation was too complex to receive treatment
through a primary care service and that he was on medication to treat
psychosis, depression and the physical consequences of anxiety.  To dismiss
this report merely because it was dated 8th November 2019 when the hearing
took place in November 2020 with a one line dismissal was plainly
inadequate.  This report is axiomatic and deserves more detailed
engagement, bearing in mind the supporting report of Dr Ibrahimi and the
Oxleas letter.  The judge also appeared to omit consideration of the mental
health of the appellant from his Article 8 assessment, merely stating that
that needed to be confined to Article 3.  That too was an error of law.

I also find that there was a fundamental legal misdirection in relation to
Section 117C, not least that all the factors relating to the "very
compelling circumstances" needed to be taken into account.

The judge further made reference at paragraph 34 that he had paid
particular attention to the expert report of Dr Antonio Giustozzi
concerning Afghanistan and to the psychiatric reports of Dr Fatema Sheba
Ibrahimi and the psychological report of Dr Majella Byrne but the judge
failed actually to engage with the reports of Dr Byrne or Dr Giustozzi.
The judge failed to engage with the report of Dr Giustozzi because he
considered that it predated AS [2020] but did not realise that many of the
findings in relation to mental health were sustained by the Tribunal from
the previous country guidance of AS [2018].  Once again, the judge failed
make adequate findings in relation to the report of Dr Giustozzi and failed
to take into account the relevant evidence.

Not least, the judge appeared to take into account that the appellant had a
criminal record when considering Article 3.  He stated at paragraph 62:

"Afghanistan is not a good or safe place to live when compared to the UK.
That does not mean that it is a breach of Article 3 for a citizen of that
country to be required to return there from a 3rd country where he is a
foreign criminal with a serious offending past and no right to be in that
3rd country."

This is not a mere slip because at paragraph 69 the judge repeats the
error: "This is an Article 3 claim not an asylum claim.  If there are very
significant obstacles to the return of the appellant to be returned to
Afghanistan the appeal does not succeed as more is required for this
appellant to succeed, given his five year sentence."

Criminality has no bearing in relation to the Article 3 assessment.  It is
asylum and humanitarian protection that may be excluded on that basis.

The judge also appeared to exclude the risk of suicide from the ambit of AM
(Zimbabwe), also an error of law, when stating at paragraph 66 in relation
to the cost of medication: "This is not a reason to allow an Article 3
medical claim."  The judge appeared to consider that cost barriers to
treatment could not lead to a successful Article 3 claim, which departs
from the legal test.  It was noted in Counsel's skeleton argument that this
argument departed from the grounds as articulated but submitted that it
fell well within Article 3.

For the reasons I have cited, I find that there was an error of law and,
albeit that the appeal has previously been remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal,  because of the fundamental nature and extent of the errors, I
shall again remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Directions

The parties should file and serve skeleton arguments (no more than 10 pages
of A4) with any further evidence at least 14 days prior to any substantive
hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 4th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

