
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/09516/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 29 September 2017                  |        On 13 October 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                               deepak tamrakar
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wylie
    which was promulgated on 3 May 2017.  The appellant is  a  national  of
    Nepal, born on 28 September 1987 and his appeal arises from a  decision
    of the respondent dated 31 March 2016 refusing him leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

     Background
2.   The basis of the appellant's case is that, as a homosexual  now  living
    in a civil partnership with Mr Alan Mercel-Santa, he would be  rejected
    by his family in Nepal, and perhaps more generally, there and he  would
    be compelled to enter a heterosexual marriage. It is contended that  it
    would be impossible for him to live openly as a gay  man  and  that  he
    would be subject to vilification and worse. This, he says, would amount
    to a violation of his human rights.

3.   When  the  matter  was  determined  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant put forward Mr Mercel-Santa as his  representative  to  argue
    the case on the appellant's behalf.  He was given the alternative,  had
    he wished, of representing himself and deploying Mr Mercel-Santa  as  a
    witness. Nonetheless, a degree of latitude was  evidently  afforded  in
    that comments and  representations  made  by  Mr  Mercel-Santa  as  the
    appellant's  representative  were  taken  into  account  by  the  judge
    notwithstanding they did not formally comprise part of the evidence nor
    had it been subject to cross-examination.

4.   In short, the  judge's  findings  were  that  the  risk  posed  to  the
    appellant was overstated and that it would not be  disproportionate  to
    compel his return to Nepal.

     Permission to appeal
5.   The grounds of appeal were lengthy and prolix: the judges who  had  had
    occasion to look at them for the  purpose  of  considering  whether  to
    grant permission to appeal, struggled to find what the issues were  was
    being advanced as a distinct ground  of  appeal.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant does not agree with it is of course not a ground  of  appeal.
    What must be demonstrated to set aside a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is a material error of law.

6.   Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede gave  permission  to  appeal  on  4  August
    2017: it was made clear that permission was being  granted  on  a  very
    limited basis.  The  second  paragraph  of  the  reasons  for  granting
    permission reads as follows:

         "The grounds are lengthy and in parts difficult to comprehend.   On
         the face of it they appear to  be  nothing  more  than  a  vehement
         disagreement with the judge's decision.  Contrary to the  assertion
         in the grounds the late service of the respondent's appeal  bundle,
         which in  the  event  contained  nothing  outside  the  appellant's
         knowledge, and the presence of other persons in the hearing room do
         not arguably give rise to any procedural irregularity or unfairness
         in the proceedings.  However there are various  references  in  the
         grounds to documents which  were  put  before  the  judge  but  not
         considered.  I am unable to ascertain which  documents  these  are,
         given the lack of clarity and focus in the grounds.   In  light  of
         the fact that the appellant was previously granted entry  clearance
         following a successful appeal to the Tribunal on what appears to be
         the same basis as the grounds relied upon in this appeal, I am just
         persuaded that this is a matter which merits further discussion and
         consideration.  Accordingly, on that limited basis, I  am  prepared
         to grant permission."

7.   When the hearing was called on at 10:00am this morning Mr  Sharma,  who
    appears for the appellant, indicated that he had construed the grant of
    permission to be such as to permit a wholesale challenge to the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision on the  ground  that  it  was  contrary  to  a
    previous one.  I stated that on my reading, the grant was  to  be  more
    narrowly construed and limited to considering those documents which  it
    is alleged were not considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Even at this stage,  the  particular  documents  relied  upon  in  this
    appeal had still not been  identified.  I  had  been  supplied  with  a
    partially paginated bundle. Mr Nath, who appeared for the Secretary  of
    State, had not been supplied with a bundle at all. It  was  clear  that
    the matter could not proceed until both bundles had uniform  pagination
    and the appellant had identified those particular documents which it is
    said the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider.  Accordingly I put
    the matter to the back of my list and dealt with three other appeals.

     Application to rely on additional grounds of appeal
9.   When the appeal was later called on for resumption, Mr Sharma  was  not
    in the building because he had apparently returned to his chambers.  In
    fairness to the appellant, I adjourned the matter to await his arrival.

10.  When Mr Sharma did re-appear,  he  produced  a  typed  document  headed
    'grounds of appeal' and proceeded to make an application to extend  the
    grant of permission to include two new grounds.  The first was:

         "the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  due  weight  to   the
         sufficient weight to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Birrell of 7 July 2015.  It is  submitted  that  in  that  decision
         matters of direct relevance to the instant appeal were decided"

11.  The second additional ground placed reliance on Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11
    and the the oft-cited passage at paragraph 51 of the judgment  of  Lord
    Reed:

         "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled  to
         remain in the UK only temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be.  For example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal.  The point is illustrated by the decision in  Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."

12.  Having heard submissions, I took the view  that  permission  to  pursue
    these two so-called additional grounds ought not to be granted.  First,
    they were raised  far  too  late,  notwithstanding  that  up  until  22
    September  the  appellant   had   been   representing   himself.   More
    particularly, I did not consider that  either  of  the  two  additional
    grounds revealed an arguable error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. In any event, since the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birrell was one of the documents which it was to be  alleged  the
    judge had failed to take  into  consideration,  this  matter  was  fell
    within the  territory  of  enquiry  for  which  the  limited  grant  of
    permission had already made provision. Thus there  was  no  conceivable
    prejudice to the appellant occasioned by my refusal to grant permission
    for these additional grounds to be argued.

     The substantive appeal
13.  The substantive appeal then proceeded  and  Mr  Sharma  identified  the
    four documents which were not considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In fairness to him, he put his oral submissions in a more measured way,
    stating that they were given insufficient weight or not afforded proper
    weight.

14.  Although the bundle for the court  and  the  bundle  provided  for  the
    Secretary of State were not identically paginated Mr  Sharma  took  the
    trouble to make sure that each of  us  was  aware  of  the  nature  and
    content of the  four  documents  upon  which  he  relied.  Since  these
    documents, as now identified, lie at the  crux  of  the  appeal  it  is
    prudent to  set  them  out  individual  below  by  name,  location  and
    description.

     Email from Mr Mercel-Santa's mother
15.  In the court's bundle at pages 62 and 63 is  an  email  sent  from  Mrs
    Doris Ashton  the  mother  of  Mr  Mercel-Santa,  which  addresses  her
    personal circumstances living alone at  some  distance  from  the  home
    shared by Mr Mercel-Santa and the appellant.

    Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell of 7 July 2015
16.  At pages 137-148 of  the  court's  bundle  is  the  transcript  of  the
    decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birrell  promulgated
    on 7 July 2015.

    Letter from Dhan Bahadur Gurung dated 20 November 2015
17.  The third document identified in the court's  bundle  at  page  156  is
    from Dhan Bahadur Gurung, a close and trusted friend of the  appellant,
    who deals with the nature of his friendship with the appellant and also
    the personal consequences for the appellant as a gay man living  either
    with or without his partner in Nepal. Certain sections of  that  letter
    were highlighted by Mr Sharma.

    Letter from Mr Conor Burns MP
18.  The fourth document is dated March 2017 and it  is  a  letter  from  Mr
    Conor Burns, Member of Parliament for  Bournemouth  West.   The  second
    substantive paragraph of that letter  points  to  certain  material  in
    relation to the way in which the  Lesbian,  Gay,  Trans  and  Bi-Sexual
    community is treated in Nepal. The letter concludes,

         "I do not share the view of the Home Office that the  situation  in
         Nepal has changed in that time to the extent that the appellant and
         Mr Mercel-Smith could live safely as a couple in Nepali society".

     Discussion
19.  It is clearly evident from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    precisely what documentation was before the  court.   At  paragraph  8,
    express reference is made to the letter from Mr Burns MP and the  email
    from Mrs Ashton. In paragraph 7 the judge says:


         "I have taken account of all the documents provided, and everything
         that was said at the hearing, even when not specifically mentioned"

    Thus Mr Sharma's  suggestion  that  the  judge  adopted  a  "blinkered"
    approach, not looking at particular documents,  is  not  one  that  can
    properly be made.

20.  As I observed during counsel's  submissions  the  probative  value  and
    weight of Mr Burns' letter is extremely limited.   Mr  Sharma  accepted
    that Mr Burns was not being put forward as an expert and the fact  that
    a citizen, albeit a Member of Parliament, expresses a view is not,  and
    cannot be, determinative of the court's disposal of the matter.

21.  Mr Sharma makes  criticism  that  although  Doris  Ashton's  letter  is
    referred  to,  the  detailed  content  of  it  is  not   given   fuller
    consideration. In paragraph 42 of the determination the judge says:

         "The appellant and his partner have a family life  together.   They
         are  in  a  civil  partnership  and  have  been  in   a   committed
         relationship since 2013.  Their extended family includes Mr Mercel-
         Santa's mother who lives independently some distance from them".


22.  Mr Sharma submit that the judge should have  gone  further  and  should
    have included express reference to the entire content of Doris Ashton's
    email and to her health and other matters.  It is not the function of a
    fact-finding tribunal to recite each and every aspect of the  documents
    placed before it.  The judge  need  only  identify  and  summarise  the
    relevant material and record his or her findings accordingly. I  regard
    this criticism of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as misplaced.

23.  Equally, and for like reasons, I do not  consider  it  to  be  anything
    approaching an error of law that the content of Dhan  Bahadur  Gurung's
    letter was not referred to in any substantial detail within the  course
    of the determination. It was clearly in the judge's mind.

24.  What has exercised me  a  little  more  has  been  the  submissions  in
    relation to the prior decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    which contained a similar examine  the  circumstances  concerning  this
    particular appellant. Mr Sharma rightly  disavowed  any  suggestion  of
    estoppel; nor did he advance a positive case that the judge was obliged
    to come to the same factual conclusions as had Judge  Birrell  when  he
    heard the matter in 2015.

25.  There is a substantial commentary on Judge Birrell's  decision  in  the
    course of the decision which the  appellant  seeks  to  impugn  in  the
    current appeal, paragraph 37 of which reads:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make mention  of  the  legal
         status of  same-sex  relationships,  nor  the  prohibition  against
         discrimination set out in the  constitution  of  Nepal.   The  full
         sentence of Sunil Pant, quoted in part by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge, reads 'Nepal do not  recognise  same  sex  relationship  and
         still remain a pretty  homophobic  country  hence  Mr  Mercel-Santa
         cannot settle in Nepal to join [the appellant]'.  This  is  not  in
         fact accurate."


26.  In truth it is tolerably clear that the judge had  fully  in  mind  the
    earlier decision. Express reference is  made  to  it:  so  the  grounds
    overstate the position to suggest that it was ignored.  It is  not  the
    function of First-tier Tribunal  Judges  to  adopt  uncritically  prior
    decisions of other First-tier Tribunal Judges.   Judges  must  come  to
    their own conclusions based upon the evidence which  they  have  heard,
    assessing the  credibility  of  witnesses  and  assessing  such  expert
    evidence as may be put before them.

27.  The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  in  this  instance
    amounts to an impeccable assessment of the  evidence,  the  conclusions
    are clearly and closely reasoned and not amenable to the criticism made
    of them by Mr Sharma.  The judge  undoubtedly  took  into  account  the
    decision of Judge Birrell, but went  judge  went  on,   in  the  proper
    exercise of the judicial function, to apply her mind  to  the  material
    which was before  the  Tribunal  in  reaching  conclusions  as  to  the
    vulnerability of the appellant (whether alone or as part  of  the  same
    sex couple) on returning to Nepal.  The decision the judge came  to  is
    clear to understand, and the fact that its conclusion may  differ  from
    an  earlier  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   is   more   than
    sufficiently reasoned. There is no discernible error of law.

28.  Finally, and for completeness,  whether  or  not  the  appellant  would
    succeed in obtaining entry clearance as a civil  partner  is  a  matter
    which can only be determined by his  return  to  Nepal  and  making  an
    appropriate application.  This is not the  type  of  case  where  entry
    clearance can be guaranteed or deemed to be so likely that the  Agyarko
    considerations would come into play.  The  judge  dealt  with  this  at
    paragraphs 47  and  48,  and  her  balanced  and  frank  assessment  is
    something which cannot be criticised; hence my refusal, irrespective of
    the lateness of the application, to expand the  scope  of  this  appeal
    into matters which were not arguable.

29.  It therefore follows that notwithstanding the skill and tenacity of  Mr
    Sharma in taking every point possible on behalf  of  his  client,  this
    appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     9 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

