
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/09718/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th August 2019                     | On 6th September 2019              |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     m s

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Reza Halim of Counsel, instructed by way of
Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th  January  1973.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in September 2004 on a  visit  visa  in  the
    name of FI.  In November 2005 he was found working using the  alias  of
    MRU and was detained.

2.   He claimed asylum on 14th November  2005.  That  was  refused  and  the
    subsequent appeal dismissed.  He absconded and was  not  re-encountered
    by the authorities until 15th August 2012.

3.   Thereafter he sought leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of his private life with his claimed  partner  SB  and  with  his
    daughter SMI born on 14th June 2007.  That application was  refused  on
    3rd September 2012.  He appealed against that refusal  and  his  appeal
    was heard on 19th October 2012.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  26th
    October 2012 and he  was  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  on  12th
    February 2013.

4.   On 3rd January  2018  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom on the basis of his  family  life  with
    his partner SB and his two children.

5.   That application was refused for a  number  of  reasons  and  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration  Rules  applied.   The  appellant  had  been
    untruthful in relation to his immigration  history;  and  breached  the
    Immigration Rules by overstaying, absconding, working illegally, making
    frivolous applications and using multiple identities.

6.    It  was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant   met   the   eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM nor was it accepted that  the  relationship
    between SB and SMI was as claimed.  Indeed it was not  accepted  either
    that he was married to SB or that he was the father of SMI.   In  terms
    of the circumstances of SB it was not accepted that  her  earnings  had
    met the Rules, nor that family and private life was  established  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Turnock on  12th  February  2018.   The
    appeal was dismissed.  Leave to challenge that appeal before the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted,  particularly  focused  upon  argument  that  the
    deception used in the 2004 and 2005 claims fell outside  the  scope  of
    paragraph 320(11).  Also that the Judge incorrectly placed  the  burden
    on the appellant to prove that he is not a bigamist.

8.   In terms of paragraph  320(11)  Mr  Halim  drew  my  attention  to  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular to the interpretation of 320(7A) which
    excluded from consideration in an application for  entry  clearance  or
    leave to enter or remain, any deceptive documents  or  statements  used
    more than ten years ago.

9.   He submits that the area of deception exercised by  the  appellant  was
    in relation to the claimed asylum in 2005  and  his  working  in  2005,
    which was said to be outside the ten year period.

10.  Mr Kandola submits  that  that  is  to  ignore  the  reality  that  the
    appellant has exercised continuing deception  towards  the  authorities
    well within the ten year period.  In  particular  he  was  detained  in
    August 2012 and sought leave to remain on the basis of his relationship
    with SB and SMI.  The hearing of that matter came before the First-tier
    Tribunal on 16th October 2012.   The  appellant  was  still  using  his
    fictitious name of Mr F I. Indeed it was a matter noted indeed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, in the decision now under challenge, that it
    undermined the credibility of SB because she supported the  application
    and gave evidence  knowing  full  well  that  that  was  not  his  true
    identity.  Significantly the Judge in 2012, Judge Lingard,  highlighted
    the lack of  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  parentage  of  his
    claimed daughter.  The birth certificate  was  signed  by  SB's  former
    husband and no DNA tests had been undertaken.  The  Judge  noted  that,
    for much of the time when the appellant was  living  in  Leeds  SB  was
    living in Middlesbrough. At the time  of  the  determination  they  had
    never lived together and lived in different parts of the  country.   It
    was not accepted by the Judge in 2012  that  the  relationship  was  as
    claimed to found any basis to grant leave to remain.

11.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  in  the  decision  currently  under
    challenge, did not find SB to be credible for the reasons as set out at
    paragraph 69 and noted indeed that the claim was the couple met  whilst
    at work at a time when the appellant was working under the name of MRU.
     The Judge did not accept in paragraph  70  of  the  determination  the
    reason why a DNA test had  not  been  instituted  in  relation  to  the
    claimed daughter.

12.  It was noted also that the appellant's current online  application  did
    not disclose his full immigration history.  The appellant  claims  that
    that was as a result of the errors on the part of  his  representatives
    rather than himself, an explanation  which  was  not  accepted  by  the
    Judge.  The  reasons  are  set  out  in  paragraph  65  to  68  of  the
    determination.

13.  The aggravating circumstances including  absconding,  previous  working
    in breach of visitor's conditions and  using  an  assumed  identity  or
    multiple identities for deceptive reasons.

14.  Were such matters made out to have occurred beyond the ten year  period
    there would be some force of merit in submissions that have  been  made
    to me concerning the application of Rule 320(11).  However it is clear,
    both from the factual analysis and from the  findings,  that  deception
    has continued and that the aggravating features identified by the Judge
    certainly occurred in part at and a stage within the ten  year  period.
    Consequently I find no error of law in that approach.

15.  The other matter is perhaps of more significance and that concerns  the
    contention made on behalf of the respondent in the refusal letter, that
    the appellant was previously married and that accordingly it could  not
    be said that SB was a partner within  the  application  of  the  Rules.
    That matter had arisen because of the insistence by the appellant at an
    early stage in matters that he had operated a business in  South  Korea
    and indeed that in 2003 he had married a South Korean  national.   They
    had returned to Pakistan in 2004.   It  was  noted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in the earlier determinations  in  relation  to  asylum,
    Judge Gordon, that on his Visa Application Form in 2004 he  had  listed
    his wife by name and had produced an email from  South  Korea  from  an
    individual claiming to be his wife and business documents  relating  to
    South Korea.  Such led the First-tier Tribunal Judge to accept that  he
    had married a South Korean wife but beyond that  his  account  was  not
    accepted.

16.  In terms of the determination regard was had to  the  hearing  of  16th
    October 2012, in which it was noted that  the  appellant  continued  to
    assert that he operated a business in South  Korea  having  married  in
    2003.  The marriage failed.  He and his  wife  went  to  Pakistan,  she
    returning to Korea in May 2004.  It was during 2005  that  he  met  and
    formed a relationship with SB.

17.  It is not a surprise therefore that the respondent sought to  act  upon
    that statement.  The appellant in  his  current  application  seeks  to
    indicate that he has never married and that the marriage to  SB  was  a
    proper one in all the circumstances such that she should be  considered
    to be his wife.

18.  The challenge that is made is essentially to the expression set out  at
    paragraph 74 of the determination as follows:

         "Accordingly, there is a  burden  upon  the  appellant  to  produce
         evidence to show that the factual finding  previously  made  should
         not stand.  He now asserts he  was  never  married  but  I  do  not
         consider that bare assertion is  sufficient  to  justify  departure
         from the previous finding, particular in light of my findings as to
         his credibility.  It  is  not  addressed,  in  his  latest  witness
         statement, why he should have claimed to  be  married  to  a  named
         South Korean woman if that were not the case.   It  is  a  somewhat
         unusual claim to have made if not true."

19.  Mr Halim addressed me at length on this  particular  matter  contending
    that it was entirely wrong in matters of deception for  the  burden  to
    fall upon the appellant.  The allegation that he had been  married  and
    therefore that his marriage to SB was not validly conducted, he submits
    is a  crucial  element  of  the  evidence,  such  that  the  burden  of
    establishing that fact falls upon  the  respondent  and  not  upon  the
    appellant.   That he was  married  previously  is  something  that  has
    permeated the case and adversely influenced the approach taken  to  the
    Rules and to Article 8.

20.   Mr Halim submits that as the appellant seeks  to  deny  that  marriage
    and to retract that which he previously said, it ought to  be  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to actively engage with that  denial  to  see
    whether or not the  appellant  is  now  telling  the  truth  about  his
    circumstances when he was not before.

21.  It is said that the appellant cannot prove a negative, namely  that  he
    was not married, and the burden should be upon the respondent  to  show
    that he was.  There is some merit in the contention that the burden has
    been misstated.  Clearly the respondent bears  the  overall  burden  of
    proving deception or a material fact.  Once the respondent  established
    a prima facie case then clearly the evidential  burden  shifts  to  the
    appellant.  It seems to me that there is clear prima facie evidence  of
    a previous marriage that that was presented on  two  occasions  at  two
    hearings before the First-tier Tribunal as well as  documents  to  show
    that event.

22.  The appellant now seeks to resile from what he said before but, as  has
    been specifically noted by the  Judge  in  paragraph  74,  he  has  not
    properly addressed why he should have claimed to be married to a  South
    Korean  woman  if  that  were  not  the  case.   Thus  the  Judge   has
    specifically addressed  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  what  the
    appellant now says is likely to be true.

23.  Even if the burden of proof were reversed, as it  properly  should  be,
    it is difficult in practical terms to understand that  there  would  be
    any different outcome to the approach to be taken. If the Judge did not
    believe that the  appellant  was  telling  the  truth  about  his  non-
    relationship with the Korean wife then the Judge  is  entitled  to  act
    accordingly. This is  particularly  so  given  the  other  elements  of
    deception as identified by the Judge.

24.   Approaching  the  matter  on  the  basis  that   the   direction   was
    inaccurately expressed, the question is whether that  could  have  made
    any material difference to the outcome of the determination.

25.  Leaving aside the issue of marriage, it is abundantly  clear  that  the
    Tribunal Judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness  for
    many other reasons.  This current application did not disclose his full
    immigration history.  It was not accepted that there  was  an  innocent
    explanation for the lack of disclosure.  The Judge considered a  letter
    from Beachwoods Solicitors, contending that the appellant had now  been
    honest by pointing out his name was  different  when  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Such however was found to be a false portrayal of  the
    appellant as one who changed his name and sought to minimise  the  fact
    that he used a completely false name when applying for entry clearance,
    asylum and leave to remain.  For the reasons as set out  in  paragraphs
    67 and 68 of the determination, the Judge gives little  weight  to  the
    explanations  that  are  sought  to  be  offered  for  the  significant
    omissions in the current applications.  Moreover  the  Judge,  for  the
    reasons as set out, did not find SB to be  credible  nor  accepted  the
    nature of her circumstances as claimed.

26.  Even were the appellant not to be lawfully married to SB the Judge  did
    recognise that it was  also  necessary  to  consider  the  relationship
    between SB and claimed daughter under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Judge
    noted the living arrangements as between the appellant and  SB  in  the
    United Kingdom and the gap in her visiting  him.   The  health  of  the
    daughter was considered but again it was not accepted by the Judge that
    she was the natural daughter of the appellant nor that her difficulties
    which she describes were attributable to the absence of  the  appellant
    from her life.  The Judge looked  at  the  medical  evidence  that  was
    presented in relation to mother and daughter and concluded overall that
    it was not a relationship that engages Article 8 of the ECHR. There was
    a detailed consideration of the chemistry as between wife, daughter and
    appellant.  It was also acknowledged of course that his wife now has  a
    child conceived during her visit to the appellant in Pakistan.   Whilst
    the genuineness of the current relationship with SB would not  seem  to
    have been challenged, the nature of that relationship  and  whether  it
    gives rise to a claim under Article  8  was  very  much  the  focus  of
    consideration.  The reason why no DNA evidence had  been  provided  was
    also considered by the Judge and found to lack credibility.   Obviously
    this was not a new matter but one raised indeed  by  Judge  Lingard  in
    2012 and little has been done to resolve that matter.

27.  I find that even had it been the case that the Judge accepted that  the
    appellant was not previously married it would  have  made  very  little
    difference to the analysis  that  was  conducted  overall,  as  to  his
    conduct and that of his SB in the United  Kingdom.   I  find  therefore
    that the error attributed to burden of proof was in  the  circumstances
    not a material error. Although it was clearly one factor  that  weighed
    the balance of credibility there were many others which were drawn upon
    by the Judge in a very detailed determination.

28.  In all the circumstances therefore I do not find there  be  a  material
    error of law in the determination.  The determination  therefore  shall
    stand.

29.  In the circumstances the appellant's appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed        [pic]                          Date: 29 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


