
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: HU/09454/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 January 2021               |On 17 February 2021              |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               shagufta pervez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Symes, of counsel, instructed under Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who was born on 15 February 1954.
     She appeals against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Traynor ("the judge") on 29 April  2020,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal of her application for entry clearance
    as the Adult Dependent Relative of a settled person in the UK.




Background

 2. The appellant is a widow who lives in Rawalpindi, Pakistan.   She  lost
    her husband to a heart attack in December 2017.  She has two daughters,
    both of whom live in the United Kingdom and have families of their own.
     The elder daughter, Aisha, came to the UK in May  2002.   The  younger
    daughter, Saira, came to the UK in July 2006.


 3. The appellant made an application  for  entry  clearance  to  join  her
    daughters and their families in  the  UK  on  21  February  2019.   The
    application form was completed by Aisha's husband, Sohail  Imtiaz.   It
    was said that she would travel to the United Kingdom with him and would
    live at the home owned by him and Aisha in Luton.   She  declared  that
    she had been refused a visit visa in 2017.  In answer to  question  83,
    the applicant provided the following additional detail:

         My husband passed away in  Dec  2017  and  as  there  is  no  other
         relative who can live and support and care for me, I am  all  alone
         in my house.  I have only two daughters,  Aisha  Sohail  and  Saira
         Shahid, that are both married and settled in the United Kingdom  as
         British citizens, with their husbands and children.


         I am dependant on my daughters and  their  family  who  support  me
         [sic] much as they can.  I have severe arthritis,  hypertension  as
         well as glaucoma in my both eyes due to which I have  already  lost
         my eyesight in my right eye and very weak  eyesight  on  the  left.
         Due to all these medical conditions, I am bed bound,  most  of  the
         time, and can hardly walk to toilet or kitchen when needed.


         I  am  therefore  applicating  to  join   my   daughters   and   my
         grandchildren in the UK on  a  permanent  basis  as  they  will  be
         looking after me.

 4. Also completed by Mr Imtiaz on the appellant's behalf was an Appendix 1
    form, providing further details.  In that form,  the  appellant  stated
    that she was suffering from glaucoma in both eyes, arthritis,  diabetes
    and hypertension.  She had  received  some  assistance  from  privately
    funded housemaids but was not receiving any such assistance at the date
    of the application.  She had experienced  lots  of  issues  with  these
    maids.  The care and support she required was not available.   She  was
    fully supported by Mr Imtiaz.


 5. Also submitted with the application was a sponsorship undertaking which
    was given by Mr Imtiaz under paragraph 35 of the Immigration Rules  and
    a range of supporting evidence.  The  evidence  regarding  finance  and
    accommodation showed that Mr Imtiaz was in well-paid  employment  as  a
    systems engineer for Cisco and that there was more than adequate  space
    for the appellant in the family home.  It is necessary to focus on  the
    medical evidence in a little more detail, since it was accepted  by  Mr
    Symes before the FtT that there was insufficient evidence to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, to which I turn in moment.   The
    medical evidence submitted to the ECO consisted of 39 pages  of  mostly
    handwritten medical notes from Pakistan.  The  most  legible  documents
    recorded that the appellant had mild cardiomegaly; pain in  both  knees
    for which she had been 'advised surgery' with a 'post-op rehab period 2-
    3 months'; optic neuropathy in both eyes' which caused  'difficulty  in
    performing daily activities and needs supervision'.

 6. The application was refused by the respondent ECO on 1  May  2019.   It
    was not accepted that the applicant was unable to obtain  the  required
    level of care in Pakistan and the application was consequently  refused
    under paragraph E-ECDR 2.5.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed.  The grounds  of  appeal  were  settled  by  Mr
    Imtiaz, although he indicated in the appeal form that he had instructed
    Mr Symes to represent the appellant at the hearing.


 8. The case was duly reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager, who concluded
    that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant
    required long term personal care to perform everyday tasks or that  she
    would be unable to obtain  the  required  level  of  personal  care  in
    Pakistan.  The ECM did not  consider  there  to  be  any  circumstances
    outside the assessment required by the Immigration Rules which rendered
    the decision unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 9. The appeal came before the judge on 14 January 2020.  A bundle had been
    filed and served by Mr Symes, acting under  the  Direct  Public  Access
    Scheme.  The bundle was helpfully separated into  seven  sections:  the
    key appeal  documents;  post-decision  evidence;  post  decision  media
    reports and evidence; the application and the evidence  in  support  of
    it; authorities; essays  and  reports  on  social  care;  and  previous
    application cover letter.

10. The post-decision medical evidence about the appellant took the form of
    a 'Medical Case History' written by Dr  Tahir  Hussain  Kharal  of  the
    Shaheen Clinic in Rawalpindi.  The document is dated 18  December  2019
    and reads, in full (and verbatim), as follows:

         This is to certify that Mrs Shagufta Pervez age 65 years 10  months
         (15th Feb 1954) was examined by me on 18 Dec 2019.  She  has  shown
         multiple Medical & Psychological problems due to her chronic poorly
         treated Diabetes and Gout.  Hypertension and  Rheumatoid  Arthritis
         involved her knee  Joints  and  Spines  leading  towards  permanent
         Backache and Supported mobility.  She also  had  glaucoma  in  both
         eyes where one eye is blind, and one has partial sight.


         She stated that she is living alone at home as a widow and has  not
         family member of anyone to provide her any support.  She complained
         of sleepless nights  and  frequent  nightmares  since  her  husband
         passed away.  I observed, psychologically she is very depressed and
         has stressful superadded Phobic attacks.  I also noticed  that  her
         state of dementia  is  highly  life-threatening  condition  as  she
         forgets about Injecting correct Insulin  dose  and  often  repeated
         injections result in hypoglycemic unconsciousness.


         Geriatric and psychological status, beside other illnesses, of her,
         need full social and Family care and support in order to avoid  any
         major  loss  to  her   life.    Recommendations   are   full   time
         psychological support with proper medication under supervision.


         Prescribed Xenax and advised to follow up appointment in  next  6-8
         weeks.

11. The judge received lengthy statements from the appellant and her family
    in the United Kingdom.  He heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  two
    daughters  and  their  husbands.   He  heard  a  submission  from   the
    Presenting Officer and Mr Symes before reserving his decision.


12. In his reserved decision, the judge set out  the  relevant  background,
    the relevant law and the evidence before him in some detail.   He  came
    to his findings at [71]-[89]. What  follows  is  only  the  most  basic
    outline of those detailed findings.


13. At [78], the judge found that the report of Dr  Kharal,  which  he  had
    reproduced in full at [74] of his decision, 'still does not address the
    very specific requirements identified in  the  Immigration  Rules'.  At
    [81], he found that there was an absence of evidence to establish  that
    the appellant could not  perform  every  day  tasks  and  that  he  was
    'obliged'  to  conclude  that  her  application  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  E-ECDR  2.4  of
    Appendix FM.  In the alternative, for reasons he gave at [82]-[84], the
    judge did not accept that the appellant had discharged  the  burden  of
    proof upon her to show that she was  unable  to  receive  the  required
    level of care in Pakistan.  Again, the judge found that  the  appellant
    had failed to adduce the requisite evidence to show that such help  was
    not available.  He therefore found that the  appellant  was  unable  to
    meet the ADR Rules and proceeded to consider  the  human  rights  claim
    outside those Rules.  Although he  found  it  'wholly  implausible'  to
    suggest that the sponsors should  uproot  themselves  from  the  United
    Kingdom to join the appellant  in  Pakistan,  he  considered  that  the
    appellant's ongoing exclusion was a proportionate course.










The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


14.  There are five grounds of appeal.   The  first  three  relate  to  the
    judge's conclusion that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were
    met.  Those grounds may be summarised as follows:


      i) In concluding that the appellant did not require long-term personal
         care to perform  everyday  tasks,  the  judge  overlooked  material
         matters;


     ii) In concluding that Dr Kharal's opinion was 'hyperbolic', the  judge
         overlooked material evidence which supported that opinion;

    iii) In concluding that the appellant had failed to establish  that  she
         would be unable to obtain the requisite care in Pakistan, the judge
         also overlooked material evidence.

15. The remaining two grounds of appeal are directed  against  the  judge's
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.
    Those grounds are as follows:


     iv) The judge overlooked evidence which  bore  on  the  proportionality
         assessment,  namely  medical  evidence  about  the  effect  of  the
         appellant's exclusion on Aisha.


      v) The judge failed to consider matters which served to  diminish  the
         public interest in the appellant's ongoing exclusion.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  in
    what Mr Symes aptly described as strong  terms.   He  was  particularly
    impressed by the complaint that the judge had overlooked evidence  that
    the appellant required knee surgery,  after  which  there  would  be  a
    lengthy period of convalescence.


17. The papers were placed before Judge Rimington in August 2020.  She  was
    provisionally of the view that the Upper Tribunal might decide  without
    a hearing whether the FtT had erred in law  and,  if  so,  whether  its
    decision  should  be  set  aside.   She  issued   directions,   seeking
    submissions on that course and on the merits of the appeal.

18. Written submissions were duly made by Mr Symes.  The papers were placed
    before Judge Perkins shortly thereafter.  He concluded  that  a  remote
    hearing was the proper course and ordered that one should  take  place,
    absent any objection from the parties, as soon as possible.

19. So it was that the appeal came before me on 14 January  2021,  with  Mr
    Symes  representing  the  appellant  and  Mr  Jarvis  representing  the
    respondent.  The  hearing  was  remote,  by  Skype  for  Business,  and
    proceeded smoothly with no technical difficulty.

Submissions

20. Mr Symes relied on the grounds of appeal and the  written  submissions.
    He developed the grounds concisely.  In respect of the first ground, Mr
    Symes submitted that there had been a very detailed statement from  the
    sponsor, Mr Imtiaz, before the judge.  At [4] of  that  statement,  the
    sponsor had set out the difficulties experienced by the appellant as  a
    result of her knees and it had been stated in a note  from  Dr  Bukhari
    that the  appellant  had  'pain  both  knees'  and  had  been  'advised
    surgery'.  There was also  evidence  from  the  Eye  Care  Hospital  in
    Rawalpindi that the appellant had 'optic neuropathy in both eyes' as  a
    result of which she had 'difficulty in performing daily activities  and
    needs supervision'.  There was  clear  evidence,  therefore,  that  her
    wellbeing was in jeopardy, which supported  the  opinion  given  by  Dr
    Kharal.  Asked by me whether this was the evidence which  was  said  to
    satisfy the evidential requirements of paragraph 34 of Appendix  FM-SE,
    Mr Symes confirmed that it  was.   Taking  account  of  that  evidence,
    together with the evidence that the appellant  had  been  seen  bumping
    into doors, this was what Singh LJ had described in Ribeli as a case of
    unmet needs, and the judge had erred in failing to treat it as such.


21. In relation to ground two, Mr Symes submitted that the judge had  erred
    in treating the report from Dr  Kharal  as  hyperbolic  self-diagnosis.
    The language of that report showed  that  it  was  based  on  empirical
    professional observation and not merely the appellant's account of  her
    circumstances.  Her diabetes, for example, was said to be 'chronic  and
    poorly treated'.

22. In relation to ground three, Mr Symes  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider a host of background reports and that, in any event,
    what had been written by Dr Kharal met the requirements of paragraph 35
    of Appendix FM-SE.  The judge had held it against  the  appellant  that
    neither she nor the family had reported the thefts  by  carers  to  the
    Pakistani police but the relevant fact - which was  overlooked  by  the
    judge - was that the appellant had a subjective fear of carers.

23. Ground four was a short point - which was that the judge had overlooked
    the circumstances of the family in the United Kingdom in deciding  that
    the appellant's exclusion was proportionate.  The judge had  overlooked
    the medical evidence that the stress caused by the appellant's  ongoing
    exclusion was having an impact on the appellant's daughter's ability to
    care for her children.  As for ground five, Mr Symes submitted that the
    judge had erred in failing to evaluate the fact that the ADR Rules  had
    been introduced after the sponsors had come to the UK,  and  could  not
    have known that it would be so difficult  for  the  appellant  to  join
    them.  The submission was more nuanced than had been understood by  the
    judge.

24. For the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  FtT  had
    not erred in law.  The requirements of Appendix FM-SE were rigorous and
    demanding and the appellant had not adduced the  evidence  required  by
    the Immigration Rules. The evidential requirements were as  significant
    as the substantive requirements, he submitted.  It had been  recognised
    by the Court of Appeal that the introduction of the ADR Rules signalled
    a significant change  in  policy.   The  judge  had  adopted  a  lawful
    approach to the evidence and to the requirements of the  Rules.   There
    were difficult tensions in the evidence and the weight which should  be
    given to the different parts of the evidence before the FtT was  matter
    for the  judge.   He  had  assessed  the  medical  and  other  evidence
    lawfully, and had given adequate reasons for  the  conclusions  he  had
    reached.  The judge had been entitled to 'dig down' into  the  evidence
    and to consider how the appellant  was  able  to  survive  on  her  own
    notwithstanding what was said by Dr Kharal.  There was  a  conflict  in
    the evidence, which suggested on one side that  she  was  not  managing
    but, on the other, that she was able to do so.  There was no  evidence,
    as the judge had found, of the appellant ever falling unconscious as  a
    result of administering the incorrect dose of insulin.  The  judge  was
    entitled to attach weight to that point.

25. There was no evidence which satisfied the requirement of  paragraph  35
    of Appendix FM-SE.  There was no  evidence  from  one  of  the  sources
    stipulated in that paragraph which began to  show  that  the  appellant
    would be unable to obtain the requisite care in  Pakistan.   There  was
    general background evidence about the cultural position in Pakistan but
    what was required by the Rules was more specific.

26. As for the wider Article 8 ECHR questions raised by grounds  three  and
    four,  the  judge's  remarks  about  an  'open  border  policy'  merely
    reflected his concern about what would be left in  the  event  that  he
    overlooked - or attached limited weight to - the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The prism through which that remark was to  be  considered  was
    provided by [77] of the decision in Britcits.  Against the backdrop  of
    the respondent's policy, the appellant's daughter's difficulties  could
    not conceivably tip the  proportionality  balance  in  the  appellant's
    favour.  As for the final ground, the fact was that the respondent  had
    responsibility for the Rules and was entitled to change them.  The fact
    that there used to be a more favourable Rule in force was immaterial to
    proportionality.

27. In reply, Mr Symes submitted that the decision as a whole suffered from
    a failure on the part of the judge to appreciate that the appellant was
    a woman with unmet needs.  She had the Sword of Damocles  hanging  over
    her and was  not  required  to  have  a  serious  accident  before  she
    qualified for entry clearance.  These precarious circumstances had been
    made abundantly clear in the sponsor's statement,  in  particular.   Mr
    Symes asked for time to  take  instructions  before  he  completed  his
    reply.  Having received instructions form the sponsor, he  stated  that
    the appellant had been found unconscious by a neighbour after injecting
    herself with the wrong dose of insulin but that there had been  nothing
    before the judge in which this account had been given.

28. I reserved my decision at the conclusion of the submissions.

The Immigration Rules

29. Prior to 9 July 2012, an Adult Dependent Relative ("ADR") was  able  to
    apply for entry clearance under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.
     A parent or grandparent under the age of 65 was required to establish,
    amongst  other  things,  that  they  were  living  alone  in  the  most
    exceptional compassionate  circumstances,  the  meaning  of  which  was
    explored in a number of cases  including  Senanayake  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    1530; [2006] Imm AR 155.  After  turning  65,  an  ADR  was  no  longer
    required to demonstrate such circumstances, and they were  able  to  be
    admitted under paragraph 317 if they were able to show that  they  were
    divorced, widowed, single or separated; that they had no one but  their
    relatives in the UK to whom they could turn for financial support;  and
    that they would be accommodated and maintained adequately upon arrival.




30. On 9 July 2012, the Secretary of State made extensive  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  Amongst those changes was the  replacement  of  the
    ADR provisions in Part 8 of the Rules by new provisions which are to be
    found in  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  substantive
    requirements for entry clearance as an Adult Dependent Relative are  to
    be found at 'sections' EC-DR to D-ECDR of  that  appendix.   As  is  so
    often the case, the contentious requirements in this appeal are  to  be
    found at E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5, which provide as follows:


         E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-

         a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who
            can reasonably provide it; or


         (b) it is not affordable.


31. Appendix FM-SE contains 'the  specified  evidence  applicants  need  to
    provide to meet the requirements of rules contained  in  Appendix  FM'.
    Paragraphs 33-37 relate to ADRs.  The two relevant  paragraphs  are  as
    follows (the word 'Independent' having been added to both paragraphs by
    an amendment made on 6 April 2014):


         34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability, the
         applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:




           (a) Independent medical evidence that the applicant's physical
             or mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday
             tasks; and


           (b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.


         35. Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with
         the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to
         obtain the required level of care in the country where they are
         living should be from:


           (a) a central or local health authority;


           (b) a local authority; or


           (c) a doctor or other health professional.

Authorities

32.  These  provisions  have  been  considered  in  two  Court  of   Appeal
    authorities.  In R (Britcits) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368; [2017] 1  WLR
    3345, a court comprising the Master of the Rolls, Davis LJ and Sales LJ
    (as he then was)  held  that  the  ADR  Rules  were  not  ultra  vires,
    unreasonable or contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  In  so  holding,  however,
    the Master of  the  Rolls  (with  whom  Davis  and  Sales  LJJ  agreed)
    emphasised the correctness of a point which had been  made  by  counsel
    for the SSHD, which was that 'the provision of care in the home country
    must be reasonable both from the perspective of the  provider  and  the
    perspective of the applicant, and the standard of  such  care  must  be
    what is required for that particular applicant': [59].  The  Master  of
    the Rolls expressed some concern that insufficient attention might have
    been paid to such considerations in the past.  The purpose of  the  new
    Rules was said to be twofold: to reduce the burden on the taxpayer  for
    the provision of health and other services to ADRs; and to ensure  that
    those whose needs could only be met  in  the  UK  are  granted  settled
    status and access to those services: [58].

33. In Ribeli v ECO (Pretoria) [2018] EWCA Civ 611, it was  submitted  that
    the Upper Tribunal had erred in law in  dismissing  the  appeal  of  Ms
    Ribeli against the refusal of entry clearance as an ADR.  She  suffered
    from degenerative back disease,  osteoarthritis  and  fibromyalgia  and
    wished to join her daughter in the UK.  The court held that  the  Upper
    Tribunal judge had been correct to find that the decision  of  the  FtT
    was vitiated by legal error, in that it had  been  wrong,  firstly,  to
    dismiss the ECO's concern about  the  absence  of  evidence  about  how
    exactly  the  appellant  was  managing  on  a  day-to-day  basis;  and,
    secondly, there was no independent  evidence  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to obtain the required level of care in South Africa.   Nor  had
    the Upper Tribunal judge erred in proceeding to  consider  and  dismiss
    the appeal on the merits.  The rules were rigorous  and  demanding  and
    what was crucial was the appellant's physical needs.  The UT  had  been
    entitled to conclude that the evidence was  insufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  There was no error of law  in  finding  that  the
    Rules were not  met,  or  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate in Article 8 ECHR terms.  Before leaving Ribeli, I should
    mention Mr Symes' particular reliance on what  was  said  by  Singh  LJ
    (with whom Hallett LJ agreed) at [47].  In that paragraph, he  endorsed
    a submission made by counsel for the appellant, 'that there can be such
    a thing as unmet needs; the fact that a person's needs  are  not  being
    met does not mean that they do not have those needs'.

Analysis

34. The short answer to Mr Symes' concise submissions on  the  first  three
    grounds is as follows.  Despite the extensive evidence before the  FtT,
    the appellant did not adduce evidence which satisfied the rigorous  and
    demanding requirements of paragraphs 34 and 35 of Appendix  FM-SE,  and
    the judge was correct to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  With that summary of my conclusions, I  turn  to  consider  the
    individual grounds.


35. Mr Symes criticises the judge for overlooking material  evidence  which
    tended to show that the appellant was in  need  of  long-term  personal
    care or would shortly be in such need.  The point he  makes  about  the
    appellant requiring knee surgery particularly impressed  the  judge  of
    the FtT who granted permission.  Mr Symes also submits that  the  judge
    ignored evidence from the sponsor and  his  family  members  about  the
    appellant's infirmity.

36. The medical evidence in support of the first  of  these  complaints  is
    extremely thin and it is unsurprising that the judge did not focus upon
    it.  The high point of Mr Symes' case in this regard is  a  handwritten
    note from a Dr Bukhari which records, as I have noted above,  that  the
    applicant has  'pain  both  knees'  and  that  she  had  been  'advised
    surgery'.  This gives no indication of the extent  of  the  appellant's
    pain or, more importantly, the  extent  of  any  physical  debilitation
    caused by it; that being the focus of the Rule.  Nor does it  give  any
    indication of how urgently the surgery should  take  place.   There  is
    obviously a world of difference between a doctor  advising  that  there
    must be urgent surgery and a doctor  advising  that  surgery  would  be
    advisable in the future to avoid further deterioration.

37. Mr Symes understandably places particular emphasis upon what  was  said
    by the sponsor and the relatives in the UK  regarding  the  appellant's
    ability to manage on her own, and the difficulties  with  her  eyesight
    and her mobility.  As far as the rigorous and demanding requirements of
    the Immigration Rules are concerned, however, this evidence is not able
    to progress the appellant's case.  What was required was evidence  from
    an independent medical professional that the  applicant's  physical  or
    mental condition means that she cannot  perform  everyday  tasks.   The
    evidence from Dr Bukhari did not satisfy that requirement.  Nor did the
    equally brief handwritten note from an unidentified practitioner at the
    Eye Care Hospital in Rawalpindi.  This notes  that  the  appellant  has
    optic  neuropathy  in  both  eyes  and  that  she  has  'difficulty  in
    performing daily activities' and that she 'needs supervision'.   Again,
    there is a wholesale absence of detail.  What are the daily  activities
    concerned and to what extent is there a difficulty?  Is  the  appellant
    unable to perform everyday tasks to the extent that she  requires  long
    term personal care or is it merely necessary for someone to check up on
    her every few days?


38. It was quite properly accepted by Mr Symes that  the  medical  evidence
    which was before the ECO was insufficient to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  Before the judge, therefore,  he  relied  on
    additional evidence in the form of  the  rather  longer  note  from  Dr
    Kharal.  Like the judge, I have reproduced that  note  in  full  above.
    This also fell short of satisfying the requirements  of  paragraph  34,
    however.  Dr Kharal recommended 'full social and Family care';  he  did
    not state that the appellant required long-term personal  care  because
    she was unable to perform everyday  tasks.   Mr  Symes  relied  on  the
    assertion in  Dr  Kharal's  note  that  the  appellant  'forgets  about
    injecting correct insulin dose and often repeated injections results in
    hypoglycaemic unconsciousness'.   The  first  part  of  that  statement
    appears to be based on what the appellant told Dr Kharal.   It  is  not
    clear what the second part of the statement means.  It appears to be  a
    statement made in the abstract,  about  the  possible  consequences  of
    erroneous insulin administration, and it does  not  appear  to  suggest
    that the appellant has made such an error with the result that she  had
    fallen  unconscious.   As  Mr  Symes  confirmed  at  the  end  of   his
    submissions, and as the judge held  at  [79],  there  was  no  evidence
    before  the  FtT  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had  ever   fallen
    unconscious for this reason.


39. The judge was entitled to draw on the fact that the appellant has  been
    living on her own since her husband passed away in 2017.  She was still
    attending her medical appointments, as he noted at [78], and the rather
    'hyperbolic' statements made by Dr Kharal in his note ("to avoid  major
    loss to her life") were not supported by the fact that there  had  been
    no serious incidents whilst the appellant was caring for herself.  This
    was not a case of 'unmet need', as Mr Symes submits with  reference  to
    Ribeli; it was a case where the sea of evidence before  the  judge  was
    legitimately found not to establish need to the extent suggested in the
    family's witness statements.  Be that as it may, the  gravamen  of  the
    judge's conclusion is clear  from  [81]:  he  considered  that  he  was
    obliged to find that the appellant did not require long  term  personal
    care because she had not adduced the requisite evidence.  That was  the
    only proper conclusion which was open to the judge, given  the  limited
    and unsatisfactory medical evidence before him.

40. Nor do I accept that the judge erred in his evaluation of  Dr  Kharal's
    note. He was entitled to adopt the Presenting Officer's description  of
    that note as being 'hyperbolic' in places and it is  not  correct  that
    the judge was not cognisant of the lengthy statements which  were  made
    by the family members.  He considered the contents of those  statements
    at various stages of his decision and he was not required  to  rehearse
    them in greater detail in his analysis.  The judge's statement at  [80]
    of his decision - that Dr Kharal's evidence was based upon what he  had
    been told by the appellant - was open to him  when  read  alongside  Dr
    Kharal's note.  It is not clear why he  said  that  the  appellant  had
    'poorly treated' diabetes or gout, and whether that was based on  tests
    undertaken by him or the appellant's word.  The second paragraph begins
    by recording what the appellant had told Dr Kharal but Mr  Symes  notes
    that he had 'observed' that the appellant was 'very depressed'  but  it
    is not clear whether this was a formal diagnosis of depression and,  if
    so, whether that diagnosis had been made by Dr Kharal or was more long-
    standing.  The statement made thereafter, about  wrongly  administering
    insulin, was unclear for the reasons I have set out.


41. The judge was entitled, given the deficiencies in the evidence provided
    by Dr Kharal and the other practitioners, to  find  that  the  evidence
    presented was insufficient to show that the  appellant  required  long-
    term personal care in the manner prescribed by paragraph 34 of Appendix
    FM-SE.  The first two grounds disclose no error of law in  the  judge's
    conclusions.

42. Ground three may be disposed of more briefly.  Mr Symes  contends  that
    the judge overlooked a raft of evidence which tended  to  suggest  that
    the appellant could not receive the  care  she  required  in  Pakistan.
    There was extensive evidence,  from  a  range  of  sources,  about  the
    inadequacy of the care which might be available in Pakistan.  There was
    no  evidence  which  began  to  address  the  specific  requirement  in
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE, however. Insofar as the judge might  be
    said to have  failed  to  examine  the  evidence  from  the  Edhi  Care
    Foundation, therefore, he was not required to do so; the requirement in
    paragraph 35 was crystal clear; the rigorous and demanding nature of it
    was underlined in Ribeli; and there was no  independent  evidence  from
    one of the sources identified in  that  paragraph  that  the  appellant
    could not receive adequate care in her country of origin.

43. Ultimately, as I stated at the outset of my analysis, this  was  not  a
    case which could properly succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    medical evidence fell short of satisfying paragraph 34 of Appendix  FM-
    SE and there was simply no specified evidence  which  began  to  engage
    with paragraph 35.

44. In relation to the  grounds  of  appeal  which  focus  on  the  judge's
    assessment outside the Immigration Rules, I also consider there  to  be
    no material  legal  error  in  that  analysis.   By  ground  four,  the
    appellant criticises the judge for overlooking evidence  about  Aisha's
    mental health and her ability to  care  for  her  son  because  she  is
    worrying about her mother all the time.  But that evidence was recorded
    by the judge at [56]-[57] and there is  no  reason  to  think  that  he
    overlooked it when he came  to  make  his  assessment,  which  included
    consideration of s55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009, at [85]-[89] of this careful decision.  There was, in any  event,
    nothing before the judge to suggest that the  consequences  of  refusal
    would be so detrimental to the family in the  UK  as  to  overcome  the
    public policy decision which underpinned the change to  the  Rules,  as
    explained in Britcits.  This was certainly not a case in which it could
    properly  be  said  that  the  best  interests  of  a   child   pressed
    overwhelmingly in support of a grandparent's admission.

45. By ground five, Mr Symes  submits  that  there  were  further  material
    considerations which were overlooked by the judge  in  considering  the
    proportionality of the appellant's  continued  exclusion.    The  point
    which he particularly relied upon in his oral submissions was the  fact
    that the Rules changed in 2012,  whereas  the  family  had  decided  to
    migrate to the UK long before that.  Mr Jarvis's submission in response
    was extremely simple and blunt: the respondent is  entitled  to  change
    the Rules.  That must be correct: the Rules do not create vested rights
    which cannot be taken  away  at  a  later  stage.   The  respondent  is
    entitled to change the Rules and to decide applications on the basis of
    the Rules in force at the date of decision: Odelola [2009] 1 WLR  1230.
    The sponsoring family were never given a clear and unequivocal  promise
    devoid of relevant qualification that paragraph 317 would remain as  it
    was in perpetuity.  Mr Imtiaz came to the UK in 1997.  Aisha joined him
    in 2002, at which point the appellant was a married woman of  48.   She
    would not have met the Rules at that stage.  The Rules changed in 2012,
    at which stage she was still a married woman under the  age  of  65.  I
    cannot see how the change in the Rules was  remotely  relevant  to  the
    assessment of proportionality in such a case.


46. In his grounds, Mr Symes also made reference to the evidence before the
    FtT which showed, or was said to show, that it is culturally taboo  for
    widows in Pakistan to rely on external support.  Even if the  appellant
    could not tick all of the evidential boxes presented by Appendix FM-SE,
    he submits, this was highly relevant to  the  situation  in  which  she
    found  herself  in  Pakistan.   There  are  two  problems   with   this
    submission.  The first is that the judge was not  prepared  to  accept,
    for good and proper reason, that the appellant was in need  of  support
    to the extent suggested.  The second is that the concerns expressed  in
    that regard in the sponsor's statement do not appear to be supported by
    the other evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle.  Mr  Symes  cites  the
    entirety of a report by the British Council entitled 'Moving  from  the
    Margins' but I cannot find a statement within it which suggests that it
    is taboo for  elderly  widows  to  rely  on  external  support,  as  is
    suggested at [16] of the grounds.  The section from that  report  which
    is cited at [25] of Mr Symes' written submissions suggests  (as  is,  I
    think, uncontroversial) that the expectation is that children will look
    after their elderly parents so as to 'repay' the older generation.  But
    that does not go to show that it is positively  taboo  for  an  elderly
    widow to seek or to receive support from outside the family.


47. For all of these  reasons,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  judge  erred
    materially in law in his decision, which shall stand.






Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  FtT  shall
stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            11 February 2020





















