
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09053/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2019                           |On 27 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            DAVE SYLVESTER BRANN

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Shaw, instructed by TMC solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 14 April 1974 and is a  citizen  of
    Antigua and Barbuda. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7 May 2019  refusing
    his human rights claim following the  making  of  a  deportation  order
    under Section 32(5) of the Borders Act 2007. The  First-tier  Tribunal,
    in a decision promulgated on 15 August  2019,  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. At the initial hearing at Birmingham on 22 November 2019, both  parties
    agreed that the judge had erred in law by finding  that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of paragraph 399A of HC 395 (as amended). Although
    he made no specific finding in respect of paragraph 399A(a), the  judge
    found that the appellant met the requirements of  the  paragraph.  That
    finding was wrong because, in the light of SC (Jamaica) EWCA  Civ  2112
    [69], the appellant had not lived 'most of  his  life'  in  the  United
    Kingdom because he had not lived here for more than half of his life.

 3. The judge's error led  to  him  to  find  at  [17]  that,  because  the
    requirement  in  the  rules  was  met,  there  was  no  need  for   him
    specifically to consider  very  compelling  circumstances  which  might
    entitle the appellant to leave under Article 8 outside the  rules.  Had
    he been aware that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399A, then it seems very likely that  the  judge  would  have
    proceeded to address the issue  of  very  compelling  circumstances.  I
    notified the representatives in court that I considered this to  be  an
    unusual case of an 'incomplete,' as opposed to a flawed,  decision  and
    that the best course of action was for the Upper Tribunal to set  aside
    the decision, preserve all the findings, save for that  in  respect  of
    paragraph 399A and return the appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge  D  S
    Borsada for him to consider the appeal on the basis of very  compelling
    circumstances only. Both parties may adduce further  evidence  provided
    copies of any documentary evidence, including witness  statements,  are
    sent to the other party and filed at the Upper Tribunal no less than 10
    clear days prior to the First-tier Tribunal hearing.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  All  of  the
    findings of fact are preserved save for the finding that the  appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph 399A of HC 395  (as  amended).  The
    appeal is returned to First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Borsada  for  him  to
    remake the decision following a hearing.






Signed                              Date 22 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

