
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09700/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd November 2018  On 31st December 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   M G K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms C Bexson, Counsel, instructed by Mordi and Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1.     Although this is the Secretary of State's appeal, for convenience
      I will refer hereinafter to the parties as they were in the First-tier
      Tribunal.

   2.     The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ripley who, in a decision
      promulgated on 12th September 2018, allowed the appellant's appeal on
      human rights grounds.

   3.     The essential facts are uncontentious. The appellant is a Nigerian
      child born on 11 June 2012. He has major health issues, including
      cerebral palsy; hydrocephalus, epilepsy and global developmental
      delay.

   4.     On 1 November 2014 his mother brought him to the United Kingdom
      along with his sister, then aged 11, to visit his father. His father
      was seriously ill and subsequently died on 5 December 2014. The judge
      accepted that when the family came to the United Kingdom it was not
      for the purpose of accessing treatment but was too visit the
      appellant's terminally sick father.

   5.     Three weeks after arrival the appellant suffered seizures and was
      admitted to hospital as an emergency. A shunt fitted in Nigeria to
      relieve the pressure on his brain was replaced and he was discharged.

   6.     The family remained and on 9 July 2015 made a human rights claim,
      raising articles 3 and 8, primarily based upon the appellant's health.
      This was refused on 15 August 2017 and the appeal against that
      decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ripley.

   7.     By the time of the hearing the appellant's condition had
      stabilised and he was able to have reconstructive surgery upon his
      hips. The evidence was that there were no active concerns but he would
      require ongoing review. At hearing it was stated most individuals with
      shunts would require a 2nd operation during their lifetime. The judge
      concluded he may well require life-saving intervention in the future.

   8.     The judge had rejected the claim made by the appellant's mother of
      a falling out with family members in Nigeria or that they would not be
      able to assist. The judge also rejected her claim that her own family
      were destitute. The judge was not satisfied that antiepileptic
      medication was unavailable in Nigeria.

   9.     The judge referred to the relevant case law in medical cases and
      concluded that it had not been established that his return would
      breach article 3. At hearing I was referred to AM (Zimbabwe) & Anor v
      The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64. The
      Court of Appeal confirmed that   judges below the Supreme Court were
      bound by the decision of the House of Lords in N v United Kingdom. In
      relation to article 8 the judge accepted he had established a private
      life bearing in mind the engagement with the medical services here.
      The judge also found that he had no right to remain under the
      immigration rules.

  10.  At paragraph 26 the judge referred to the public interest involved,
      and the factors in section 117 B. The judge found because of his
      disabilities he was going to have difficulty integrating. His medical
      needs would be a significant burden on the National Health Service and
      the Department of Education. The judge placed considerable weight on
      this cost. The judge also recorded that further to section 117 B(4),
      little weight to be placed upon his private life as it had been
      established primarily when his residence here was not lawful. The
      judge found that whilst the evidence about the length of overstaying
      was unclear it was no more than a matter of months before the
      application was made.

  11. At paragraph 27 the judge correctly referred to the need to consider
      the appellant's best interests before going on to consider the
      proportionality of the decision. The judge pointed out the intention
      would be for the appellant to be returned to Nigeria along with his
      mother and sister and there was a possibility that relationships with
      his extended family there could develop.

  12. The judge described his disabilities as profound (para 28) and that he
      would require a plethora of experts to assist. Without help he was
      likely to be confined to a life with minimal meaningful engagement
      beyond that of his family.  The judge was not satisfied he would be
      able to access any educational facilities in Nigeria because of his
      disabilities. The judge also referred to the risk to his life if there
      were an exacerbation of his hydrocephaly, noting surgical care was
      very expensive in Nigeria. The judge found the family members there
      may be able to provide for the family's basic expenses and medication.
      However, they would be unable to meet the costs of surgery or the
      specialised services required. At paragraph 32 the judge concluded it
      was not in the appellant's best interest to leave the United Kingdom.

  13.  In terms of the overall proportionality of the decision the judge
      highlighted the likely future expense of caring for and educating the
      appellant given his complex needs. The judge saw this as a weighty
      factor in favour of removal. There was no suggestion of any
      criminality or illegal working on the part of the appellant's mother.

  14. In the final paragraph, paragraph 34, the judge refers to weighing all
      of the factors and concluded, notwithstanding the adverse
      considerations in section 117B, the appellant's removal would be
      disproportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

  15. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted to the
      Secretary of State on the basis the judge failed to have regard to the
      public interest factors set out in section 117 B. Whilst the judge set
      out the factors relating to those considerations it was arguable that
      the findings in paragraph 34 failed to apply those considerations in a
      meaningful balancing exercise.

  16. At hearing, Ms Kenny submitted that the judge gave inadequate reasons
      for allowing the appeal. She pointed out that the appellant's mother
      and brother were university educated and there was medical treatment
      available in Nigeria. She submitted that family life could continue in
      Nigeria and that the judge had failed to give reasons for allowing the
      appeal. Throughout, particularly leading up to paragraph 33, the judge
      emphasised the public interest factors involved. This suggested the
      appeal would be dismissed and then in the final paragraph the judged
      apparently changed by allowing the appeal. There was no suggestion
      that there was any typographical error but arguably the judge had
      given no explanation for the conclusion that the appeal should be
      allowed.

  17. Ms Kenny submitted that the judge had obviously had regard to the
      public interest considerations. She submitted this can be seen at
      paragraphs 25 and 26, with the judge setting out the relevant factors
      beginning with the language issue and the financial considerations.
      Similar considerations are referred to at paragraphs 33 and 34 in
      relation to the proportionality question. Ms Kenny argued that the
      public interest was very much prevalent in the judge's reasoning and
      so the respondent was wrong to contend the judge did not consider
      these. She submitted that the findings made were open to the judge.

  18.  She submitted that this was a very compelling case involving a child
      who could not walk or talk and the judge clearly considered with care
      the medical evidence. The judge had found that the medical treatment
      formed part of the appellant's private life and to interrupt this
      would have serious implications for his future development. The judge
      had referred to the decision in EA (article 8) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
      00315 and Ms Kenny submitted that the judge had concluded the
      appellant's disabilities would seriously impede his ability to adapt
      to life in Nigeria despite his young age.

  19. I was referred to paragraph 32 and 34 as examples of the judge
      balancing the child's best interests with the general public interest
      considerations. The judge acknowledges the cost considerations in
      caring for the appellant in the United Kingdom. Finally, she submitted
      that the grounds amounted to an attempt to reargue the case by the
      Secretary of State. Ms Kenny acknowledged that had the judge only
      looked at the medical evidence and what was best for the appellant
      without having regard to the public interest considerations this would
      have been an error of law.

Consideration

  20. There are a compelling compassionate circumstances in this appeal
      given the appellant's health. The child has a global developmental
      delay. He suffers from epilepsy. He has cerebral palsy. He has
      hydrocephalus which has require the fitting of a shunt in Nigeria and
      further surgery there. Shortly after arrival in the United Kingdom he
      was experiencing seizures and further surgery was carried out relating
      to the shunt. The medical evidence indicated that the appellant could
      develop a need for further surgery in relation to the shunt. This
      could present as a medical emergency. The appellant at the time of
      hearing had just had surgery on his hips. His condition now is
      relatively stable but the future is uncertain.

  21. Basic humanity would invoke sympathy for the appellant. However, as Ms
      Kenny acknowledges, it would have been an error in law for the appeal
      to have been allowed on this basis.

  22. The permission application was grounded upon the judge, in allowing
      the appeal, not applying the public interest considerations in section
      117 B. It clearly would be wrong to say the judge did not have regard
      to those public interest considerations. The cited decision of Dube
      (ss 117 A -D) [2015] UKUT 00090 highlights that there is a statutory
      obligation upon judges who have regard to the specific considerations
      in the legislation. The Secretary of State is not suggesting the judge
      did not bear in mind those considerations. Rather, the challenge is
      that the judge, having referred to them, failed to properly apply
      them.

  23. On an initial reading the decision appears to be leading up to a
      dismissal of the appeal. There is then an apparent flip in the final
      paragraph when the appeal is allowed. Having considered the decision
      in detail however it is my conclusion this is a misreading of the
      decision. Rather, I find it to be a carefully prepared and nuanced
      decision. The judge sets out the background and makes sustainable
      findings on contentious areas.

  24. The first finding of significance is that the family did not come here
      to benefit from medical treatment. Rather, the judge finds the reason
      the family came here was to visit the appellant's father who was dying
      with cancer. In the course of the hearing it was explained that he was
      here lawfully under European Treaty provisions as an extended family
      member of a relative. He was working here lawfully and sending money
      home to his family.

  25. The judge rejects the claim made by the appellant's mother that her
      late husband's family are unsupportive and in fact are now blaming her
      for his death. The judge also rejected the claim that her family in
      Nigeria were impoverished. The judge noted that the appellant's mother
      had been educated to university level. The judge acknowledged that in
      the normal course the starting point in considering the best interests
      of the children is that they be removed with their parent if the
      parent is not entitled to remain. But for the appellant's health
      issues this is a conclusion which could have been anticipated.

  26. The judge considered carefully the appellant's medical condition. The
      judge concluded that he may well require life-saving intervention in
      the future but there was no reason to expect this would be necessary
      in the short term. The judge found that there would be medical
      treatment available in Nigeria albeit at a cost. Specifically the
      judge found there would be antiepileptic medication. The judge found
      that the medical condition was not such as would satisfy the high
      threshold to succeed under article 3, bearing in mind that his
      condition was currently stable.

  27. The judge acknowledged that the appellant had not been in the United
      Kingdom for very long. However in the circumstance, particularly in
      light of the medical treatment he had received here, article 8 in
      relation to his private life was engaged. No challenge was made to
      this conclusion.

  28. The judge then correctly pointed out in paragraph 27 that the
      appellant's best interests had to be considered before engaging in the
      proportionality exercise. The judge concluded that if the appellant
      were returned to Nigeria then he would not receive the expert
      treatment he has been receiving here and that he would make very
      little progress. The likelihood was that he would be confined to a
      life with minimal meaningful engagement beyond that with his immediate
      family. He would not be able to participate in mainstream schooling.
      Even if there were special schooling available in Nigeria it was
      unlikely the appellant could avail of this given the distance and
      cost.

  29. In the past his father had been able to pay for his medical treatment
      in Nigeria. The judge found that neither his paternal or maternal
      family in Nigeria would have access to the required level of funds to
      provide for the necessary medical treatment. Whilst they could provide
      for his basic needs they could not support him beyond this. The judge
      also pointed out that given his vulnerability his return would have
      serious adverse effects on his continued development. He would find it
      harder to adapt than other children who enjoy good health.

  30. Perhaps unsurprisingly the judge concluded the child's best interests
      were to remain in the United Kingdom. The judge also referred to the
      progress his sister was making here. Clearly therefore that the judge
      correctly assessed at the outset where his best interests lay and made
      a finding which was clearly sustainable.

  31. The judge then correctly went on to consider the wider considerations.
      The judge made the basic point that a comparison of the medical
      treatment available in Nigeria as opposed to that available in the
      United Kingdom was not the issue. The judge went through the factors
      in section 117 B. In summary those factors weighed against the
      appellant. The judge noted that he is unable to speak and will face
      difficulties integrating. He is not financially independent. The judge
      emphasised the significant financial burden his needs would present on
      the National Health Service and the Department of Education. The judge
      describes these as considerable factors to weigh in the consideration
      of the public interest. He is not a qualifying child and his private
      life was established here during a period of on lawful residence
      albeit comparatively short.

  32. The judge is required to balance those public interests against the
      specific interests of the appellant in considering whether the
      decision is proportionate. In this appeal the judge has clearly
      acknowledged the significant cost the appellant will be upon the
      public purse if he were allowed to remain. The judge does not ignore
      the significant public interest in his removal on this basis. At
      paragraph 34 the judge then steps back and weighs all the issues for
      and against his removal. The judge concluded his removal would be
      disproportionate. Paragraph 34 is brief but must be read in the
      context of the decision as a whole. The judge has set out all the
      factors in the balancing exercise in the preceding paragraphs. The
      judge has undoubtedly shown compassion towards the appellant and his
      family and the outcome could be considered generous. Nevertheless, the
      judge has not disregarded the public interest considerations and the
      conclusion was one open to the judge. Consequently, I find no material
      error of law established.

Decision

No material error of law is established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Ripley. Consequently, that decision allowing the appeal
shall stand.

Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
19 December 2018

