
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09447/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 27 September 2018                        |On : 10 October 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                   SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sh
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revill, instructed by D J Webb & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  SH's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse his human rights claim  and
    to refuse to revoke a deportation order previously made against him.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, we shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent  and  SH  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Immigration History

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 23 June  1973.  He  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 4 June 1999 using an alias,  having  been
    refused entry and returned to Jamaica in December 1998. He was  granted
    leave to enter until 3  December  1999  and  was  subsequently  granted
    further leave as a student until 31 January 2001. He  left  the  UK  at
    some point and then returned on 7 July 2001 and was  granted  temporary
    admission, but failed to report and was listed as an absconder.

 4. On 13 March 2002 the  appellant  was  convicted,  under  an  alias,  of
    possessing a controlled drug with intent to  supply  -  Class  A  Crack
    Cocaine and possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply -  Class
    A Heroin and was sentenced to  two  years  for  each  offence,  running
    concurrently. On 9 October 2006 the appellant was  encountered  by  the
    police under the same alias, and served with a liability to removal  as
    an overstayer. On 15 January 2008 the appellant was convicted under the
    same alias of using a vehicle whilst uninsured and he served one day in
    detention. On 26 February 2008 he was convicted under the same alias of
    possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply -  Class  A  Cocaine
    and possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply - Class A Heroin
    and was sentenced to four years' imprisonment for each offence, running
    concurrently. On 16 May 2008 the appellant submitted an application  to
    return to Jamaica under the Assisted Voluntary Returns  Scheme.  On  17
    February 2009 he was served with liability to automatic deportation and
    on 23 February 2009 was made the subject of a deportation  order  under
    his alias. He was deported to Jamaica on 11 March 2009 under the  Early
    Removals Scheme.

 5. On 5  April  2010  the  appellant  was  encountered  at  Ramsgate  Port
    attempting to enter the UK on a false passport in another alias and was
    detained. At an interview he admitted his true identity to be SH. As he
    had returned to the UK in breach of the conditions of his early release
    he was recalled to  prison,  issued  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    automatic deportation and deported to Jamaica again on 3 January 2011.

 6. On 11 January 2015 the  appellant  was  encountered  when  arrested  by
    police on suspicion of drink driving and theft. He was  issued  with  a
    notice of liability to administrative removal and admitted,  during  an
    interview, to have re-entered the UK clandestinely in March 2012. On 23
    April 2015 the appellant was issued  with  a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds and he returned the statement requesting leave to remain on the
    basis of his relationship with his British child.

 7. On 10 February 2016  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for  a
    derivative residence card as the primary carer of  a  British  citizen.
    That application was refused  together  with  a  decision  made  on  11
    October 2016 to refuse his human rights claim.  On  26  June  2017  the
    appellant made further submissions and the decision of 11 October  2016
    was withdrawn and re-made on 16 August 2017.

 8. In that decision the respondent considered the appellant's human rights
    claim which was made on the basis of his relationship with his  partner
    DG, his son D, born on 21 December 2005, and another child T,  both  of
    whom were the sons of his former partner CO. The respondent  considered
    that paragraph 399D of the immigration rules applied, as the  appellant
    had entered the UK in breach of a deportation order, and that he  could
    not, therefore, benefit from the exceptions in paragraph 399  and  399A
    and had to  meet  the  same  test  as  in  paragraph  398(a),  of  very
    exceptional circumstances or very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the exceptions to deportation. The respondent did not accept that
    the appellant played a significant and meaningful role in his  son  D's
    life and did not accept that he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with him. The only evidence of any role he played  in  D's
    life consisted of an unsigned letter from his mother and a letter  from
    the child's school confirming that he  collected  him  from  school  on
    occasions. The respondent noted from the appellant's application for  a
    derivative residence card that  his  son  lived  13  miles  away.   The
    respondent considered in any event that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant's son to live in Jamaica or for his son to remain  in
    the UK whilst he was deported. There was  no  independent  evidence  to
    show that CO required the appellant's support in raising D  because  of
    her other son, T's autism.  With  regard  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    partner DG, the respondent found there to be  no  evidence  of  such  a
    relationship  or  of  DG's  immigration  status  or  nationality.   The
    respondent found that the appellant  could  not,  therefore,  meet  the
    requirements in paragraph 399(a) or (b). The respondent considered that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements in paragraph 399A on  the
    basis of his private life as he had not been in  the  UK  lawfully  for
    most of his life, he was not socially and culturally integrated in  the
    UK and there would be no very significant obstacles to his  integration
    in  Jamaica.  The  respondent  considered  that  there  were  no   very
    compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation
    and that his deportation would not breach his Article 8  human  rights.
    Consideration was given to the application to  revoke  the  deportation
    order under paragraph 390 of the immigration rules and it was concluded
    that the order should not be revoked.

The Appellant's Appeal

 9. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    in the First-tier Tribunal on  20  March  2018  by  Judge  Clarke.  The
    Tribunal heard from the appellant and his partner CO. He  rejected  the
    suggestion that T was the appellant's step-son, as  the  appellant  was
    not married to T's mother CO. The judge noted that the  appellant  also
    had a daughter, SH, who lived in the UK and was 22 years  of  age.  The
    judge considered the exceptions  to  deportation.  He  found  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A as  he  had
    not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, he  was  not
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK and  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to integration into life in  Jamaica.  The  judge
    noted that the appellant and CO did not cohabit and that the boys lived
    with her. He accepted that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with D and that it would be unduly harsh for  D  to  leave
    the UK and live with the appellant in Jamaica.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a level of contact with T, was involved in his day to day
    care but did not accept that he had  any  parental  responsibility  for
    him. The judge found that it was in the best interests of both boys for
    the appellant to remain involved in their lives and, on the basis  that
    the appellant played an integral part in the lives of  D  and  T,  that
    that  constituted  exceptional  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
    interest in the appellant's deportation. The judge concluded that there
    were very compelling reasons why the appellant should not  be  deported
    and allowed the appeal under the immigration rules and on human  rights
    grounds.

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the judge had failed to  assess  the  exceptionally
    high strength of the public interest in the  appellant's  removal  from
    the UK and that none of the factors  identified  in  the  determination
    amounted to very compelling or exceptional circumstances.  The  grounds
    asserted that the judge had failed to give clear reasons why any of the
    evidence regarding the appellant's claimed contact with his son  should
    be accepted. It was asserted further  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    identify any factors beyond the best interests of the  children  either
    within the rules or  exceptionally  outside  the  rules  to  allow  the
    appeal. The judge, although quoting the relevant immigration rules  and
    requirements, failed  to  then  apply  them  within  the  body  of  the
    determination rather than focussing on separate free-standing Article 8
    considerations in particular in relation to the best interests  of  the
    children.

11. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 17  July
    2018 on all grounds. The matter then came before us for a hearing.

Hearing and Submissions

12. Mr Wilding relied upon the grounds of appeal. He submitted  that  there
    were two main complaints about the judge's decision: a failure to apply
    the correct structured approach and a failure  to  weigh  and  properly
    recognise the public interest. In regard to the  first  complaint,  the
    judge's findings on the family life exceptions, from [86] onwards, were
    confusing. There was no reference  to  the  immigration  rules  and  no
    consideration of unduly harsh consequences for the appellant's child if
    separated from the  appellant.  The  judge  was  required  to  consider
    whether there were very compelling circumstances over and above such  a
    consideration and therefore the determination was incomplete. The judge
    found that the best interests  of  the  child  trumped  everything  and
    failed to carry out a full assessment. This was far from being a unique
    case. There was no evidence from professional or other organisations as
    to the appellant's  role  with  the  children,  aside  from  a  passing
    reference from the  school  about  him  collecting  D  from  school  on
    occasions. The judge failed to recognise  that  the  immigration  rules
    were all-encompassing and erred in his reliance  on  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.
    In regard to the second complaint, the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
    weight to the public interest, considering it only in  the  context  of
    his findings on paragraph 399A, and made a surprising comment at  [104]
    as to the significant weight to  be  attached  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not  committed  further  criminal  offences  since  2007,
    whilst ignoring his entry to the UK on two occasions in breach  of  the
    deportation order, which was perverse.  The  judge  had  made  material
    errors of law and the decision should  be  set  aside  and  re-made  by
    dismissing the appeal.

13. Ms Revill submitted that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.  The grounds had not included any  challenge  on  the
    basis of a lack of findings on separation being unduly  harsh  and  the
    Tribunal therefore had no jurisdiction to consider that. In  any  event
    there was an implicit finding by the judge  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to be separated from the appellant.   The  judge
    did set out the importance of the  public  interest  and  it  could  be
    inferred  that  he  took  that  into  account  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise. Ms Revill accepted that the judge had erred in  his
    reference to SS (Congo), but submitted that that was not material.  The
    judge's findings did not meet the high  threshold  of  perversity.  The
    judge was entitled to accept the appellant's evidence as to the role he
    played with the children and to find that there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the unduly harsh test.

14. Mr Wilding reiterated the submissions previously made in response.

Legislative Framework

15. In so far as is material to this case, the relevant rules  relating  to
    deportation state:

    "Revocation of deportation order


    390. An application for revocation  of  a  deportation  order  will  be
    considered  in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
    following:


         (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;


         (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


         (iii)    the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
         of an effective immigration control;


         (iv) the interests of the applicant,  including  any  compassionate
         circumstances.


    390A.    Where paragraph  398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,  it
    will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public  interest  in
    maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by other factors."


    "Deportation and Article 8


    A398.    These rules apply where:


         (a)  a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


         (b)  a foreign  criminal  applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
         against him to be revoked.


    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and


         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or


         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case


                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and


                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or ..."


    399D.    Where a foreign criminal has  been  deported  and  enters  the
    United Kingdom in breach of a  deportation  order  enforcement  of  the
    deportation order is in the public interest  and  will  be  implemented
    unless there are very exceptional circumstances."


16.  In so far as is material, the relevant statutory  provisions  relating
    to deportation in section  117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 state as follows:

    "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.


    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-


         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-


         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


    (4)  Little weight should be given to-


         (a)  a private life, or


         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious..."


    "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
    criminals


    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
         C's life,


         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
         and


         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


    (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


    (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted."


Discussion and Findings

Error of Law

17. We  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the  judge's  decision  is
    materially flawed and we find merit in both of Mr Wilding's grounds  of
    challenge. Whilst Ms Revill submitted that it was not  open  to  us  to
    consider any error by the judge in relation to a lack  of  findings  on
    separation of the appellant and the children being  unduly  harsh  when
    that was not pleaded in the grounds, it seems to us that  [11]  of  the
    grounds makes it clear that there was such a  challenge.  Although  not
    expressed in terms, it is clear that, by referring  to  factors  beyond
    the best  interests  of  the  children  within  the  rules,  that  must
    necessarily include a challenge to the judge's  findings  on  paragraph
    399(a) and the question of undue harshness.

18. We agree with Mr Wilding that the judge made  no  specific  finding  on
    whether separation of the children from the appellant would  be  unduly
    harsh. At [95] he made a specific finding that it would be unduly harsh
    for D to move to Jamaica with  the  appellant,  but  he  made  no  such
    finding on the question of separation for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b). It could be inferred, we accept, that  he  made  initial
    and indirect findings on the matter by his comments  at  [101]  on  the
    importance of face to face contact and at [105] on the significant role
    the appellant played in  the  lives  of  both  boys.  However,  as  the
    respondent  properly  asserts,  the  judge's  focus  was  on  the  best
    interests of the boys and there is little else in his decision  by  way
    of a relevant assessment of "unduly harsh" beyond those best interests.
    Indeed at [110]  the  judge  commented  that  he  had  found  that  the
    appellant did not satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules and
    at [106] he skipped to the next stage  of  "exceptional  circumstances"
    and did so without any balancing of relevant matters, in effect finding
    that the boys' best interests trumped all other  matters  and  was  the
    entire answer.

19. In the circumstances it is plain that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    failing to follow the correct, structured approach, but in addition the
    findings that he made  in  following  his  own  approach  were  clearly
    contradictory and confusing and it is not  clear  how  he  reached  the
    conclusions that he did. At [87] the judge noted that the appellant did
    not live with D or the mother of the two boys and at [90]  he  referred
    to inconsistencies in the evidence of frequency of contact between  the
    appellant and D. At [91] he found that  the  appellant  and  the  boys'
    mother were trying to embellish their evidence.  At  [98]  he  observed
    that the appellant was not named in any of the documentary evidence  as
    an adult with any involvement in T's life and certainly not as  someone
    with parental responsibility for him. At [99] the judge was prepared to
    accept that there was a degree of contact between the appellant and  T,
    but only on the basis of  there  being  contact  between  him  and  his
    biological son D who lived with T. On the basis of such findings it  is
    difficult to see how the judge managed to achieve the significant  leap
    to the conclusion that the appellant's role in the boys' lives  was  so
    exceptional that it outweighed the public interest in his  deportation,
    let alone that separation would be unduly harsh. We have to agree  with
    Mr Wilding that that was bordering on perverse,  if  not  reaching  the
    very high threshold of perversity.

20. We also agree with Mr Wilding that the judge failed  to  weigh  in  and
    properly recognise the public interest factor when  considering  family
    life. At [73] and [74] the judge referred to  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's crimes and his disregard for the  rule  of  law  by  repeat
    offending and re-entering the UK in breach of the deportation order. He
    factored that into his assessment of private life under paragraph 399A,
    at [82]. However those considerations did not feature  at  all  in  the
    judge's assessment of family life from [86] onwards and he made only  a
    passing reference to the public interest in deportation cases at [106].
    Like Mr Wilding, we  find  the  judge's  observation  at  [104]  to  be
    surprising  and  again  bordering  on  perverse.  The  judge   attached
    significant weight to the fact that the  appellant  had  not  committed
    further criminal offences since 2007 and had not  involved  himself  in
    criminal activity in 10 years, yet he completely ignored the fact  that
    he had re-entered the UK in breach of  the  deportation  order  on  two
    occasions, that he had used a false passport in 2010 when  he  returned
    to the UK and that he was arrested in  January  2015.  Whether  or  not
    those incidents led to criminal convictions,  the  fact  remained  that
    they were significant matters which completely undermined  the  judge's
    assessment of weight at [104]. In the light of such significant  issues
    the judge's conclusion, that the circumstances  of  the  two  boys  was
    sufficient to  amount  to  exceptional  circumstances  outweighing  the
    public interest, lacks any proper basis and is simply unsustainable.

21. For all these reasons we find  that  the  judge  made  significant  and
    material errors of law in his decision and that  his  conclusions  with
    regard to family life under Article 8 cannot stand.

22.  As for the re-making of the decision, Mr Wilding asked that that could
    be undertaken on the basis of the evidence before us without  the  need
    for a further  hearing.  Ms  Revill  asked  that  there  should  be  an
    opportunity  for  further  oral  evidence  to  be  given.  However  she
    confirmed that there was no further documentary evidence and  that  the
    witnesses would adopt the statements previously made. In the absence of
    any indication that there was a change in circumstances, and given that
    there was no further documentary evidence to be  produced,  we  saw  no
    need for there to be a further hearing and we have therefore  proceeded
    to re-make the decision on the evidence before us, as  we  advised  the
    parties we would do in the event of us  setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

Re-making the Decision

23. In the light of our findings above there is little more that we need to
    add in re-making the decision as it is clear from  our  conclusions  on
    the error of law that the appellant's appeal must fail.

24. The appellant falls within paragraph 399D  of  the  immigration  rules,
    having entered the UK in breach of a deportation order previously  made
    against  him,  and  therefore  has  to  demonstrate  very   exceptional
    circumstances justifying  why  the  deportation  order  should  not  be
    enforced. The provisions in paragraphs 390 and 390A also apply  to  the
    appellant as his application has been considered as an  application  to
    revoke the deportation order and that in turn leads to a  consideration
    of paragraph 398. In light of the length of his sentence the  appellant
    cannot benefit from the exceptions in paragraphs 399 and 399A, and  has
    to  show  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the  those
    described in paragraph 399 and 399A. Accordingly, under  399D  and  398
    the appellant has to meet  an  equivalent  test  of  very  exceptional/
    compelling circumstances. In considering whether he  could  demonstrate
    such circumstances over above those  in  paragraph  399  and  399A  the
    starting point has to be a consideration of those paragraphs.

25. The First-tier Tribunal's findings on paragraph 399A have not been  the
    subject of a challenge and were properly made. They therefore stand.

26. With regard to paragraph 399(a) and a consideration of the children, we
    note the following unchallenged findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which we adopt: The boys do not live with the appellant but with  their
    mother. T is not the appellant's biological son or step-son, but is the
    son of his former partner CO. There  is  regular  contact  between  the
    appellant and both boys, albeit that the evidence in that regard is not
    consistent. The appellant has no parental responsibility for T  and  is
    not named in T's Education, Health and Care Plan (on the basis  of  his
    autism) as one of his  supporters,  but  D  is  named  as  one  of  his
    supporters.

27. We consider it clearly to be in the best  interests  of  both  boys  to
    remain living in the UK with their mother CO  and  we  accept  that  it
    would be in their best interests for the appellant to remain in the  UK
    to continue the level of contact they currently have.  We  also  accept
    that, for the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  [95],  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect D  to  relocate  to  Jamaica  with  his
    father. None of those findings are controversial.

28. However, turning to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) we do not  accept  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for D or T  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant. We take account of the fact that T is  not  the  appellant's
    child or step-son and that the appellant is not named  as  one  of  his
    supporters or a person with any parental responsibility  over  him.  We
    take account of the fact that the appellant and D do not live  together
    and that evidence of the level of contact between them is inconsistent.
    Even accepting the level of contact claimed, we note that the appellant
    has been in and out of D's  life  owing  to  his  previous  periods  of
    imprisonment and living in Jamaica following deportation. There  is  no
    independent evidence from  a  professional  about  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and D and the impact that separation
    would have upon him. Therefore, even though we accept that it would  be
    in D's best interests to have his father in the UK, his best  interests
    carry only limited weight. Balancing that weight against other factors,
    we consider that the significant public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation  far  outweighs  the   children's   best   interests   when
    considering the nature and seriousness of the appellant's offending and
    his appalling immigration  history.  We  consider  that  the  appellant
    cannot meet the requirements in paragraph 399(a).

29. The focus  of  the  evidence  and  the  appellant's  case  was  on  his
    relationship with the two children and, in light  of  our  findings  on
    paragraph 399(a), there is in  reality  nothing  further  to  consider.
    There is  no  evidence  at  all  to  demonstrate  anything  approaching
    compelling or exceptional circumstances, let alone very  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances,  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation. Accordingly the appellant is  unable  to  meet
    the requirements in paragraph 398 to demonstrate that  his  deportation
    would  be  in  breach  of  Article  8.  His  deportation  is   entirely
    proportionate and there are no  compassionate  or  other  circumstances
    justifying revocation of the deportation order under paragraph 390  and
    390A of the immigration rules. The appellant has failed  to  show  that
    paragraph 399D does not apply to him. His deportation is plainly in the
    public interest and his appeal against the refusal of his human  rights
    claim is dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION

30. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. We re-
    make the decision by dismissing SH's appeal.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014. We continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed:  [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 4 October 2018
