
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09729/2018
                                                               HU/09730/2018
                                                               HU/09732/2018
                                                               HU/09733/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th February 2019                |On 11th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                          mrs d t (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         Mr V C j (SECOND APPELLANT)
                         miss d v (THIRD APPELLANT)
                          Mr d v (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


                          Anonymity Direction Made

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellants.  No  report  of
these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   them.   This
direction applies to both the appellants  and  to  the  respondent  and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
I make this order because the second and third appellants minors.
The parties are at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


1.   These are  linked  appeals.   The  first  appellant  was  born  on  1st
    December 1980, the second appellant on 14th April  1978  and  they  are
    married.  The third and fourth dependants are their children, the third
    appellant was born on 31st October 2006 and is therefore now  currently
    12 and the fourth appellant was born  on  14th  December  2010  and  is
    therefore currently 8.  All are citizens of India.

2.   The first named appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  1st  April
    2009 with a student visit visa valid from 16th February  2009  to  31st
    July 2012.  His dependent spouse the second appellant arrived  on  11th
    November 2009 with leave as a dependant of the first  named  appellant.
    On 31st July 2012 the first named appellant applied for  further  leave
    to remain as a student and this was refused with a right of  appeal  on
    7th March 2013.  The second named appellant's application  was  refused
    in line with the first named appellant.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on
    29th May 2013.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted
    on 1st July 2013 but the Upper Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  on  23rd
    September that year.  Permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  was
    refused by the Upper Tribunal on 2nd May  2014  and  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal itself on 5th February 2015.  On 23rd February  2015  the  first
    named appellant applied for leave to remain outside  the  Rules.   This
    was refused and certified as unfounded with an out of country right  of
    appeal on 28th May 2015.   I  should  have  mentioned  that  the  third
    appellant also  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  11th  November  2009
    presumably accompanying her mother, the second named appellant.

3.   On 17th April 2018 a decision was made by the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse the appellants' applications and they appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  P  W
    Harris at Hatton Cross on 8th November 2018.  He noted that  the  third
    appellant was at that time 11 years of age and had spent just  under  9
    years in the United Kingdom.  On the  basis  of  oral  and  documentary
    evidence before him he found that she had spent the formative years  of
    her life in this country during which time she had established ties and
    links identified as significant in MA (Pakistan).   He  concluded  that
    the appellant satisfied paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and  succeeded  in  the
    appeal.  He went on to allow the  appeals  of  the  first,  second  and
    fourth appellants.  The judge noted at paragraphs 19  to  22  that  the
    third appellant had been brought up as Roman Catholic and was satisfied
    that there were Catholic churches and communities in India which  would
    be open to the third appellant to join.  He noted that  the  first  and
    second appellants had a social and family network to assist them to re-
    adjust to their lives  in  India  and  that  there  was  a  functioning
    education system which the third appellant would  be  able  to  access.
    There was nothing in the evidence to suggest that the  third  appellant
    would be unable in time to become fluent in Malayalam the language most
    commonly spoken in the home area of the appellant.

4.   The respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal.  The  basis
    on which permission was granted is as follows:

         "1.  It is respectfully submitted that the First-tier Tribunal have
             erred in allowing the appeal on the basis that it would not be
             reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  child  as  a  British
             citizen to accompany him to Bangladesh.  It is  asserted  that
             in reaching this conclusion the  Tribunal  fails  to  consider
             proper country guidance in this  regard  as  dictated  by  the
             recent case of KO (India) and Others v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 that finds a  'real  world'
             test is to be applied in cases where one or more parents of  a
             qualifying child have no legal right to  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom and their conduct dictates they should be removed.


         2.   It is asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to
             apply the  test  adequately  and  that  they  have  failed  to
             consider the conduct  of  the  appellant's  parents  in  their
             deliberate and calculated breaches of  the  Immigration  Rules
             and any associated public interest factors this raises  as  to
             the responsibility for  their  removal.   It  is  respectfully
             asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  misdirected  and
             ignores the finding in KO (Nigeria) where  the  Supreme  Court
             found that the Tribunal erred in law in that a  British  child
             could not be expected to relocate outside the UK (paragraph 44
             of the judgment).  The fact that a child is British  does  not
             in itself render removal of a parent unduly  harsh.   Even  if
             the consequence is that the child will  leave  the  UK  it  is
             asserted that the applicant in this case had no valid basis to
             stay since the expiry of the lead applicant's student leave in
             2012 and had made it quite clear that  they  were  aware  that
             they should have left the UK in 2015  following  rejection  of
             their application to remain in the UK outside the  Immigration
             Rules and as  such  this  is  a  very  weighty  factor  to  be
             considered in any balancing exercise.  It is accepted that the
             children are best placed in remaining with their  parents  and
             that there are no serious obstacles to integration and as such
             if the real world test is applied it is respectfully submitted
             that this is clearly as a family unit in India  their  country
             of origin  along  with  the  rest  of  their  extended  family
             members."

5.   The grounds appear to be wrong in  that  they  assume  that  the  third
    appellant is British.  She is not a British subject, although she is of
    course a qualifying child under the Immigration Rules.

6.   For the respondent Ms Willocks-Briscoe told me that the  judge  started
    his assessment on the basis that the children should remain with  their
    parents and looks at various elements of  private  life,  finding  that
    every aspect of private life would be replicated on return.  They  have
    been without leave since 2015.  Unfortunately, the judge does  not  say
    what  it  is  the  judge  finds  that  satisfies  him  that  the  third
    appellant's ties with the United Kingdom would  be  greatly  disrupted.
    The ties are not identified.  Counsel sought to persuade  me  that  the
    judge had not erred and that he had properly applied MA (Pakistan).  He
    suggested that the decision of the Supreme Court in KO did  not  depart
    at all from the existing case law and that the judge had not erred.

7.   I have concluded that the determination does contain an  error  on  the
    part of the judge.  I believe it was incumbent upon him to say  why  he
    was allowing the appeal with sufficient clarity  for  both  parties  to
    understand.  He does not identify what it is he  finds  that  satisfies
    him that the third appellant's ties with the United  Kingdom  would  be
    greatly disrupted.  The ties are not identified.  I  concluded  that  I
    must set aside the determination and that the appeal should be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh by a judge  other  than
    Judge Harris.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 07 March 2019







