
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09486/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5th October 2016                 |On 3 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            Anwarr Sied Mortlock
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Mynott, Counsel instructed by IAS (Manchester)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica date of birth 1st August  1977.
    On the 22nd January 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Evans)  allowed
    his appeal against a decision to deport him under  section  3(5)(a)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  The Secretary of State now has permission to
    appeal[1] against that decision.

    Anonymity

 2. The Respondent is a foreign criminal. As such there is no  good  ground
    to conceal his identity and no anonymity direction is made.

    Background

 3. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2002.  He  had
    leave to enter as a visitor, and was then aged 25. By December of  that
    year he had been convicted of the possession with intent of  supply  of
    two Class A drugs, namely crack cocaine and  heroin.  He  and  his  co-
    defendant were each sentenced to six years' imprisonment.

 4. The Respondent was released sometime in early 2005.  On  the  7th  June
    2005 the Secretary of State served upon him notice of an  intention  to
    deport him.  the Respondent appealed that decision and on the 19th June
    2007 a panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Immigration  Judge
    Irvine and Mrs G Greenwood, non-legal member) allowed his  appeal  with
    reference to paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State sought  to  appeal  the  decision.  That  appeal
    failed before the Upper Tribunal (Senior Immigration  Judge  Warr)  and
    before the High Court (Wyn Williams  J).  The  decision  of  the  first
    instance Tribunal having  been  upheld,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    compelled to grant the Respondent a period of six months' discretionary
    leave. That leave was renewed on three subsequent  occasions,  so  that
    the Respondent had permission to be in the  United  Kingdom  until  the
    17th July 2014.

 6. On the 30th July 2014 the  Respondent  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain. On this occasion the Secretary of State responded by  making  a
    second decision to deport him, dated 13th April 2015. This decision was
    made  with  reference  to  the  statutory  framework   for   'automatic
    deportation' of foreign criminals.

 7. The Respondent appealed  on  Article  8  grounds  and  the  appeal  was
    allowed.  Although the Respondent could not bring himself within one of
    the 'exceptions' in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Rules,  the  Tribunal
    held that  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described  therein.  It  is  against
    that decision that the Secretary  of  State  now  brings  this  further
    challenge.

    The Grounds of Appeal

 8. The Secretary of State submits that the determination  of  Judge  Evans
    contains the following material errors of law:

      i) In finding there to be "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and
         above those described in 399 or 399A the Tribunal appeared to  give
         weight to the fact that the Respondent had earlier had  his  appeal
         against deportation allowed and had been  granted  four  successive
         periods of leave to remain. The Secretary of  State  contends  that
         this history was "not relevant" and that no legitimate  expectation
         can have arisen from the temporary grants of leave;

     ii) The finding that the Respondent had led  an  "exemplary"  life  was
         flawed because "the Judge  appears  to  impermissibly  conflate  an
         absence of subsequent convictions with confirmation of  an  absence
         of continued criminality".  It is submitted that there is a  subtle
         but  important   difference   between   "no   offences"   and   "no
         convictions";

    iii) The finding that the Respondent  is  in  a  committed  relationship
         "adds nothing to his side of the balance".  It  was  not  a  matter
         capable of constituting a family life "over and above" the  factors
         in 399 and 399A;

     iv) The finding that the Respondent's Article 8 rights are stronger now
         than they were in 2007 is irrational given that his  step-sons  are
         now adults;

      v) The finding that Article 8 is the same as it was in 2007 "fails  to
         adequately grasp" that the Immigration Act  2014  has  shifted  the
         balance in terms of the public interest so that the outcome  "must"
         be that the Respondent is deported. The  Judge  has  "attempted  to
         pile weight" on the Respondent's side of  the  scales  without  any
         consideration of how the public interest has changed since 2007

     vi) There was no evidence or finding on whether the Respondent and  his
         partner could not run their social enterprise from Jamaica;

    My Findings

 9. I start, as Mr McVeety did, with ground (ii). Mr McVeety  started  with
    that ground so that he could make it clear that he was not relying upon
    it.  He confirmed that the Respondent has not  been  convicted  of  any
    criminal offence other than the one  for  which  he  was  sentenced  in
    December 2002. There was no evidence at all to suggest that he had ever
    committed  any  other  offences,  nor  that  he  had  had  any  adverse
    interaction with the police.  It is extremely surprising,  to  say  the
    least, to find the Secretary of  State  suggesting  that  the  Tribunal
    should have somehow  weighed  in  the  balance  the  spectre  that  the
    Respondent was secretly still committing crimes. He is  innocent  until
    proven guilty.  There was some discussion at hearing  as  to  how  long
    that principle had been part of the English common  law.  The  earliest
    reference that I can find is to its codification in Roman  Law  in  the
    2nd century AD under Antoninus Pius.

10. The remainder of the grounds fall into two central complaints, about a)
    the way that the Judge approached the law and b) the way that the Judge
    approached the facts.

11. In respect of the law Mr  McVeety  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  to
    recognise that the statutory framework  had  changed  since  2007.  The
    public interest now assumed a very great weight and that  is  reflected
    in the way that the rules were drafted. I am unable to accept that  the
    Tribunal was not  cognisant  of  that.   The  determination  begins  by
    summarising the submission of the Presenting Officer Mr  Richardson  to
    the effect that the "historic criminality" had to be viewed through the
    prism of current legislation [at 8]. It then sets out s117B-117C of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 [at 16] and  the  relevant
    immigration rule  [at  17].  The  arguments  advanced  by  Respondent's
    counsel as to res judicata are expressly rejected [at 32] and the Judge
    accepts that Secretary of State's submission that the proper  framework
    for analysis is paragraphs 398-399A of the Rules [at 25]. The  Tribunal
    directs itself to the guidance in Devaseelan v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00702 and Chege (section  117D-Article
    8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC).  It is abundantly clear from all
    of this that the Tribunal understood what it was being asked to do.  It
    specifically accepts that it cannot simply reproduce  the  decision  of
    the 2007 Tribunal and in  considering  whether  the  circumstances  are
    sufficiently compelling weighs in the public  interest  [at  41-42]  in
    accordance with Chege and indeed MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   I
    reject the submission that the Tribunal "failed to  grapple"  with  the
    new legal framework.

12. At paragraphs 34 and 35, having regard to  Chege,  the  Tribunal  notes
    that none of the following factors are capable  of  constituting  "very
    compelling circumstances": the Respondent's long-standing relationship,
    his financial independence, his ability to speak English,   his  social
    and cultural integration into UK society.

13. What the Tribunal does is weigh the cumulative effect of the following.
    This man won his 2007 deportation appeal on the basis  of  findings  of
    fact that are a Devaseelan starting point.  The  central  and  positive
    findings of fact made by that Tribunal have been proved  correct.  They
    accepted that he was  a  low  risk  of  re-offending;  he  has  led  an
    "exemplary" life since and had not committed a criminal  offence  since
    2002.  His relationship with his partner was found to be  a  protective
    factor;  this  has  been  borne  out  by  the  strong   and   committed
    relationship that they continue to share whilst running their  business
    of "considerable social value".  That  business,  a  social  enterprise
    aimed at encouraging  children  in  deprived  areas  of  Manchester  to
    celebrate education, is run by the Respondent and his partner.  She  is
    paid, he is not. It does not have sufficient funds to pay two  salaries
    so he works for free, and at the date of the hearing had  done  so  for
    some time. The Tribunal found the organisation's  "continued  existence
    is dependent upon the appellant  providing  unpaid  administrative  and
    organisational assistance to Ms Taylor, and more significantly,  unpaid
    tailoring assistance". That latter reference was to the mini graduation
    gowns that the Respondent sews for children to wear  in  ceremonies  at
    the end of term. The Judge  finds  that  the  Respondent's  deportation
    would "highly likely" result in 'Young Graduate' going out of business:
    "this would be to the detriment of the deprived communities in which it
    works".  The Tribunal further gave some weight to his finding that  the
    emotional dependency between  the  Respondent  and  his  partner  "goes
    beyond the level" that would typically be found in a  partnership.  She
    had suffered the devastating loss of two of her grandchildren dying  in
    2012 and had  given  evidence  as  to  her  high  degree  of  emotional
    dependence on him in the years that followed.

14. The Judge did not find, nor I think was it argued, that the  successive
    grants of Discretionary Leave gave rise to any  legitimate  expectation
    on the Respondent's part that he would be  allowed  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Judge was however entitled to  take  into  account
    the facts 'on the ground': during those successive grants of leave  the
    Respondent deepened his ties with his family and community  and  helped
    establish a business which is providing great benefit  to  children  in
    deprived areas of Manchester.  It was not irrational to find  that  the
    Respondent's Article 8 ties were stronger today than they were in 2007.
    Article 8 ties are not confined to relationships  with  children.   The
    Tribunal was bound in law to take account of all  of  the  Respondent's
    relationships,  his  work,  his  friendships,  his  partner   and   his
    subsisting parental relationship with his now adult  stepsons.    There
    is no basis for a rationality challenge to those findings. Finally, the
    Secretary of State complains that the Tribunal did not consider whether
    the Respondent, his partner and their social enterprise would  be  able
    to relocate to Jamaica. It is true that express consideration  was  not
    given to that possibility.  The focus of the decision was on  the  fact
    that this business is providing a measurable benefit to  the  community
    in the UK. That was one of the compelling reasons why  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

15. I do not find this decision to contain any error of law.




    Decisions

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

17. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           16th October 2016

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 10th June 2016 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge MacDonald

