
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09884/2019 (P)



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



                        Decision & Reasons Promulgated
                                                        On 14 December 2020

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    j r s
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                       DECISION AND DIRECTIONS NOTICE


   1. By a decision promulgated on 14 October 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge
      Macleman concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred
      in law when allowing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
      refusal of his human rights claim, dated 31 May 2018.  The decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal was duly set aside.  Judge Macleman directed
      the parties to provide submissions as to the method by which this
      appeal should proceed.

   2. Both parties have complied with that direction, submitting that this
      appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
   3. Having regard to the issues in this case, the basis of Judge
      Macleman's decision, and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement, I
      agree that remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the appropriate
      course of action.

   4. Therefore, this appeal is remitted pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of
      the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   5. I have considered the issue concerning whether or not the appellant re-
      entered the United Kingdom in breach of the deportation order.  Having
      regard to the material is currently on file and what is said in the
      email from the appellant's solicitors dated 23 October 2020, I
      conclude that the respondent has not put forward any evidence to
      support the assertion that the appellant did indeed return to this
      country, as alleged.  In addition, I have regard to paragraph 9 of the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision, in which is expressly found that this
      event did not occur.

   6. In light of the above, I preserve the finding made by the First-tier
      Tribunal in paragraph 9 of its decision to the effect that the
      appellant did not re-enter the United Kingdom in breach of the
      deportation order.  This preserved finding will be the starting point
      if this issue is to be addressed at the remitted hearing.


        Directions to the First-tier Tribunal


              1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;


              2) The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier
                 Tribunal Judge S Clarke;

              3) The previous finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the
                 appellant did not re-enter the United Kingdom in breach of
                 the deportation order is preserved.


      Directions to the parties


              1) Both parties shall comply with any further case management
                 directions issued by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed: H Norton-Taylor           Date:  7 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
