

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09941/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 May 2019                         |On 15 May 2019                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     s s
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A W Khan, of Fountains Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  (with  permission  of  UT
    Judge Martin) against the decision and reasons statement of  FtT  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp that was issued on 17 May 2018.

 2. As Mr Khan reminded me, the appellant's grounds relate to whether  Jude
    Boylan-Kemp  made  adequate  findings  about  the   reasonableness   of
    expecting the appellant's eldest child to leave the UK.  Mr Khan raised
    concerns that the judge repeatedly described the children returning  to
    the Gambia with the appellant, their mother, when  in  fact  all  three
    children were born in the UK, and although they could go to the  Gambia
    they could not in fact return there.  Mr Khan also  argued  that  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp failed to explain what powerful reasons existed to outweigh
    the eldest child's private  life  rights  established  in  the  UK,  as
    described in the documentary and oral evidence.

 3. Mr Mills countered by arguing that the proper approach  to  the  issues
    has been clarified by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  and  others  v
    SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and that what  was  important  was  to  assess  the
    reality of whether the best interests of the qualifying  child  was  to
    remain with the parents wherever they might be and not to focus  solely
    on whether there are powerful  reasons  to  outweigh  the  child's  own
    private life.  Mr Mills recognised that the KO (Nigeria) still required
    an assessment of the child's best interests, including consideration of
    what ties the child had of their own to the UK.

 4. It was at this  juncture  that  Mr  Mills's  arguments  became  unstuck
    because Judge Boylan-Kemp failed to make  adequate  findings  regarding
    the qualifying child's private life rights.  She has not made  findings
    on the strength of the child's friendships and  schooling,  which  were
    evidenced before her.  The failure to make findings on material matters
    is a legal error. It follows that I find Judge  Boylan-Kemp's  decision
    is legally flawed.  It is necessary to set it aside, which I do.

 5. I asked Mr Khan and Mr Mills for their submissions  about  whether  the
    appeal needed to be remitted.  Mr Mills advised  me  that  because  the
    remitted hearing will have  to  consider  the  facts  at  the  date  of
    hearing, and given that the eldest child of the appellant has now  been
    resident in the UK for more than ten years and is eligible to  register
    as a British citizen, the respondent would  concede  that  appeal.   Mr
    Mills said the fact the appellant is eligible for citizenship is a very
    weighty factor that would result in the appellant succeeding because it
    is not reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

Decision

There is legal error in the decision and reasons of Ft T Judge Boylan-Kemp.
I set aside her decision.
I remake the decision to allow the appeal against the original  Home  Office
decision.



Signed                                       Date         13 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


