
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09313/2017
     hu/09323/2017
     HU/09326/2017
     hu/11384/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 June 2018                              |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       GAWRI NAYANAKUMARI WAHANTHARAGE
                      RUVINDU AGRAJITH SAUNYA HANNADIGE
                      NISHANTHA UDENI SAUNYA HANNADIGE
                       PAWAN ANURAJA SAUNYA HANNADIGE
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Talacchi of Counsel instructed by Sriharans


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decisions of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated  on  22
    November 2017 in the linked  appeals  of  Mrs  G  N  Wahantharage,  her
    husband Mr Nishantha Hannadige and  their  children  Ruvindu  Hannadige
    (date of birth 7 March 1999) and Pawan  Hannadige  (date  of  birth  21
    April 1997).


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the  appellant  and   the   Wahantharage/Hannadige   family   are   the
    respondents, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and the Wahantharage/Hannadige  family  as  the
    Appellants.


3.   The Appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka. The parents' dates of  birth
    are a matter of record on file; I have set out the dates  of  birth  of
    the 'children' above - they are the children of the family albeit  that
    they are now both adults.


4.   The family entered the United Kingdom on 26 September 2007.  The  First
    Appellant came to the UK for the purposes of  study;  her  husband  and
    children had leave 'in-line' as her dependants.  The  children  of  the
    family at the time of initial entry were 8 years old and 10 years  old.
    The Appellants were initially granted leave to enter  until  31  August
    2008; thereafter they obtained a sequence of subsequent grants of leave
    to remain until June 2016.   Joint  applications  were  then  made  for
    indefinite leave to remain which were refused on 4 July 2016 because of
    irregularities in the payment of tax by Mrs Wahantharage.   Nonetheless
    further representations and submissions were made which were treated as
    a further joint application for leave made on 20 August 2016.  By  that
    date the children of the family had been in the United Kingdom for just
    under 9 years.  The elder child was no longer a minor, but the youngest
    child was still under 18 years of age.  The applications  were  refused
    for reasons set out in decision letters dated 11 September  2017  -  by
    which time even the youngest child had become 18.


5.   It is pertinent to note that the applications were put 'on  hold'.  The
    decision letter of 11 September 2017 in respect of Pawan Hannadige, for
    example, states:

         "Your application was placed on hold following a pause in  Appendix
         FM decision making which began on 22 February 2017.   This  applied
         to applications made or considered  under  Appendix  FM  where  the
         application falling for refusal involved a child (in this case your
         brother).  This temporary hold was to enable  the  Home  Office  to
         consider the implications of and to make necessary changes  in  the
         Immigration Rules and guidance  to  reflect  the  judgment  of  the
         Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) and Others."



6.   Necessarily because of the delay  imposed  by  the  Respondent  Ruvindu
    Hannadige reached and passed his majority whilst  the  application  was
    pending.  Nonetheless the Respondent treated his application as  if  he
    were still a minor - as indeed he had been  when  the  application  was
    made - and gave consideration  to  his  circumstances  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) accordingly.


7.   The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


8.   The appeals were allowed for reasons  set  out  in  the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart  promulgated  on  22
    November 2017.  The  essential  basis  of  the  favourable  outcome  is
    encapsulated in paragraph 28 of the Decision:

         "I find that the public interest does not require  the  removal  of
         the [children of the family] and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
         expect them to leave the UK which has been their home for more than
         half their lives, have established strong private  life  and  where
         for most of the time they have lived  lawfully.  It  would  not  be
         reasonable for the family to  be  separated  and  consequently  not
         reasonable or proportionate for the parents to be removed."


9.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, which  was  granted
    on 19 April 2018 by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell.


10.  There are two aspects to the Respondent's grounds of challenge.  It  is
    argued that the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied in respect  of
    any of the Appellants, that the Judge essentially placed  determinative
    weight on the educational progress of the children and their  potential
    to pursue higher education in the UK, and that in so  doing  he  failed
    adequately to explain why this rendered removal disproportionate. It is
    also pleaded that the Judge's reference  to  the  public  interest  not
    requiring removal of the children  of  the  family  and  it  not  being
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK  suggested  a  reliance  upon
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    which should not have been applied because neither were still  children
    under 18 years of age - and in such circumstances where the Immigration
    Rules were not  satisfied  the  public  interest  pursuant  to  section
    117B(1) favoured removal.


11.  In my judgement, at least in so far  as  the  position  of  Ruvindu  is
    concerned, the Respondent's challenge  is  unsustainable.  I  make  the
    following observations:


         (i)  In respect of the approach under the Immigration Rules  it  is
         to be noted that the Respondent acknowledged  that  Ruvindu  was  a
         minor at the date of  application  and  accordingly  evaluated  his
         claim against the criteria of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  The  Judge
         recognised that  this  had  been  the  Respondent's  approach:  see
         paragraph 10.


         (ii) In the premises, in so far as the Judge was entitled  to  give
         consideration to the substance of the decision that was the subject
         of challenge, in evaluating the appeal on human rights  grounds  he
         is not to be criticised for evaluating the circumstances of Ruvindu
         with reference to the Rule  applied  by  the  Respondent  decision-
         maker. As such it was open to the  Judge  to  have  regard  to  the
         'reasonableness' test under 276ADE(1)(iv).


         (iii)    In this context the Judge's essential conclusion was  that
         Ruvindu did satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  as
         they were to be applied to his application -  irrespective  of  the
         fact that he might have reached his majority by  the  date  of  the
         appeal hearing.


         (iv) In so far as the Respondent seeks to suggest it was reasonable
         to expect Ruvindu to leave the UK, that  is  in  substance  a  mere
         disagreement with the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  and  does
         not constitute an error of law.


         (v)  Further, in all such circumstances I do not accept that it  is
         to be implied that the  Judge  was  erroneously  having  regard  to
         section 117B(6) simply because he concluded that it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect Ruvindu (or Pawan) to leave the UK.


         (vi) In any event such an expression - 'not reasonable to expect' -
         is essentially an alternative way of  expressing  a  conclusion  on
         proportionality, and so is not in any way in itself indicative of a
         misapplication of the law in respect of either Ruvindu or Pawan.


         (vii)    In any event, in so far as the Respondent  by  emphasising
         that by the date of either the Respondent's decision or the date of
         the appeal hearing Ruvindu  could  not  avail  himself  of  section
         117B(6) by reason of  having  become  an  adult,  the  Respondent's
         submissions run into the difficulty that by the date  of  decision,
         and at all times thereafter Ruvindu has been aged between 18 and 25
         years and has spent at least half of his life  living  continuously
         in  the  UK  -  thereby  satisfying  the  substance  of   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(v). The Judge recognised this circumstance  at  paragraph
         26, with  the  implicit  caveat  that  such  a  circumstance  might
         technically necessitate a further application to succeed under  the
         Rules. It seems  to  me  that  recognition  that  Ruvindu  met  the
         substance of the Rules (and indeed that  his  older  brother  would
         shortly also do so) was a legitimate and relevant consideration  to
         take forward into the overall proportionality evaluation in respect
         of each of the younger Appellants.



12.  In substance the Judge reached a conclusion to the effect that  Ruvindu
    satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  at  the  date  of
    application and satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(v)  at
    the date of the appeal.  That was sufficient in  the  Judge's  view  to
    establish that the removal of the youngest child of the family  -  even
    if he had by this time  reached  his  majority  -  would  constitute  a
    disproportionate interference with his private life.   That  conclusion
    was informed by the bench mark of proportionality expressly set out  in
    the Immigration Rules.  It seems to me that that is an  uncontroversial
    outcome.  It follows that there is little or nothing offensive  in  the
    Judge's consequent conclusions in respect of the remaining  members  of
    the family.


13.  I also consider in more general terms that it is adequately clear  from
    the Decision that the Judge  identified  that  there  were  no  adverse
    features of immigration history in respect of any of the Appellants. So
    far as the irregularity in respect of payment of tax that had  defeated
    the earlier joint applications for indefinite leave was concerned,  the
    Judge gave express consideration to this circumstance at  paragraph  24
    and noted that there was no evidence "to suggest that the  underpayment
    was deliberate."


14.  In all of the circumstances of the case I can see no material error  of
    law and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notices of Decisions

15.  The decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  these  linked  appeals
    contained no error of law  and  stand.  The  Appellants'  appeals  each
    remain allowed.


16.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

