
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09989/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2019                     |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                        ESTHER LOUISE KWATENG KWATENG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes, instructed by Lawrencia & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated 19 June 2019, I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on 23 December 1971  and  is  a  female
         citizen of Ghana. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a
         decision of the respondent dated 24 August 2017 refusing her  leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  her  family  life
         (Article  8  ECHR).  The  First-tier  Tribunal,   in   a   decision
         promulgated on 30 May 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
         appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   By a Rule 24 letter dated 14 September 2018, the Secretary  of
         State indicated that he did not  oppose  the  appeal.  My  reasons,
         therefore, may be brief. I find that the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal is flawed in law such that it should be set aside.  First,
         the judge overlooked evidence before him concerning the nationality
         of the father of the female child of the appellant. In a bundle  of
         papers before the judge, there was a copy of a British passport  of
         the child's father. The judge was  wrong,  therefore,  at  [16]  to
         state that 'there is no other evidence to show what the nationality
         of Mr Mzondo is.' The error relates to the wider difficulty in this
         appeal of the nationality of the child. The passport which had been
         issued to the child had been revoked because the child's birth  had
         been registered more than 12 months after her birth.  However,  the
         judge does not seem to have been aware that Mr Mzondo  had  applied
         for the  registration,  a  factor  he  does  not  consider  in  his
         (inconclusive) discussion of  paternity  [14].  There  was  written
         evidence in the file indicating that the Home Office  is  currently
         reviewing the revocation of the passport. Again, the judge  appears
         to have overlooked that evidence. He proceeded with his analysis on
         the basis that the child is not a British citizen. At  the  present
         time, it remains difficult to be certain as to her nationality  but
         the judge clearly made a mistake in failing to  take  into  account
         evidence which had been put before him.

         3.   The judge was aware that the child, whatever her  nationality,
         had been living in the United  Kingdom  for  eight  years  (indeed,
         since her birth.). The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA
         Civ 705 considered that there  should  be  'powerful  reasons'  for
         expecting a child who had been resident in the United Kingdom  more
         than seven years to leave the country. That guidance  must  now  be
         read in the light of the Supreme Court judgement  in  KO  (Nigeria)
         2018 UKSC 53. However, there is nothing  in  the  judge's  analysis
         which indicates that he has taken any  particular  account  of  the
         length of residence of the child in this  jurisdiction.  The  judge
         took the view that, since the child and the appellant are  Ghanaian
         citizens, they may continue their family life abroad.  The  parties
         agree that the analysis is deficient.

         4.   At the hearing, I  asked  Mrs  Aboni,  who  appeared  for  the
         Secretary of State, to check if steps may be taken to expedite  the
         review  of  the  child's  nationality.  Understandably,   she   was
         reluctant to suggest any particular timescale for the conclusion of
         that review. The question of the child's nationality is  important;
         it will be necessary to look at the  'real  world'  situation  when
         assessing this appeal as indicated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
         (Nigeria). It is one thing for a  child  and  her  mother  both  of
         foreign nationality and no right to remain here to leave the United
         Kingdom, even if the child has been here for more than seven years;
         it may be quite another for a  British  child  to  be  expected  to
         leave. I shall, therefore, not  list  this  appeal  for  a  resumed
         hearing until I have heard from the Secretary of  State  and  would
         ask that he should do so no later than 15 July 2019. Anything which
         the appellant's solicitors may also do to expedite the review would
         also be of assistance."

 2. At the resumed hearing  at  Birmingham  on  9  August  2019,  Mr  Vokes
    appeared for the appellant and Ms Isherwood appeared for the  Secretary
    of State. The representatives told me that  UK  Visas  and  Immigration
    were not now carrying out a review of the application made to  register
    the child M as a British citizen.  I  was  shown  email  correspondence
    confirming that UK Visas and Immigration considers that the passport of
    the child M had been revoked for the legitimate reason that the child's
    birth certificate, bearing the father's details, and been  issued  more
    than one year following the child's birth. The correspondence concludes
    as  follows:  'I  can  confirm  that  we  have  not  had  any   further
    correspondence  or  received  any  further  evidence  and  we  are  not
    currently reconsidering or reviewing any decision made.' As at the date
    of the resumed hearing, child M, therefore, is a citizen of  Ghana  and
    is not a British citizen nor is there any clear prospect that she  will
    be recognised as a British citizen.

 3. For the respondent, Ms Isherwood submitted that there  was  little,  if
    any, evidence of contact between the father of M (who it is claimed  is
    a British citizen) and the child. Indeed, the only evidence of  contact
    is a photograph of a letter. The  appellant  herself  never  had  legal
    status within the United Kingdom following the expiry of the visit Visa
    which appears to have been issued to her  in  2003  under  a  different
    name. the visit visa expired on 30 March 2004. The appellant  had  been
    served with a Form  ISI151A  as  long  ago  as  25  November  2010.  An
    application in March 2014 made by the appellant to remain on the  basis
    of her family and private life had been refused. A similar  application
    was refused in April 2014 with no right of  appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State accepts that the child M was born in the United Kingdom  and  has
    now lived here for more than 7 years. She is, therefore, a  'qualifying
    child' for the purposes of section 117 of the 2002  Act  (as  amended).
    However, there was no evidence to show that, should a fresh application
    for a British passport  for  the  child  be  submitted,  that  such  an
    application would be  successful.  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  this
    appeal should not be decided on the basis of speculation as to  how  UK
    Visas  and  Immigration  would  respond  to  a  fresh  application.  Ms
    Isherwood also submitted that it was significant that there had been no
    oral evidence put before the Upper Tribunal at the resumed hearing. Had
    there been any degree of ongoing contact between the father and M, then
    it was likely that  the  appellant  would  have  brought  this  to  the
    attention of the Upper Tribunal. Further, the school reports for M make
    no mention of the father whilst was there was little  if  any  evidence
    that M had established a significant private life of  her  own  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. For the appellant, Mr Vokes submitted that the  appeal  turned  on  the
    application of section 117B6:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

          b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

 5. He submitted that, whatever the position as regards the registration of
    M as a British citizen, she is a qualifying child who  lives  with  the
    appellant. He submitted that M has 'the normal established private life
    of a child of her age removal would be difficult  to  explain  to  her,
    particularly if she could not see her father.' (see Mr Vokes's skeleton
    argument).

 6. I agree that the appeal does  turn  upon  the  application  of  section
    117B6. Mr Vokes is right to point out that the child M is a  qualifying
    child having lived in the United Kingdom from more than 7 years  but  I
    had the strong impression that, lying behind his submissions,  remained
    the suggestion that it is still likely that M will be recognised  as  a
    British citizen and that she should be treated as such in this  appeal.
    However, M's father figures in the evidence only as  a  rather  shadowy
    presence and I accept  Ms  Isherwood's  submission  that  there  is  no
    reliable evidence to indicate that there is ongoing contact. I  do  not
    find that expecting M to leave  the  United  Kingdom  will  damage  her
    relationship with her father as I  am  unable  to  find  that  anything
    properly described as a relationship exists between them.   I  have  to
    decide the appeal on the basis of the facts  as  at  the  date  of  the
    resumed hearing; at that date, it is  a  fact  that  M  is  a  Ghanaian
    citizen and that there is no evidence that she is entitled  to  British
    nationality. It would be  incorrect  to  apply  section  117B6  on  the
    understanding or suggestion that, notwithstanding the facts,  I  should
    be assessing the reasonableness of expecting a British child  to  leave
    the jurisdiction.

 7. Mr Vokes's submission that M has established 'the normal  private  life
    of a child of her age' is not a particularly strong one. He was  unable
    to point to any characteristics of M particular to her as  evidence  of
    her private life. I acknowledge that, having been in the United Kingdom
    for more than 7 years, M is likely  to  have  acquired  friendships  at
    school which she would be reluctant to relinquish. Beyond  that,  there
    is no evidence which would lead me to conclude that  her  private  life
    here is so strong that it would be unreasonable to interfere  with  it.
    The 'real life' question in this appeal is  whether  the  appellant,  a
    Ghanaian citizen with an appalling immigration history and no right  to
    live in this country, should be required to return to  Ghana  with  her
    Ghanaian 8 old child who does not have a strong relationship  with  her
    natural father. Having regard to the observations I have made above and
    to the evidence  as  a  whole,  I  have  concluded  that  it  would  be
    reasonable in all the circumstances to expect the child M to  accompany
    her mother when she returns to Ghana. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal
    of the appellant against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse her human rights application.




Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 24 August 2017 is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 17 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

