
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09283/2016
                                                               HU/09285/2016
                                                               HU/09288/2016
                                                               HU/09289/2016
                                                             (HU/09277/2016)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2018                 |On 21st November 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     OBA
                                    AMIA
                                     OJA
                                    AJEA
                                    (AAA)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by The Cardinal Hume
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants  in
this determination identified as OBA, AMIA, OJA, AJEA, AAA.  This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. AAA is no longer in the UK, having left the UK prior to the hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal. Although he sought and was  granted
         permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it is
         accepted by all parties that he has, because of his departure  from
         the UK, abandoned his appeal. The evidence of OBA  that  he  is  in
         Nigeria and remains in contact with the family was accepted by  the
         First-tier Tribunal and is a finding that remains undisturbed.

      2. The appellants' human rights claim, made on 20th January 2015,  was
         refused on 15th March 2016. A copy of the application  was  not  in
         the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, but various  documents
         were in the bundle and it seems that those  documents  were  before
         the respondent when she made her decision and were before the First-
         tier Tribunal judge. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and,
         in a decision signed on  27th  October  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Wylie dismissed their appeal.

      3. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on the grounds that  it
         was arguable  the  judge  had,  in  making  her  finding  that  the
         appellants would be  able  to  look  to  their  husband/father  for
         support in Nigeria on  their  return  there,  had  failed  to  have
         adequate regard to the evidence before  her  and  did  not  make  a
         decision based on the evidence before her.

         Background

      4. All appellants are Nigerian citizens. OBA  and  AAA  are  wife  and
         husband. The other three appellants are their  children.  AMIA  was
         born on 28 September 2007 in  South  Africa  and  is  diagnosed  as
         suffering from sickle cell anaemia; OJA was born on  21st  February
         2010 in the UK; AJEA was born on 9 December 2012 in the UK  and  is
         diagnosed as suffering from sickle cell anaemia.

      5. AAA came to the UK as a Tier 4 student with  leave  valid  from  14
         January  2009.  Although  subsequently  extended,  his  leave   was
         curtailed with no right of appeal on 11 April 2014. He left the  UK
         around August 2015.

      6. OBA arrived in the UK on 3rd June 2009 with AMIA as  dependents  of
         AAA; their leave to remain was curtailed in line with AAA. OJA  and
         AJEA were both born in the UK whilst their parents were lawfully in
         the UK as students/dependents. When they initially arrived  in  the
         UK they lived in Aberdeen until 2014 and  then  they  relocated  to
         Margate.

      7. OBA's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal included that she had not
         been abandoned by her husband; she was not  a  single  parent.  She
         said that she had uncles, aunts and cousins in Nigeria but her  own
         parents had died when she was young. Her husband's mother  remained
         in Nigeria and before coming to  the  UK  they  had  lived  in  her
         husband's family property. Her evidence was that she  thought  that
         property had been sold.

      8. Prior to coming to the UK, OBA had  worked  as  an  accountant  and
         reached a managerial position. Since  being  in  the  UK,  she  has
         undertaken voluntary work as a school volunteer and on  the  school
         parent's council in Aberdeen, assisted the church in helping people
         with difficult circumstances and since moving to  Margate  she  has
         volunteered at a Salvation Army drop-in centre. She was at the time
         of the hearing, working as  a  senior  care  assistant,  supporting
         herself and the children with her earnings together with  financial
         support from friends, family and the church.

      9. The two children with sickle cell are  both  prescribed  penicillin
         and folic acid; they go for check-ups at  hospital  three  or  four
         times a year.

     10. OBA in her evidence denied she had received treatment for a  mental
         health problem saying that she had been found  to  have  no  mental
         health  condition  but   suffering   stress   due   to   her   then
         circumstances, with three young children.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal judge said ([29])  that  although  AAA  had
         left the UK prior to the decision the subject of this  appeal,  she
         "did not see that this prevented him from pursuing the  appeal,  as
         long as he was represented." This is plainly incorrect:

           . AAA should have notified the respondent that he had  left  the
             UK and thus was not making an application for leave to  remain
             in the UK. He had left the UK and could therefore not be  said
             to be making an application for leave to remain;

           . The solicitors notified the Tribunal on  16th  May  2016  that
             they continued to represent him,  submitted  an  out  of  time
             appeal purporting to be an "in country" appeal on his  behalf,
             giving his address as in the UK and declaring  that  they  had
             his instructions to lodge the appeal on his behalf;

           . AAA and his solicitors failed to notify the Tribunal  that  he
             was not in the UK;

           . AAA's representative stated at the hearing before  the  First-
             tier Tribunal judge that he represented AAA;

           . To represent AAA, unless the solicitors are purporting to  act
             for  someone  from  whom  they  have  not  in  fact   received
             instructions,  it  must  be   assumed   they   have   received
             instructions.

         AAA's application for leave to remain must  have  ceased  to  exist
         prior to the decision of the respondent - an application for  leave
         to remain can only be made and continued when a person  is  in  the
         UK. The respondent's decision, although it seems  it  was  made  in
         ignorance of the fact that AAA had left the UK because his passport
         remained at the Home Office, was (in so far as AAA  was  concerned)
         not a valid decision. It is  not  possible  to  appeal  an  invalid
         decision. His appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  have
         proceeded, it was an invalid appeal.

         If this is incorrect, the fact that AAA left the UK  prior  to  the
         hearing of the appeal, means that he has abandoned his appeal - see
         s92(8) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  Although  the
         Tribunal did not send AAA a  notice  to  that  effect,  no  address
         having been provided, Ms Fitzsimons stated she was not  acting  for
         him and that in so far as both she and Mr Bramble  were  concerned,
         the appeal had been abandoned.

         Error of Law

     12. The grounds upon which permission to appeal were amplified  in  the
         skeleton argument filed  and  served  by  Ms  Fitzsimons.  I  heard
         submissions from Ms Fitzsimmons and Mr Bramble.

         Ground 1 - Failure to give adequate weight  to  the  evidence  from
         social services and the mental health history of the OBA.

     13. OBA's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal judge was  that  she  did
         not have a mental health problem. Ms Fitzsimons submitted that  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge should not  have  accepted  this  without
         taking account of the medical and social services evidence that had
         been submitted, such evidence providing support for the  submission
         that she did have mental  health  problems,  and  these  should  be
         factored into the decision on the reasonableness of the removal  of
         the children with their mother to Nigeria. It  was  submitted  that
         the medical evidence  supported  the  contention  that  OBA  lacked
         insight  into  her  mental  health,  declined  treatment  and  this
         impacted upon  her  ability  to  care  for  her  children's  health
         including ensuring compliance with prophylactic medication.

     14. OBA's witness statement signed on 16th October 2017  and  her  oral
         evidence, states, inter alia, that her health is presently  stable,
         that she is worried she may suffer a relapse  in  Nigeria  with  no
         friends or relatives to assist her in Nigeria, that whilst she  was
         unwell her husband dealt with studying, caring for the children and
         her ill health, that she had been suffering from child care stress,
         that she is concerned about her children and provides  support  for
         them in their medical needs,  that she has not  been  abandoned  by
         her husband who has returned to Nigeria, that remaining in  the  UK
         will provide the children  and  her  with  continued  support  from
         family and friends.

     15. The medical evidence relied upon in connection  with  OBA's  health
         included a letter dated 22nd September 2014 stating she was  liable
         to be detained under s2 Mental Health  Act  1983  for  28  days,  a
         letter dated 16th  October  2014  stating  she  was  liable  to  be
         detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 for up to  6  months,   a
         referral and assessment by Enfield  Social  Services  completed  on
         18th September  2014  in  relation  to  the  three  children  which
         concludes, inter alia,  that OBA did not  at  that  time  have  the
         mental capacity to care for her children and that her mental health
         condition had led to separation because of her detention under s3.

     16. There was no medical or social services evidence either for OBA  or
         the children which post-dated the human rights application (January
         2015), or the respondent's decision (March 2016) or the  Notice  of
         Hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (12th  June  2017  for  a
         hearing on 16th October 2017). There was no  evidence,  other  than
         OBA's evidence, before the First-tier Tribunal what  mental  health
         condition OBA had been diagnosed with. There was no evidence before
         the First-tier Tribunal that OBA continued to require treatment for
         a mental health condition or that she was refusing treatment. There
         was no evidence the children were not being  compliant  with  their
         medication needs. There was  no  evidence  of  any  current  social
         services  input.  There  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge to contradict OBA's evidence that she did not have a
         mental health condition and that at the time of  her  admission  to
         hospital she was suffering from childcare related  stress  or  that
         she did not provide the necessary support  for  her  children.  The
         evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  OBA  undertook
         voluntary work and was herself working as a senior care  assistant,
         such evidence not being contradicted by any other evidence.

     17. It was plainly open to the First-tier Tribunal  judge  to  conclude
         ([36]):

             "... the children's] interests are currently being safeguarded
             living together as a family  in  the  care  of  [OBA].  Social
             services were involved in the child and family  assessment  in
             2014, but there was  no  suggestion  that  there  was  current
             contact with social services or that  there  was  any  current
             concern about the children's care".

     18. The First-tier Tribunal judge  took  account  of  the  medical  and
         social services report and gave it very little if no  weight  -  it
         was out of date and there was nothing to suggest that  it  had  any
         relevance to the circumstances of the appellants at the date of the
         hearing.

     19. Ground 1 does not disclose a material error of law.

         Ground 2 - Failure to make clear findings whether the family  would
         in fact be able to look to the father for support.

     20. OBA's evidence was that she was not a single  mother  and  had  not
         been abandoned. There was evidence  in  the  2014  social  services
         report that AAA  had  referred  the  children  to  social  services
         because of concern about OBA's parenting and ability to cope; there
         was no current evidence that she  was  not  able  to  cope  in  his
         absence. There were family members in Nigeria,  according  to  OBA.
         The First-tier Tribunal judge found that if she  and  the  children
         were to go to Nigeria, they could be reunited as a family together.
         The judge also found that the children's interests were safeguarded
         by OBA. There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  judge
         that the children and OBA would not be reunited with AAA. There was
         no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that if they  were  not,
         then there would be some level of hardship or difficulty endured by
         them, other than OBA's  evidence  that  she  had  some  unspecified
         concerns about a relapse  if  she  had  no  support  and  that  she
         received support from people in the UK.  The  evidence  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal was that OBA had previously worked, was working
         and volunteering in the UK and there was no evidence that she would
         not be able to turn to family members in  Nigeria  or  that  family
         members in the UK would not be able to  continue  to  provide  such
         unspecified support as they were currently providing.

     21. Ms Fitzsimons was correct when she said to me  that  there  was  no
         positive evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  family
         could look to AAA if they are removed to Nigeria. But  that  misses
         the point. The burden of proof is upon the appellants. There was  a
         distinct lack of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that there
         would be any difficulties for the appellants if they  were  removed
         to Nigeria; they had not been living with  AAA  for  the  last  two
         years  or  so,  medical  services  are  available  in  Nigeria  for
         treatment of the children's sickle cell, there are  family  members
         in Nigeria and OBA had previously worked in Nigeria in a management
         position. Even if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was  wrong  in
         concluding that the family would be re-united with AAA,  there  was
         nothing in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  could
         lead to a finding that not being reunited with AAA would result  in
         difficulties for the appellants or that it  would  be  unreasonable
         for them to go to their country of nationality. The  references  by
         Ms Fitzsimons to out dated medical and social services reports does
         no more than support the judge's finding that, at the date  of  her
         decision there was no such supporting evidence. It is incorrect  to
         state that because that out-of-date  evidence  was  not  challenged
         then it somehow continued to be applicable.

     22. There is no material error of law identified in ground 2.

         Ground 3  -  failure  to  give  weight  to  the  residence  of  the
         qualifying children

     23. Two of the children - AMIA and OJA - are "qualifying" children. The
         oldest child had been in the UK for 8 years having come to  the  UK
         aged 2; OJA had been born in the UK and lived all his life  in  the
         UK. Although there had been previous  social  services  involvement
         some two years earlier there was  no  suggestion  in  the  evidence
         before the First-tier Tribunal judge that the children were not now
         in a stable environment.

     24. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  the  position  of  the
         children absent any consideration that the parents were overstayers
         at the time of the application and that the mother continued to  be
         an overstayer. The judge did not "visit the sins of the mother upon
         the children" but examined the circumstances  of  the  children  in
         isolation.  There  was  no  evidence  from  friends  or  clubs   or
         information about  activities  that  either  qualifying  child  was
         involved in or whether and  to  what  extent  there  would  be  any
         disruption or what effect any disruption would have. There were  no
         significant  school  reports  save  that   they   were   performing
         appropriately for their chronological ages. There is  reference  to
         AAA performing the main role, but that reference is in January 2015
         since which time he left the UK and,  since  August  2015  OBA  has
         performed that role. There was no indication that  there  were  any
         difficulties in obtaining documentation in support of  the  appeal.
         The documentary evidence did not provide  any  significant  support
         and OBA's evidence was that she had not been abandoned and she  was
         not a single parent.

     25. The judge considered the evidence in connection with  sickle  cell.
         The children were on prophylactic medication. There was no evidence
         of sickle cell episodes and no evidence that the children were  not
         able to receive adequate treatment in Nigeria.

     26. The judge fully considered the length of time the children had been
         in the UK. It was open to the judge to find that OBA was, given her
         previous employment history, likely to find employment on return to
         Nigeria, that the children would be reunited with their father  and
         that although there would be disruption to  their  education,  such
         disruption would be temporary.

     27. It is not merely the fact that the children are qualifying children
         but whether it would be reasonable for them to go to their  country
         of nationality. Ms Fitzsimons submitted that  strong  reasons  were
         required before it could be said to be reasonable for a  qualifying
         child to leave the UK. But in this case,  there  were  no  adequate
         reasons put forward. There was no evidence that  the  children  had
         established any significant or meaningful social, cultural or other
         ties in the UK; the medical evidence did  not  indicate  that  they
         would suffer medically in Nigeria. The evidence  was  however  that
         they would be with their father again - even if not living with him
         then at least in closer contact because, as OBA said, she was not a
         single mother and had not been abandoned.

     28. There is no material error of law identified in ground 3.

         Ground 4 - failure to determine the private life claim of OBA

     29. It is correct that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  findings
         regarding the private life of OBA in terms of paragraph  276ADE  of
         the Immigration Rules; she did not make a finding on whether  there
         were significant obstacles to her return to Nigeria.

     30. But there was no credible evidence that there would  be  obstacles,
         never mind significant obstacles to her  return.  Her  husband  was
         there; there were family members there; she was not suffering  from
         any mental health issues; she would be likely to  find  employment.
         There was no evidence  that  whatever  financial  support  she  was
         currently  receiving  (unspecified  and  unevidenced)   would   not
         continue at least for the short-term.

     31. If the First-tier Tribunal judge had considered  paragraph  276ADE,
         the outcome of that consideration would inevitably have  been  that
         there were no obstacles to her return there.

     32. There is no material error of law identified in ground 4.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision

    The First-tier Tribunal decision dismissing the appeal stands.


                                    Date 14th November 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
