


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09698/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: UTIAC Birmingham                       |Decision& Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 12 December 2018                             |On 18 January 2019             |
|                                                 |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 elvira [l]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr of Karis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to refuse her human rights claim, it was found, at an error of  law
hearing on 19 October 2018, that the First-tier Tribunal had made errors  of
law in its decision. The decision was accordingly set aside with  directions
for it to be re-made at a resumed hearing.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on 25 October  1974.  She  first
came to the UK in 2001 with her husband [TM] and their  daughter  [E]  (born
on 7 January 1999). Their son [K] was born in the UK on 29 January 2004.  In
2007 the family were returned to Albania.  The  appellant  and  her  husband
divorced in November 2007 and in 2009 her ex-husband returned to the  UK  on
an EEA family permit, following his marriage to  a  Portuguese  national  in
September 2008 and a successful appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  to
issue him with such a permit. He was issued with a permanent residence  card
on 23 August 2014. In September 2013 the children came to  the  UK  to  join
their father and were issued  with  residence  cards  valid  until  December
2018. The appellant then entered the UK illegally in November  2013  and  on
22 December 2014 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her  family
and private life. Her application was refused with no right of appeal on  18
March 2015.

On 8 June 2016 the appellant made a human rights claim for leave  to  remain
on the basis of family life under the 10-year parent route  in  Appendix  FM
of the immigration rules. Her claim was  refused  on  16  August  2017.  The
respondent considered that the appellant  could  not  meet  the  eligibility
requirements in Appendix FM as her children were not British or  settled  in
the UK and had not lived in the UK for  over  7  years  and  that  paragraph
EX.1(a) did not apply. The respondent considered that  she  could  not  meet
the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) on private  life  grounds  and  that
there were no exceptional circumstances outside the immigration rules.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and her appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 18 April  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Butler. The evidence before the judge  was  that  the  children  lived
with the appellant during the week and with their father  at  weekends.  The
appellant's daughter was having surgery in the UK for  a  cleft  palate  and
wanted her mother with her. The children's father  lived  close  by  and  he
would not be able to visit them in Albania as often as  previously  if  they
returned with their mother as he had started a new business  and  needed  to
spend time  in  the  UK  developing  it.  The  judge  did  not  believe  the
appellant's claim that she only came  to  the  UK  because  she  missed  her
children, but considered that she had always planned to  join  her  children
in the UK.  He  considered  that  the  children's  father  would  visit  the
children regularly if they returned to Albania. The  judge  considered  that
the children's best  interests  were  to  remain  in  the  UK  even  if  the
appellant was removed. He considered  that  it  would  be  proportionate  to
remove the appellant and he dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Permission to appeal against that decision was sought, and granted,  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to give proper consideration to  the  best
interests of the children and had  failed  to  consider  the  argument  made
before him at the hearing in regard to Article 24(3) of the  EU  Charter  of
Fundamental Rights. Reliance was placed upon the case of Abdul  (section  55
- Article 24(3) Charter : Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 106 in that regard.

At an  error  of  law  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson,  the
respondent conceded the error based upon the Charter and  Abdul.  The  judge
made directions for the re-making of the decision at a resumed hearing.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 12 December 2018. I was  informed  by  Mrs
Aboni that the  appellant's  son  [K]  had  now  been  issued  with  an  EEA
permanent residence card.

There was no oral evidence. Both parties made submissions on the basis  that
[K] was now a "qualifying child". Mr Kerr submitted that the  appellant  now
qualified under the parent route under  Appendix  FM,  given  that  [K]  was
settled in the UK. He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
disproportionate  in  any  event  pursuant  to  section   117B(6)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the grounds that it  was  in
[K]'s best interests to remain in the  UK  with  both  parents  and  it  was
unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK with  the  appellant.  Mrs  Aboni
accepted that [K]'s best interests were to remain in the UK,  but  submitted
that it was a matter of choice for the family whether he remained in the  UK
or not.

Following the hearing, and on further reflection,  I  considered  that  both
parties were wrong in accepting that [K] was now a "qualifying child"  as  a
result of becoming settled in the UK. In light of Mr  s  Aboni's  concession
at the hearing in that  regard  I  issued  directions  to  both  parties  to
provide written representations clarifying  their  positions.  Both  parties
made written submissions.

Mrs Aboni's submissions were as follows:

    "We write in response to Directions issued on 18 December 2018.


    The Respondent agrees with the Tribunal that although  the  appellant's
    son, [K] has now been issued with an EEA Permanent Residence  Card,  he
    is not a "qualifying child" for the purposes of  Paragraph  EX.1(a)  of
    Appendix FM or Sec 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.


    However, the Respondent accepts that [K]'s best interests are to remain
    in the UK to continue to enjoy family life with his father and  sibling
    and pursue his studies.  The Respondent accepts that the appellant does
    enjoy a genuine and subsisting relationship with [K] and that it  would
    be disproportionate to require the appellant to leave the UK.


    The Tribunal is invited to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
Outside the Rules."

Mr Kerr, in his submissions, accepted that the appellant could not meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules but asked that the appeal  be  allowed
outside the rules.

In light of Mrs Aboni's submissions there is no need  for  me  to  make  any
detailed findings. I make the  following  summary  findings.  The  appellant
cannot meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  However  it  is
clearly in [K]'s best interests  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  continue  his
studies. He is now settled in the UK and, since he has been living with  the
appellant for all his life apart from the two  months  after  his  departure
from Albania and prior to her arrival in the UK in November 2013,  it  would
be disproportionate to require her to leave  the  UK.  It  is  necessary  to
consider the human rights of [K] as well as the appellant's  and  therefore,
despite  the  appellant's  adverse  immigration  history,  the   appropriate
decision is that the appeal be allowed on human rights grounds  outside  the
immigration rules.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
outside the immigration rules.




Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 9 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
