
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/09740/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 27th March 2018                            |On 1st May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                  New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ALINA LIMBU
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr James Khalid, Counsel appearing by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross hearing centre, who
    allowed the claimant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR  against  his
    she did not qualify for entry clearance to re-join her  father  in  the
    United Kingdom under the Secretary of State's  policy  in  relation  to
    family members of former Gurkhas, first published in 2015.

 2. There is no dispute that the claimant is the adult child  of  a  former
    Gurkha.  The appeal  turns on whether family life  continues  to  exist
    between the claimant and her sponsor father.  For the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Mr Wilding accepts that if family life does continue to  exist
    then the First-tier Tribunal's decision on proportionality is sound and
    the appeal must be dismissed.

 3. The facts of this matter emerge from the evidence of the sponsor father
    and the written evidence of the claimant herself and are summarised  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision at paragraphs 9 to 17 thereof.

 4. In summary it appears that since the sponsor father left Nepal for  the
    United Kingdom his daughter has remained a student at least until  very
    recently (she is now a qualified nurse) and she has lived, not with any
    of the rest of her extended family, but with neighbours.  She does  not
    have her own bank account, but has an ATM card  on  her  father's  bank
    account into which his pension credits are  paid.   He  telephones  her
    regularly and visits annually.  I  note  also  that  it  was  with  the
    claimant's late mother that her father originally came  to  the  United
    Kingdom although unfortunately her late mother later returned to  Nepal
    and died there and he has since remarried.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that family life had  continued  to
    exist and that the applicant should be granted entry clearance to  join
    her sponsor father in the United Kingdom.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
    appealed.

 6. The findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal can be interfered  with
    by this Tribunal only if they are irrational in one of the ways set out
    at paragraph 90 of the judgment of Lord Justice  Brooke  in  R  (Iran).
    That is to say, that they are contrary to the evidence  or  a  decision
    which no reasonable judge could make or a decision which  the  Tribunal
    simply cannot understand.

 7. That high standard is not reached here.   There  is  evidence  from  an
    unchallenged witness that his adult daughter is maintained by access to
    her father's bank account and has continued  to  live  in  Nepal  as  a
    student while she finished her qualifications and that  he  would  have
    brought her to the United Kingdom with his first wife, her mother,  had
    he been able to do so at the time.  On  that  basis  the  finding  that
    family life continues to exist was open to the First-tier Judge and  as
    Mr Wilding conceded, if that is the case the appeal must fail.

 8. The appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is  therefore  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson                  Dated:       27 April 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

