
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09122/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 April 2019                      |On 6 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me after a hearing  on  18  January  2018
    following which I decided that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") was to be set aside for error of law and for the decision to be
    re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant had appealed to  the  FtT
    against a decision to refuse his human rights claim within the  context
    of a decision by the respondent to make  a  deportation  order  against
    him.  The decision I made following the  hearing  on  18  January  2018
    entitled "Decision and Directions"  (the  error  of  law  decision)  is
    attached as an annex to this decision and reference should be  made  to
    it for the full context of this, the re-making of  the  decision.   For
    immediate context however, I set out some of  the  paragraphs  of  that
    decision as follows:

         "14. By way of background, it is to be noted that the appellant has
             a number of convictions.   These  are  for  driving  offences,
             offences of violence, and sexual assault in relation to one of
             his daughters.  The offences occurred between 2004  and  2015.
             In respect of the most  recent  offence,  that  relates  to  a
             conviction in the Magistrates' Court on 21 July  2015  whereby
             he was convicted of four counts of battery and sexual  assault
             and commission of a further  offence  during  the  operational
             period of a suspended sentence order.  The suspended  sentence
             was imposed on 23 September 2013 in the Magistrates' Court for
             an offence of battery.  The court on 21 July  2015  imposed  a
             restraining order prohibiting him from contacting his wife and
             three children or going  to  their  address,  with  the  order
             lasting until 20 July 2017.

         15.  Mr Bramble clarified that the decision to make  a  deportation
             order on the basis that his deportation was conducive  to  the
             public good was explained in the decision letter as  being  on
             the basis that he was a persistent offender (per  para  398(c)
             of the Rules).

         16.  The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant, his  wife  MD,  and
             his daughters HS and JD.  He noted that the appellant and  his
             wife have five children, the eldest who is 26 years of age and
             the youngest being 18 years  of  age.   The  eldest,  SD,  has
             severe autism and he lives in the family home where his mother
             cares for him.  The evidence before the FtJ was that as SD had
             matured physically it had become  necessary  for  a  male  "to
             administer to his more personal needs", which it is said is  a
             role that had fallen to the appellant.  Other children  assist
             however.

         17.  He referred to the appellant, and the family as a whole, being
             reliant exclusively on state benefits.  The  appellant  is  in
             receipt of employment support  allowance,  having  suffered  a
             heart attack in 2000.  At the time of the hearing  before  the
             FtJ, the youngest child was at school in the sixth  form,  two
             of the children were at university and the eldest works  part-
             time as a support worker.  The  appellant  is  in  receipt  of
             medication to suppress his alcoholism  and  manage  his  blood
             pressure.

         18.  There was evidence to the effect that since the expiry of  the
             restraining order in July 2017 the appellant had  visited  the
             family home daily to assist in relation to SD.

         19.  At [23] the FtJ concluded that the appellant and his  wife  do
             have a commitment towards one other and he accepted  that  the
             appellant was unable to work following his heart  attack.   He
             found that being unable to provide for his family he  took  to
             alcohol and thereafter began to amass "his unenviable list  of
             previous convictions".  At [24] he recorded the evidence  that
             the children are still committed to their father and he  noted
             in particular the evidence of HS.

         20.  He found that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's
             wife to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant,  having
             referred to the provisions of para 399(b)  and  para  EX.2  of
             Appendix FM.

         21.  Nevertheless, at [27] he concluded that the appellant had been
             an intermittent figure in the life of his  wife  and  children
             since he was imprisoned for the first time in  May  2008.   He
             accepted that  his  offending  was  related  entirely  to  his
             alcoholism but that he had failed to address that issue for 15
             years until the sexual assault on his daughter.   It  was  the
             nature and gravity of that offence, he found, that had  caused
             him to seek the help that he now receives.

         22.  However, at [28] he said that the evidence he had  heard  left
             him in no doubt that the reality of the family has  been  that
             they have struggled on in spite of the appellant, rather  than
             with him.  His wife takes the lion's share of caring for their
             son and has done so exclusively while her husband has been  in
             prison.  He found that such assistance as he affords  her  has
             in the past been  limited  due  to  his  alcoholism  that  was
             unmanaged at that time.  Although he  had  sought  to  address
             those issues, the FtJ found that that was at a time after  his
             children had attained their majority.  He concluded that given
             the limited help the appellant  had  offered  his  wife  since
             2000, he was not satisfied that it would be unduly  harsh  for
             her to remain in the UK without him.  Thus, he  did  not  meet
             the requirements of para 399(b)."

 2. At the resumed hearing, oral evidence was given by the  appellant,  his
    wife and their three children.  The following is  a  summary  of  their
    evidence.

    The Oral Evidence

 3. The appellant adopted his witness statements  in  examination-in-chief.
    In cross-examination he said that he lived at home with  his  wife  and
    children, having moved in with them on  7  December  2017.   His  three
    daughters and son also live there.

 4. His wife does not work and receives state benefits  for  looking  after
    their son.  Their daughter H is the eldest and works.  Their daughter J
    is married.

 5. Their son's condition is still the same.  He gets angry a lot but  when
    they take him out he is happy.  He is unable to be left on his  own  as
    he does not understand where he is.  He agreed that one of the  reasons
    that he was saying that he should not be deported was that his wife  is
    unable to cope on her own because he needs to help care for their  son.
    As to whether other family members would be able to step in  and  help,
    they would not because they are doing their own  things.   His  married
    daughter and son-in-law do not visit regularly.  Although his daughters
    live at home they go to university and the other one works.  Either  he
    or his wife takes their son out and looks  after  him.   J  lives  near
    Tipton which is quite far from them.

 6. He and his wife do have other family members but none of them  come  to
    visit and none are willing to help.  He had asked them  and  they  said
    that they could not.  All five of his sisters have their own lives  and
    they do not visit each other.  One brother has kidney problems and they
    have to go and see him in hospital.  The older one had a  heart  attack
    and passed away.  There is another brother who lived in  India  but  he
    also passed away.

 7. He has no family in India.  It is true that their daughter R is engaged
    and went to India.  She stayed with some relatives there.   His  wife's
    family home is there.  His wife has a brother and  sister-in-law.   Her
    parents are here in the UK.  The house in India  is  where  his  wife's
    brother lives.  They had asked if he would be able to stay with them if
    he was deported but they said that there was no room for him. He thinks
    they have two daughters and two sons.  To the suggestion that the house
    would be large enough to accommodate  him,  given  that  his  wife  and
    daughter went there last July, he knows that they could  not  have  him
    there.  Nobody would be willing to help in any event.

 8. He has cut down on his drinking drastically and at the weekends he only
    has just two cans of light beer.

 9. In relation to Reach Out Recovery, he had attended  the  course  twice.
    The classes were at the library.  He completed  the  course.   Although
    the course consisted of an initial assessment and  six  sessions,  they
    told him that his drinking was quite normal and that there  were  other
    people attending the course whose drinking was  much  worse  than  his.
    They did not provide a report or letter in that respect.

10. Referred to the letter stating that the initial assessment was  to  the
    effect that he drank about 15 units a week, it has been about three  or
    four months now that he has cut down from that amount to  two  cans  of
    weak beer at weekends and nothing else.  It was true that until two  or
    three months ago he was still drinking quite a lot more.

11. In re-examination he said that in relation to his wife's family he only
    sees her mother and father who live in the UK.  They are like  his  own
    parents.

12. MD, the appellant's wife, adopted her witness statements in examination-
    in-chief.  In cross-examination she said that the appellant only drinks
    one can of light beer at the weekend.  The alcohol clinic  was  at  the
    library.  He went there twice.  The reason he only went for two  visits
    was that they said that there are people who are a lot worse than he is
    and that he was not an alcoholic.  That was all they said.

13. Since August of last year he had only been having one can of light beer
    at the weekend.  As to the appellant having said that he has about  two
    cans and that it was up until  about  three  months  ago  that  he  was
    drinking quite a lot more, she said that he was not drinking that  much
    except maybe at a wedding or some other occasion.  He had been drinking
    an average of about one can at the weekend for the past several months.

14. She is the main carer for their son.  As she had said  in  her  witness
    statement, she needs her husband's help to cope with him.   As  to  how
    she coped for the quite long period when the appellant was  not  living
    at home, her daughters helped her.  If her husband  was  deported  they
    would not be able to help because they are independent now and will  be
    working.  She would be the only one to look after him.

15. Her husband does not have any family in India.  She has a  brother  who
    lives there.  Her husband could not live with her  brother.   They  had
    been asked and had refused.  She had asked them when they were  talking
    about deporting him.  In their culture a son-in-law would not have  her
    husband living with them and they had refused once.  The appellant  was
    their son-in-law and brother-in-law.  It is  her  father's  house  that
    they live in.

16. In re-examination she said that the reason that they could not have him
    stay with them in India  was  because  they  are  just  about  managing
    themselves.

17. She provides the money for the alcohol that her husband consumes.   She
    knows that he only has one can because he consumes it in front of  her.
    She does not give him more than �3 or �4 at the weekend.  She does  not
    drink alcohol herself.

18. H adopted her witness statements in examination-in-chief.  In  relation
    to the Reach Out Recovery letter dated 23 August 2018  (the  assessment
    and course), they went there for triage.  They  did  an  assessment  in
    terms of what help he needs.  They were  told  that  local  communities
    could help with his  situation.   They  gave  them  a  contact  at  the
    library.  They said that he was not an alcoholic and that there  was  a
    long waiting list.  They did not find that social or  weekend  drinking
    was serious and  they  therefore  did  not  attend  the  workshops  any
    further.

19. In cross-examination she said that she had  graduated  from  university
    and had moved back to her parents' address.  She gave  details  of  her
    employment.

20. Her brother has quite a lot of care needs.  Right now she is  not  able
    to help with those because of the hours that she works, sometimes going
    out at 3 a.m. and then sleeping in the day.  She normally works between
    3 a.m. and 11.30 a.m.  However,  she  does  shift  work  so  her  hours
    change.

21. She was able to help in the past when her father was not  around.   She
    used to come around at weekends from Coventry, although it  was  mostly
    just meeting them and going out shopping with them.  She is quite close
    to her brother.

22. As to whether she would be able to help with her brother if her  father
    was deported, what she wants to do is focus on her career and make  her
    hours full-time.  Helping with her brother would block a lot of options
    for her.

23. In answer to my questions she said that her brother  does  not  have  a
    normal chronological mental age.  Her niece is 8 and he bonds more with
    her.  He does not speak at all, only simple words like  "ma".   He  can
    say easy names.  As to what he does all day,  he  watches  YouTube  and
    listens to music.  He spends time with his nieces and nephews  or  goes
    for a walk with someone.   They  have  tried  to  get  him  some  basic
    training in terms of, for example, washing but they say that because he
    cannot speak that is not possible.

24. When he watches YouTube, they put it on for him and he will click on  a
    letter or scroll down.  He recognises the  pictures  and  sometimes  he
    understands if they say something to him.  She  thinks  he  understands
    Makaton sign language which was used at his school.  They are trying to
    learn it.

25. He cannot bathe himself and needs support to do so.  He would not,  for
    example, brush his teeth properly and if he was washing he  would  just
    drop water on himself and come out of  the  bathroom.   He  can  toilet
    himself.  At the moment her father helps him shower or bath  as  it  is
    better if he does it.

26. R adopted her witness statements in  examination-in-chief.   In  cross-
    examination she said that she was engaged last July and went  to  India
    with her mother, her brother and her other sister P.  She  is  not  yet
    married.  They stayed at her uncle's house, her mother's brother.

27. She had been there about four or  five  times.   Her  uncle  has  three
    children at home and one who is married lives  away.   They  only  have
    three rooms in total in the whole house.  They all  slept  together  in
    one big room when she was there.  Her uncle is not on good  terms  with
    her father.  They have not communicated much for  quite  a  few  years;
    since they were little.

28. She does not think that even though her father has changed and  is  not
    drinking like he was before, her uncle would see him differently.   The
    situation between them has been long standing and her father  does  not
    really have contact with her mother's side of the family.  It is a two-
    way thing.

29. She is planning to get married in 2020 in India, probably in  February.
    She intends her husband to come to the UK.  He is Indian.

30. She is going to be at home next year.  As to whether she would be  able
    to help with her brother's care, in relation to bathing he needs a male
    and the only one who can do that is her father.  She could not help  in
    that respect.  Whilst her father was away for a long period her  mother
    took care of him.  However, he has now become attached to their father.
     In addition, because of his age it is better if his physical needs are
    met by a male.

31. In answer to my questions she said  that  she  is  studying  biomedical
    sciences at university.

32. P adopted her witness statements in  examination-in-chief.   In  cross-
    examination she  said  that  she  is  studying  international  business
    management at university and is in year 1.  She lives at home.

33. Now she does not do much in terms of caring for her brother because her
    parents do it.  Before she just used to go with  them  when  they  went
    out.  She had never previously had a bigger role because it was  mainly
    her mother and older sisters who  are  involved.   If  her  father  was
    deported she could try and help but she has her course and  also  needs
    to go on an international placement in the third  year.   That  is  not
    sorted out yet.







    Submissions

34. In his submissions Mr Mills conceded that  none  of  the  offences  for
    which the appellant was convicted resulted in a  sentence  of  over  12
    months' imprisonment.  However, the appellant was a persistent offender
    and there was no dispute on his behalf but  that  he  was  therefore  a
    'foreign criminal'.

35. So far as s. 117C(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") is concerned, that was a matter that was open  to
    be argued on behalf of the appellant in terms of the length of time  he
    has been here.

36. As regards the issue of undue harshness,  there  is  not  much  dispute
    about the facts.  The appellant has a son who has autism and a learning
    disability and needs physical assistance.   The  appellant  provides  a
    significant amount of care, including intimate care in particular.   It
    was not disputed on behalf of the respondent that he  has  taken  on  a
    greater role than before in terms of care for their son.  His  wife  is
    the primary carer and receives benefits for him.  She has been  present
    throughout his life.  Nevertheless, it was accepted that to remove  the
    appellant would have a significant impact on his wife.

37. However, in a way the appellant's wife has proved herself  to  be  very
    capable and the  children  have  done  very  well.   Because  of  their
    strengths they would be able to cope in future without  the  appellant.
    It was true that his daughters are now in higher education  or  working
    and one is married.  Nevertheless, he has three adult daughters at home
    who can assist with the support of his son  in  his  absence.   It  was
    relevant that he was able to toilet himself and there is no  suggestion
    that he is not able to move around by himself.  Although  therefore  it
    would be preferable to have the appellant there, his absence would  not
    be unduly harsh on his wife.  As was  established  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2019]  UKSC  53,  the
    threshold for undue harshness is  high.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    meaning of unduly harsh is the same for a spouse or a child and that it
    must be more than the normal trauma of separation.

38. As regards s. 117C(4), it was accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    lawfully resident for most of his life.  It was also accepted under  s.
    117C(4)(b) that the appellant is socially and culturally integrated  in
    the UK.  Although he used the interpreter  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing, he does speak English and he has five children who have  grown
    up in the UK and been to university and so forth.

39. As regards the issue of very significant obstacles  to  integration  in
    India (s. 117C(4)(c)), Mr Mills referred to the decision  in  Kamara  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,
    submitting that the appellant would be enough of an insider in  society
    in India, for example in terms of language and culture.   It  would  be
    hard to argue that he could not integrate.  Even if one took  his  case
    at its highest in terms of there being no-one there to support him,  he
    speaks the language, and he arrived in the UK  as  an  adult.   He  has
    cultural ties there.

40. So far as his health is concerned,  he  does  have  heart  disease  and
    receives  medication  for  it.   However,  that  medication  would   be
    available in India which has relatively good  health  care.   The  fact
    that there would be no-one there to support him is not sufficient.   In
    actual fact, he probably  does  have  greater  support  than  has  been
    suggested.  It may not culturally be the  done  thing  for  his  wife's
    brother to support him or for him  to  move  in  with  them  but  those
    considerations do not mean that that would not  be  possible.   If  the
    appellant returned to India they would not leave him  homeless  and  on
    the street.  It is likely that family  would  rally  round.   In  those
    circumstances, the requirements of s. 117C(4) are not met.

41. Following NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, the appellant was entitled  to  argue  that  there
    were very compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1  and  2,
    that consideration being required to be read into s. 117C(4).  In those
    circumstances everything would have to be taken into account  including
    the impact on the children who are committed to the appellant  and  who
    clearly do not want him to be deported.  The largest impact would be on
    his son who has a childlike understanding of the world and in terms  of
    what it would be like for him without the appellant there.

42. It is true that his son would not grow up to understand his absence  as
    a child would ordinarily grow up.  The impact on their son is  part  of
    the cumulative impact.

43. Nevertheless, the appellant is a persistent offender  and  there  is  a
    clear  public  interest  in  the   deportation   of   such   offenders.
    Rehabilitation was relevant but not determinative.  Since  his  release
    from prison he has not got into any  trouble.   However,  there  was  a
    slight issue as to the evidence in terms of alcohol  consumption.   All
    the family spoke of him as barely drinking at all, with  his  wife  for
    example saying that he drank only one can at  weekends.   However,  the
    letter from Reach Out in terms of the initial  assessment  was  to  the
    effect that he was still drinking about 15 units a week.  That is about
    six or seven pints of beer.  The appellant said that it was about three
    months ago that he was drinking a lot more.   There  was  inconsistency
    therefore about how much he was drinking and  when  he  cut  down.   It
    could not really be said that he was not a problem drinker or  that  in
    times of stress he would not revert to drink.  In the past  year  these
    proceedings had been a protective factor.  The balance therefore  still
    falls against the appellant and the public interest is heavily weighted
    against him.

44. In terms of whether he could be said to be a persistent offender now, I
    was referred to SC  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 929, in particular at [26]-[27] and Chege  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC).

45. For his part, Mr Azmi submitted that a persistent  offender  would  not
    always remain so.   One  had  to  look  at  the  circumstances  of  the
    offending and the period of time that had elapsed since  the  offending
    ([26] of SC (Zimbabwe)).

46. The background  in  this  case  is  the  appellant's  use  of  alcohol.
    However, he had changed his attitude to alcohol having  recognised  the
    impact of it on his life and the lives  of  his  family.   All  of  his
    children had testified to that effect, albeit that J did not give  oral
    evidence.  All said that he had dramatically reduced his alcohol intake
    and changed from the man that he was before.  His last major conviction
    was on 21 July 2015 for battery at Birmingham Magistrates'  Court  when
    he received a sentence of 18 weeks' imprisonment.  After that, the only
    other matter was on 18 May 2016 at Birmingham Magistrates' Court  where
    he  received  a  sentence  of  14  days'  imprisonment  for  breach  of
    conditions (according to the letter from his solicitors dated  15  July
    2016).

47. He now controls his alcohol and his last conviction was some time  ago.
    He could not now be said to be a persistent offender.  It was  however,
    agreed that the longer the period of offending the less easy it  is  to
    lose the label of persistent offender.

48. In terms of whether there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration in India, in  terms  of  emotional  and  social
    issues he has no  family  or  home  there  and  no  means  of  support.
    Reference was made to  J's  witness  statement  at  [21]-[22]  in  that
    respect.  Furthermore, the FtJ found that he was unfit to work.  He had
    suffered two major and one minor heart attacks.

49. His daughter R had said that there was a long standing issue  with  the
    relatives  in  India,  leaving  aside   the   cultural   and   domestic
    circumstances that would mean that  he  could  not  turn  to  them  for
    assistance.  He is dependent on his family and would  not  be  able  to
    obtain employment.

50. The children have real concern for him.  H  had  said  in  her  witness
    statement that there was concern if he was to return to India in  terms
    of the risk that he would get drunk and kill himself if he were  alone.
    She also referred to the risk that he would be isolated  and  depressed
    without having his family around  him.   As  set  out  in  the  written
    submissions before the FtT at [6], he is unable to  care  for  himself.
    In those circumstances the issue of integration is significant in terms
    of the obstacles that he would encounter and his ability to participate
    in society in India.

51. So far as the appellant's wife is concerned, she relies  upon  him  for
    the support that he provides.  It would be unduly harsh for her  to  be
    separated from him given the role that he  undertakes  in  relation  to
    their son.  The responsibility would all fall upon her.  She could  not
    call upon the assistance that she previously  had  from  her  daughters
    because of their own circumstances, including their education.

52. So far as Article 8 outside the Rules is concerned, reference was  made
    to [9] of the written submissions before the FtT to the effect that all
    the circumstances needed to be  taken  in  account,  in  particular  in
    relation to their son and his attachment to the appellant.   There  was
    evidence in the appellant's most  recent  witness  statement  of  their
    son's attachment to him and how upset he  becomes  when  the  appellant
    goes out.  To remove the appellant would be disproportionate.




    Assessment and Conclusions

53. I take the details of the appellant's offending from  the  decision  of
    the FtT.  On 18 June 2004 for aggravated vehicle taking,  driving  with
    excess alcohol and other related motoring offences, the  appellant  was
    made the subject of a two year community rehabilitation order.   On  12
    December 2007 for an offence of battery he was sentenced to a community
    order involving 18  months'  supervision.   On  21  February  2008  for
    another offence of battery  he  was  sentenced  to  a  community  order
    involving 12 months' supervision.  On 2 May 2008 and  6  November  2008
    for offences of battery and common  assault  he  was  sentenced  to  20
    weeks' and 16 weeks' imprisonment, respectively.  A further offence  of
    battery resulted in a sentence  on  23  September  2013  of  18  weeks'
    imprisonment suspended for two years.  Then, on 21 July 2015  for  four
    counts of battery and for a sexual assault (on one of his daughters) he
    received a sentence of 16 weeks' imprisonment.  He was made the subject
    of a restraining order preventing him  from  contacting  his  wife  and
    three youngest daughters or going to the family home.

54. According to the letter from his former solicitors dated 15 July  2016,
    on 18 May 2016 he was convicted of a breach of conditions for which  he
    received 14 days'  imprisonment.  In  that  respect,  the  respondent's
    decision dated 21 August 2017 states that "Despite  being  served  with
    warning letters on two occasions you re-offended and on 18 May 2016 you
    were convicted at Birmingham Magistrates Court of breach of supervision
    requirements and sentenced to 14 days imprisonment".  It is  not  clear
    what the breach of supervision requirements refers to but it presumably
    relates to the requirements imposed on his release from prison for  the
    most recent offence.

55. The parties agreed that certain findings  made  by  the  FtT  could  be
    preserved, as foreshadowed in my written directions dated  4  September
    2018.  Those preserved findings, with references in square brackets  to
    the decision of the FtT, are as follows:

       . The appellant and his wife are committed to each other (as  husband
         and wife) [23].


       . Following the appellant's heart attack he was unable to work,  took
         to alcohol and started offending [23].


       . The appellant's children are committed to him but none of them  are
         under the age of 18 and thus paragraph 399(a)  has  no  application
         [24].


       . At [27] of the FtT's decision:


             "The appellant has been an intermittent figure in the life  of
             his wife and children since he was  first  imprisoned  in  May
             2008.  I was told and accept that his  offending  was  related
             entirely to his  alcoholism.   That  being  so  he  failed  to
             address his alcoholism for  fifteen  years  until  the  sexual
             assault on his daughter.   It  seems  to  be  the  nature  and
             gravity of that offence that has caused him to seek  the  help
             he now receives".


       . At [28] of the FtT's decision:


             "... the reality of this family life has been that  they  have
             struggled on in spite of the appellant rather than  with  him.
             It was apparent that MD [his wife] takes the lion's  share  of
             caring for their son and has done  so  exclusively  while  her
             husband has been in prison.  Such assistance as he affords her
             I am satisfied has  in  the  past  been  limited  due  to  his
             alcoholism that was unmanaged at that time".


       . The appellant has sought to address these  issues  but  at  a  time
         after his children have attained their majority.


56. In terms of whether the appellant is a foreign criminal because he is a
    persistent offender, I am satisfied that he is.  It seems  to  me  that
    such is obvious from his repeated offending since 2004 and  up  to  and
    including 2016.  The mere fact that  the  appellant  has  not  offended
    since 2016 does not mean that he is not  a  persistent  offender.   His
    offending has endured for significant period  of  time,  and  has  only
    abated in a relatively recent period  compared  to  the  years  of  his
    offending.  In his case, given the history of  his  offending,  a  very
    much longer period of no offences would be necessary  before  he  could
    claim no longer to be a persistent offender.

57. Paragraph 399A was argued on the appellant's behalf and I  accept  that
    subparagraphs (a) and (b) are met by the appellant  (lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life and socially and  culturally  integrated
    in  the  UK).  Those  matters  were  not  disputed  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

58. I have considered very carefully the respective parties' submissions in
    terms of whether it could be said that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in India.  I bear in mind  his
    health and what is said about the lack of family support that would  be
    there for him.  I am prepared to accept that his  wife's  family  would
    not welcome him and are unlikely to offer  him  any  material  support.
    The evidence on  this  was  consistent.   As  much  as  anything  else,
    although  it  was  not  specifically  said,  it  is  likely  that   the
    appellant's behaviour in terms of his offending and  abuse  of  alcohol
    are factors meaning that he would not be  a  welcome  presence  in  his
    wife's family's household in India.  I doubt whether anyone would  find
    that particularly surprising.

59. It is likely that the  appellant  would  find  reintegration  in  India
    difficult, bearing in mind the lack of material and  emotional  support
    from sources in India.  I accept that he  would  be  unable  to  obtain
    employment in the light of his  health.  In  my  view  it  is  unlikely
    however, that he would be destitute.  Whilst the  appellant's  wife  is
    dependent on state benefits, at  least  one  of  his  daughters  is  in
    employment.  Whilst  two  other  daughters  are  students,  the  family
    collectively are likely  to  be  able  to  provide  him  with  material
    financial support.  It may not be much, but  I  am  satisfied  that  it
    would be sufficient to prevent him from being  destitute.   They  would
    certainly be willing to provide such support  in  the  light  of  their
    commitment to him.  The financial support that he is likely to  receive
    from his family would also enable him to obtain the medication that  he
    needs.

60. It is also to be borne in mind that the appellant is familiar with  the
    language and culture of India, having lived there until he was 20 years
    of age.  Whilst not essential for my conclusions in this respect, it is
    not the case that he would be considered as an outsider.  He  would  be
    able to reintegrate.

61. In my judgment therefore,  the  appellant  is  not  able  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  399A(c)  (very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration).  Likewise, the parallel provision in s. 117C(4)(c) of the
    2002 Act.

62. The appellant arrived in the UK in 1989 as a  visitor.  He  married  in
    August 1990.  He obtained indefinite leave  to  remain  on  18  October
    1994.  Accordingly, their relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
    appellant's immigration status was precarious.  For that  reason  alone
    he is not able to meet the requirements of paragraph 399(b).

63. It seems to me that the only basis upon which the appellant is able  to
    succeed in his Article 8 appeal is if he can show that there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    399 or 399A.  The extent to which he meets those requirements,  or  put
    another way, the extent to which he falls short of them, is relevant to
    the question  of  whether  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances.
    Likewise, in terms of the extent to  which  his  appeal  could  succeed
    outside the Article 8 Rules.

64. A  major  factor  in  the  consideration  of  whether  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 or 399A is the situation with regard to his  son  SD.   He  suffers
    from severe learning disability, according to the most  recent  medical
    report which is dated as long ago as 2 March 2015.   Although  the  FtJ
    said that he suffers from autism, I cannot see medical evidence to that
    effect.  The medical report refers to severe learning  disability  with
    significant impairment in behaviour requiring attention  or  treatment,
    as well as epilepsy which at that time was in  remission.   Whether  or
    not he does actually suffer  from  autism,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    evidence demonstrates that he has a profound disability.

65. There was consistent evidence about his  need  for  constant  care  and
    supervision.  I accept the evidence of  the  care  that  the  appellant
    provides for him and the extent of SD's attachment  to  the  appellant.
    None of that evidence was challenged and it was consistent.   There  is
    also evidence of SD's distress when the appellant was absent in  prison
    or otherwise away from  the  family,  and  indeed  currently  when  the
    appellant leaves the home.  There was also consistent evidence  of  the
    appellant being the one who provides for his daily  care  in  terms  of
    washing and bathing.  As SD has become older that assistance has fallen
    more and more to the appellant, although it cannot be  said  that  that
    has always been the case since SD was born in 1992  and  the  appellant
    only came back to the family home relatively recently.

66. If the appellant was to be removed from the UK I am satisfied that  the
    bulk of the caring responsibilities would fall to the appellant's wife.
     Whilst there are children living at home at the moment  they  are  not
    likely to be living there for very  much  longer  than  the  relatively
    short term.  One of his daughters  is  in  employment  and  seeking  to
    further her career, and the  other  two  are  at  university.   In  the
    natural order of things they would be expected to  leave  home  and  to
    pursue their own lives and careers.

67. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the appellant's removal would have  a
    significant impact on not only the appellant's wife, but on SD  himself
    who is clearly very attached to the appellant.

68. There is plainly a significant public interest factor to be taken  into
    account in terms of the appellant's repeated offending, and of the same
    type, despite warnings.  It  is  however  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that there has been no offending since May 2016; three years
    now.

69. The evidence of the extent of the appellant's alcohol  consumption  was
    in my view inconsistent in that his evidence was that  he  had  stopped
    consuming so much alcohol within the last three months,  although  that
    was not his wife's evidence.  Furthermore, the  evidence  from  his  GP
    dated 14 August 2018 at page 15 of the supplementary bundle is that  he
    is heavily dependent on alcohol.  However, the 23 August 2018 Reach Out
    Recovery letter states that in the light of the answers  given  by  the
    appellant he was deemed as not being alcohol dependent.  On that basis,
    the treatment programme appears to have  been  devolved  to  the  local
    area.

70. Nevertheless, the  evidence  does  seem  to  me  to  have  been  mostly
    consistent in terms of the fact  of  his  having  reduced  his  alcohol
    intake and in terms of his no  longer  getting  drunk.   Regardless  of
    whether he has either one or two cans of alcohol at the  weekends,  the
    evidence clearly indicates that he  has  made  efforts  to  reduce  his
    alcohol intake to the point where it no longer involves his  committing
    offences whilst in drink.

71. When all these factors are considered, I am satisfied  that  there  are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs  399  and  399A,  in  particular  taking  into  account  the
    circumstances of his son, SD, his relationship with the  appellant  and
    the appellant's close involvement with his day-to-day care.  Thus,  the
    'very compelling circumstances' criteria  being  contained  within  the
    Rules, I am satisfied that the appellant meets the requirements of  the
    Rules and that his appeal should accordingly be allowed.

72. A consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules would result in the same
    outcome, those considerations not involving anything different from the
    matters to which I have referred.

73. Whilst I have decided that the appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed
    under  Article  8,  in  particular  with   reference   to   his   son's
    circumstances,  that  is  not  to  say  that   it   would   always   be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant  notwithstanding  any  further
    offending.  Society could not be expected to tolerate  a  situation  of
    reoffending  and  thus  further  persistence  in  offending,  with  the
    appellant being shielded from removal because of his  son's  condition,
    or in combination with other circumstances. Those matters are likely in
    the future to have to give way to the public interest in removal.

    Decision

74. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision, allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 4/06/19


                                    ANNEX

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09122/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 18 January 2018                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M J Azmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born in 1969.  He is said to  have
    arrived in the UK in 1989 as a  visitor.   He  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 18 October 1994.

 2. Because of his criminal offending,  a  decision  was  made  to  make  a
    deportation  order  against  him  pursuant  to  section  5(1)  of   the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The respondent's decision is  categorised  as  a
    decision to refuse a human rights claim.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 5  October
    2017 whereby he dismissed the appeal.

 4. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision, to  summarise,
    contend that given that the FtJ concluded that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
    Appendix FM (insurmountable obstacles to family life outside  the  UK),
    he should have allowed the appeal "on that  issue  alone".   He  should
    similarly, according to the grounds, have found that it would be unduly
    harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in the  UK  if  the  appellant
    were to be removed.

 5. With reference to the appellant's  particular  circumstances,  and  the
    evidence provided by family members, it is contended that it  would  be
    unduly harsh to return the appellant to India.  It  is  contended  that
    the FtJ "ignored the statements" of family members.

 6. In submissions, Mr Azmi argued that  there  was  inconsistency  in  the
    FtJ's decision as between [33] and [34], in that in the latter he  said
    that Article 8 was not engaged whereas in [33] the opposite is implied.



 7. More significantly, for reasons which I explain below, it was submitted
    that the FtJ had failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life,
    having failed to consider paragraph 399A of  the  Rules.   That  is  so
    notwithstanding the fact that the respondent had considered  para  399A
    in her decision.

 8. Furthermore, it was submitted that where at [33] the FtJ had said  that
    the appellant had not been lawfully resident for most  of  his  "adult"
    life, after a consideration of s.117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), the FtJ had added  a  requirement
    that is not in the statutory provision.  The appellant did not need  to
    establish that he had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
    "adult" life.

 9. On the facts, it  was  submitted  that  from  the  year  2000  onwards,
    excepting limited periods of imprisonment and  the  restraining  order,
    the appellant had lived within the family home and  provided  care  and
    support for their son SD, born on  3  August  1992,  who  suffers  from
    autism.

10. In submissions, Mr Bramble relied on the 'Rule 24'  response,  although
    accepted that to some degree it was rather generic.

11. In relation to the private life argument, it was accepted that the  FtJ
    did not deal with para  399A,  but  he  submitted  that  that  was  not
    material.  The appellant had arrived in the UK on 20 May 1989  when  he
    was aged 20.  He was born in 1969.  It could not be said  that  he  had
    been in the UK for "most of his life" with reference to para 399A.   As
    I understood Mr Bramble's submissions, they were to the effect that the
    phrase "most of his life" was not to be taken literally  in  the  sense
    that it means 'more than half' of a person's life.

12. It was accepted  that  if  I  was  against  him  in  relation  to  that
    submission, there was an error of law on the part of the FtJ.  However,
    it was nevertheless contended that any such error would not be material
    because the FtJ had considered matters  overall.   I was  referred  to
    various aspects of the FtJ's analysis in terms of  undue  harshness  in
    relation to his removal.

13. In response to my question as to whether a private  life  ground  would
    inevitably be weaker than  a  family  life  ground,  Mr  Bramble  quite
    properly pointed out that  the  Rules  do  contemplate  a  circumstance
    whereby a person could succeed on private life grounds under the  Rules
    where they could not succeed in terms of family life.

    Assessment

14. By way of background, it is to be noted that the appellant has a number
    of convictions.  These are for driving offences, offences of  violence,
    and sexual assault in relation to one of his daughters.   The  offences
    occurred between 2004 and 2015.  In respect of the most recent offence,
    that relates to a conviction in the Magistrates' Court on 21 July  2015
    whereby he was convicted of four counts of battery and  sexual  assault
    and commission of a further offence during the operational period of  a
    suspended sentence order.  The suspended sentence  was  imposed  on  23
    September 2013 in the Magistrates' Court for  an  offence  of  battery.
    The court on 21 July 2015 imposed a restraining order  prohibiting  him
    from contacting his wife and three children or going to their  address,
    with the order lasting until 20 July 2017.

15. Mr Bramble clarified that the decision to make a deportation  order  on
    the basis that his deportation was conducive to  the  public  good  was
    explained in the decision letter as being on the basis that  he  was  a
    persistent offender (per para 398(c) of the Rules).

16. The FtJ heard evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  wife  MD,  and  his
    daughters HS and JD.  He noted that the appellant  and  his  wife  have
    five children, the eldest who is 26 years of age and the youngest being
    18 years of age.  The eldest, SD, has severe autism and he lives in the
    family home where his mother cares for him.  The  evidence  before  the
    FtJ was that as SD had matured physically it had become necessary for a
    male "to administer to his more personal needs", which it is said is  a
    role that had fallen to the appellant.  Other children assist  however.



17. He referred to the appellant, and the family as a whole, being  reliant
    exclusively  on  state  benefits.   The  appellant  is  in  receipt  of
    employment support allowance, having suffered a heart attack  in  2000.
    At the time of the hearing before the FtJ, the youngest  child  was  at
    school in the sixth form, two of the children were  at  university  and
    the eldest works part-time as a support worker.  The  appellant  is  in
    receipt of medication to suppress his alcoholism and manage  his  blood
    pressure.

18. There was  evidence  to  the  effect  that  since  the  expiry  of  the
    restraining order in July 2017 the appellant  had  visited  the  family
    home daily to assist in relation to SD.

19. At [23] the FtJ concluded that the appellant and his  wife  do  have  a
    commitment towards one other and he accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to work following his heart attack.  He found that being  unable
    to provide for his family he took to alcohol and  thereafter  began  to
    amass "his unenviable  list  of  previous  convictions".   At  [24]  he
    recorded the evidence that the children are still  committed  to  their
    father and he noted in particular the evidence of HS.

20. He found that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  to
    remain in  the  UK  without  the  appellant,  having  referred  to  the
    provisions of para 399(b) and para EX.2 of Appendix FM.

21. Nevertheless, at [27] he concluded  that  the  appellant  had  been  an
    intermittent figure in the life of his wife and children since  he  was
    imprisoned for the first time  in  May  2008.   He  accepted  that  his
    offending was related entirely to his alcoholism but that he had failed
    to address that issue for 15 years until  the  sexual  assault  on  his
    daughter.  It was the nature and gravity of  that  offence,  he  found,
    that had caused him to seek the help that he now receives.

22. However, at [28] he said that the evidence he had heard left him in  no
    doubt that the reality of the family has been that they have  struggled
    on in spite of the appellant, rather than with him.  His wife takes the
    lion's share of caring for their son and has done so exclusively  while
    her husband has been in prison.  He found that such  assistance  as  he
    affords her has in the past been limited due to his alcoholism that was
    unmanaged at that time.   Although  he  had  sought  to  address  those
    issues, the FtJ found that that was at a time after  his  children  had
    attained their majority.  He concluded that given the limited help  the
    appellant had offered his wife since 2000, he was not satisfied that it
    would be unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without  him.   Thus,
    he did not meet the requirements of para 399(b).

23. At [33] after setting out the requirements of s.117C of the  2002  Act,
    he found that the appellant "has not been lawfully resident for most of
    his adult life" (my emphasis).

24. He went on to state that in the light of his earlier findings  at  [27]
    and [28] and the extent to which the appellant had played a  meaningful
    role in the family lives of his  wife  and  children  since  2000,  the
    decision of the respondent was proportionate.  He  concluded  that  the
    limited help he offers now that the restraining order had expired,  was
    not sufficient to render the decision disproportionate.   He  concluded
    at [34] by stating that Article 8 was not engaged.

25. I am satisfied that the FtJ's decision does contain errors of law  such
    as to require that decision to be set aside.  The most  significant  of
    the errors of law is the failure to consider para 399A of the Rules, in
    terms of the  appellant's  private  life.   Para  399A,  to  summarise,
    applies where  para  398(b)  or  (c)  applies.   The  latter  of  those
    provisions applies because the respondent has made a decision to deport
    the appellant on the basis that his deportation  is  conducive  to  the
    public good.  Thus, the FtJ should have considered the requirements  of
    para 399A, namely whether he has been lawfully resident in the UK  "for
    most of his life", and whether he is socially and culturally integrated
    in the UK, and whether there would be very significant obstacles to his
    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he  be  deported.
    There is no such consideration in the FtJ's decision.

26. He did refer to the identical provisions in s.117C(4), or at  least  he
    set them out.  However, he imported a requirement that  is  neither  in
    the Rules nor in that provision of the 2002 Act  by  stating  that  the
    appellant had not been lawfully resident for most of his adult life.

27. It is not the case therefore, that there was no  consideration  of  the
    appellant's private life, but that consideration was  not  made  within
    the context of the Rules, and was otherwise in error in  terms  of  its
    understanding of what the statutory provisions require.

28. Although Mr Bramble submitted that the phrase "most of his  life"  does
    not mean more than half of a person's  life  spent  in  the  UK,  as  I
    indicated at the hearing I do not agree with that contention.  It seems
    to me that the meaning of the phrase is plain.  In  addition,  although
    neither I nor the parties were aware of it at the time of the  hearing,
    this phrase was considered by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State
    for the Home Department v SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112,  where  it
    was said at [53] that the  meaning  of  'most  of  his  life'  for  the
    purposes  of  the  Rules  has  to  be  'more  than  half'.   It  was  a
    quantitative not a qualitative concept.

29. It was not contended on behalf of the respondent, nor it  seems  to  me
    could it have been, that the appellant had not been "lawfully" resident
    for the requisite period.  According  to  his  immigration  history  he
    arrived on 2 May 1989 as a visitor, and at least from 19 November 1990
    he has had lawful residence.  At the time of the hearing before the FtJ
    he had been in the UK for 28 years, but had spent only twenty years  in
    India.  Thus, he is able to establish, and was before the FtJ, that  he
    had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life in accordance
    with para 399A(a).  The other requirements of  para  399A  (social  and
    cultural integration and very significant obstacles to  integration  on
    return) also need to be established, but that does not alter  the  fact
    that the FtJ failed to consider para  399A  and  wrongly  assessed  the
    parallel provision in this regard under s.117C(4)(a).

30. In my judgement that is a sufficient basis from which to conclude  that
    the FtJ's decision must be set aside for error of law.   There  was  no
    lawful assessment of the appellant's claim to remain on the grounds  of
    private life.

31. I do not consider that there is any merit in the argument  in  relation
    to para 399(b) and the FtJ's assessment of  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant met the requirements of that aspect of the Rules.  Apart from
    his reasoned conclusion that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's wife to remain in the UK without the appellant, it seems to
    me that the appellant does not even require  a  consideration  of  that
    issue, within the Rules at least, given that  para  399(b)(i)  requires
    that the relationship was not formed at a  time  when  the  appellant's
    immigration status was precarious.  The FtJ concluded that it  was  but
    nevertheless went on to  consider  the  further  requirements  of  that
    aspect of the Rules.  He need not have done so.  At the time he  formed
    his relationship with his wife he had no settled status, having married
    on 10 August 1990 he was granted leave to remain until 6 December 1992.
     It was not until 1994 that he was granted indefinite leave to  remain.



32. It is not necessary for me to express a concluded view on other aspects
    of the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant in  terms  of  the
    FtJ's assessment of the facts.  However, in the light of the fact  that
    it is now said that the appellant has moved back into the  family  home
    and the contention that there will need to  be  a  reappraisal  of  his
    family and private life circumstances, consideration will  need  to  be
    given to the extent to which any findings made by the FtJ, now that the
    decision has been set aside, ought to be allowed to stand.

33. I have reflected on the submission on behalf of the  appellant  to  the
    effect that it was appropriate for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing, given the  further  evidence
    that  it  is  proposed  to  adduce.   Having  considered   the   senior
    president's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2, I do not consider that
    that is an appropriate course.  It may be, subject to submissions, that
    some findings made by the FtJ can stand.  Accordingly, the re-making of
    the decision will take place in the Upper Tribunal.  In  that  context,
    the parties are to have careful regard to the directions set out below.



                                 DIRECTIONS

      a) In relation to any further evidence  relied  on  by  either  party,
         there is to be a further paginated and indexed supplementary bundle
         of documents to be filed and served no later than seven days before
         the next date of hearing.

      b) In relation to any witness whom it is  proposed  should  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail such as to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is  no
         need for any further examination-in-chief.

      c) At the next hearing the parties must  be  in  a  position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact, if any, made  by  the  FtJ
         can be preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     6/03/18

