
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/09403/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th November 2018                   |On 20th December 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr MUKHTIAR SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss I Husain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moan, promulgated on 13th October 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 4th  October  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 17th March
    1971.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  17th
    March 2016 refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
    the basis of his relationship with his partner.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  came  to  the  UK
    illegally, as the family home  in  India  was  subject  to  a  loan  to
    purchase medication from his brother and father, but that he  had  done
    so as long ago as 1995, and had remained here ever since, a period  now
    of twenty years' residency in this country.  He had a relationship with
    a partner which is described as "on and off" because  the  partner  had
    been married to someone else.  The Respondent considered that this  was
    not a relationship that amounted to a marriage  for  a  period  of  two
    years and there were no bases upon that the Appellant could not be seen
    to be  returning  to  India,  and  nor  had  the  Appellant  shown  any
    exceptional reasons for a grant of leave to remain to be given to  him.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the application on the basis of paragraph  276ADE,
    which was carefully set out in its entirety  (at  paragraph  23).   The
    judge recorded the fact that it was not accepted that the Appellant had
    been in the UK since 1995 by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  but
    that having considered the evidence,

         "I am satisfied that he entered the UK by October 1995  and  it  is
         highly unlikely given his status that the  Appellant  left  the  UK
         during that period [the period being between  1995  and  2000].   I
         find that he was present in  the  UK  between  1995  and  2000  and
         therefore satisfied the twenty  year  residency  conditions  for  a
         grant of discretionary limited leave.  Discretionary leave it to be
         distinguished  from  indefinite  leave.    There   are   additional
         requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of private
         life and other factors such as character and conduct would  feature
         in that decision they can process" (paragraph 26).

 5.  The  thereafter  then  considered  the  Appellant's  family  ties  and
    relationships in the UK, especially with his sister, who he claimed  to
    be in a close relationship with (paragraph 39).

 6. The judge then went on to conclude that

         "The Appellant would satisfy the criteria for a  grant  of  limited
         leave under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) on the basis of  twenty  years
         in the UK albeit he is not entitled to such  leave,  he  is  simply
         eligible  for  that  leave.   The  discretion  remained  with   the
         Respondent and not with the Tribunal.  He has been in the UK for  a
         long time, and whilst he has not complied with immigration laws, he
         has also not offended or caused any difficulty for members  of  the
         public" (paragraph 47).

 7. The Judge then turned to an analysis of factors which  counted  against
    the Appellant  (paragraph  48),  together  with  his  full  immigration
    history, and the fact that he had  not  submitted  another  application
    until 2011, and when that was refused in 2012, he did not leave the UK.
     The judge concluded that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the
    Appellant returning to India (paragraph 49).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that, once  it  had  been  recognised,
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) that the Appellant had been in the
    UK for twenty years and satisfied the requirements of  that  provision,
    then the appeal ought to  have  been  allowed,  because  there  was  no
    further requirement of his  being  "simply  eligible  for  that  leave"
    (paragraph 47).   Second,  it  was  stated  that  the  judge  erred  by
    considering the application as this was an indefinite leave  to  remain
    application, (where the position would be  that  matters  such  as  the
    Appellant's character and conduct become relevant), which was not to be
    the case here.  Third, it  was  said  that  the  judge  erred  also  in
    relation to Article 8 of the European Convention because given that the
    judge had found that because, in holding that  the  Appellant  did  not
    speak English to the standard required in  the  Immigration  Rules  (at
    paragraph 45), the judge had had regard to a requirement which did  not
    feature in a consideration outside the Immigration Rules.

10. On 12th February 2018 permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that, "it is arguable  that  the  appeal  should  at  least  have  been
    apparent to the extent that the  Appellant  had  met  the  requirements
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(ii) and (iii).  It remained a matter for  the
    Respondent whether limited leave to remain on the  grounds  of  private
    life should be granted pursuant to Rule 276BE(1).

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 14th November 2018, Miss Husain,  appearing
    on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the  issue  before  this
    Tribunal was a valid narrow one.  This was that  since  the  judge  had
    recognised that the Appellant had been in the UK for twenty years,  and
    that he "would satisfy the criteria" for the grant of limited leave  to
    remain, on the basis of twenty years' residence in this  country,  then
    the appeal should have been  granted  on  this  basis.   There  was  no
    additional requirement of his being "simply eligible  for  that  leave"
    (paragraph 47).

12. For her part, Miss Aboni submitted that the judge  had  concluded  that
    the Appellant had not been in this country for twenty years at the time
    that he had  made  his  application.   He  had  simply  said  that  the
    Appellant had been in this country for twenty years "by  October  1995"
    (paragraph 26) but this did not bring him up to the twenty year  period
    when his application was made.  The judge  therefore  had  to  consider
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi) whether there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go" (see paragraph 23) if  he  were  to  be  returned  to
    India.

13. In this respect, the judge found that, although the Appellant had  been
    in the UK for twenty years, his dealings were such that he

         "Has integrated himself into the local  community  and  established
         himself within his sister's household and assisted her, in the full
         knowledge that he may be required to  leave  at  any  time.   I  am
         satisfied that he provides some help within his sister's  household
         but not with personal care and I do not accept that  the  Appellant
         has  been  truthful  about  the  circumstances  in  India  or   the
         involvement of his sister's stepchildren.  He is  still  very  much
         dependent.  There is little evidence that he is integrated  outside
         the Sikh community" (paragraph 48).

14. Given that this was the case, Miss Aboni submitted that the  judge  had
    concluded that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant returning to India although "he  would  find  it  challenging
    initially  after  a  long  absence"  (paragraph  49).   Therefore,  the
    decision made by the judge was one that was entirely open to her.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  There are two reasons
    for this.  First, the judge recognised that the Appellant had  been  in
    the UK for twenty years.  This is clear from paragraph 26 itself.  Here
    the judge makes it clear that "I am satisfied that he entered the UK by
    October 1995".  This is a recognition that certainly  by  October  1995
    the Appellant was in this country.  It is  not  a  statement  that  the
    Appellant's presence in this country only began in October 1995.   This
    is clear from the fact that the judge states in the same paragraph that
    she was "therefore satisfied the twenty year residency  conditions  for
    employment of discretionary  limited  leave"  had  been  met.   It  was
    against this background that the judge came to the firm conclusion that
    "the Appellant would satisfy the criteria  for  the  grant  of  limited
    leave under paragraph 276ADE(iii) on the basis of twenty years  in  the
    UK" (paragraph 47).  In these circumstances, it was  not  open  to  the
    judge to also add the qualification that "he is not  entitled  to  such
    leave,  he  simply  [is]  eligible  for  that  leave"  (paragraph  47).
    Plainly, if the Appellant complied with the Rules, he stood to  succeed
    under the Rules.  The appeal should have been allowed for the grant  of
    limited leave on that basis.

16. Second, I am satisfied that the approach of the judge to  the  question
    of whether there would be "very significant obstacles to the  Appellant
    returning to India" (paragraph 49) is  flawed.   This  is  because  the
    judge takes the view that, although the  Appellant  has  been  in  this
    country for twenty  years  and  has  "established  himself  within  his
    sister's household and assisted her," and that she was satisfied  "that
    he provides some help within his sister's household" (paragraph 48) and
    that this was somewhat diluted  by  the  fact  that  "there  is  little
    evidence that he has integrated outside the Sikh community".  There  is
    no such requirement.  Accordingly, an assessment of  "very  significant
    obstacles" should have been divorced from this consideration.  One must
    take the situation as one finds it.  The situation with respect to this
    Appellant was that he was "a person who could establish himself  within
    his sister's household and assisted her" (paragraph 48).

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that this falls to be set aside.  I set aside the  decision
    of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal
    is allowed to the extent that the judge  erred  in  stating  that  "the
    Appellant would satisfy the criteria for the  grant  of  limited  leave
    under paragraph 276ADE", on the basis of twenty years in  the  UK,  but
    that "he is not entitled to such leave, he  simply  [is]  eligible  for
    that leave" (paragraph 47).  This is a  case  where  the  Appellant  is
    plainly entitled to a grant of limited leave.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may  be
payable.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018

