
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09657/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 24th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr JANAKAN [S]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MS J. ISHERWOOD (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    MS A. PATYNA (Counsel)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing. The Appellant in this  matter  is  the
    Secretary of State who appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Saunders) ("FtT") promulgated on 23.7.2018 in which the
    appellant's human rights claims was allowed on the basis of his  family
    and private life.


Background
2.    The Claimant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  who  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student.  He married his wife, a  British  citizen  on  16th  September
    2015. His application for leave to remain as a spouse  was  refused  on
    the grounds that he failed  the  Suitability  requirements  because  on
    4.4.2013 he submitted and relied on a false language test  certificate.
    The Appellant also concluded  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  that  the
    Claimant failed to meet EX 1 as to insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life outside of the UK which had been argued on medical evidence. There
    was a previous appeal promulgated on 27.9.2016 in which the appeal  was
    dismissed and in which it  was  found  that  the  Claimant  had  worked
    without permission.  On the morning of the hearing the Appellant sought
    to serve on the Tribunal and the Claimant the  bundle  of  evidence  in
    support of the deception claim. The Claimant's  representative  opposed
    the application to submit the documents late.   The FtT considered Rule
    2, the overriding objective and decided not  to  admit  the  bundle  in
    evidence [9] and thus did not determine the  issue  of  deception.  The
    precise reasons given by the FtT are set  out  below  in  the  Rule  24
    response summary. It was further argued  that  there  was  new  medical
    evidence to enable the FtT to depart from  the  previous  determination
    (Devaleesan).

Grounds of appeal
3.     In grounds of appeal the Appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    acting unfairly in not admitting evidence (generic and  specific)  from
    ETS of the alleged deception because  it  had  been  served  late.  The
    Appellant's representative at  the  FtT  hearing  had  been  unable  to
    produce evidence that the bundle had been filed and served in  time  in
    compliance with directions.   The FtT failed to make material  findings
    of fact and reached an erroneous decision on insurmountable  obstacles.
    The Claimant's wife suffered from endometriosis and was at the time  of
    the hearing trying to conceive a child. The FtJ  erred  by  failing  to
    take into account her evidence that she was able to work full  time  in
    the assessment of insurmountable obstacles.

Permission to appeal
4.  Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Povey who accepted that the Appellant unbeknown to the FtT had in  fact
    served the further evidence in time, 5 days prior to the hearing and in
    accordance with Tribunal directions.  Further in refusing permission to
    admit the bundle, the FtT had taken into account that a  previous  2016
    determination had not determined the ETS matter [8].   That  aspect  of
    the Appellant's decision was not before the FtT and which was  relevant
    to subsequent the Article 8 assessment.  The FtT made no finding as  to
    whether or not the Claimant had acted deceptively in the language test.

Rule 24 response

5.   The FtT properly considered the application to admit  the  evidence  of
    the ETS evidence bundle and gave sustainable reasons  for  refusing  as
    follows:
    (i) the bundle had not been served at the hearing in 2016;
    (ii) the evidence had not been included  in  the  main  bundle  and  no
    proper notice given that the issue was being pursued;
    (iii) there was no evidence that the bundle had been served at  all  or
    properly;
    (iv) if admitted the FtT would have had to grant an adjournment for the
    Claimant to deal with the issue;
    (v) the delay would be significantly prejudicial given  the  Claimant's
    wife's medical condition.
    Even if the bundle was served it was too late for the  material  to  be
    admitted without prejudice to the Claimant.

Submissions

6.    At the hearing before  me  Ms  Isherwood  representing  the  Appellant
    argued that it had now been accepted that the ETS evidence had in  fact
    been served on the Tribunal in  time  (by  21st  June).   Ms  Isherwood
    submitted (incorrectly) that the bundle had not been  produced  at  the
    hearing for the FtJ.  It had been produced at the  hearing  [5].  There
    was no issue that  the  Appellant  failed  to  comply  with  directions
    therefore. The FtJ had acted unfairly by allowing the Claimant to  rely
    on evidence that was served late on the morning of the hearing. It  was
    clear from the refusal letter that the ETS matter was  relied  on.  The
    FtJ had ignored the material fact that the Claimant  was  working  full
    time in assessing the impact of her condition. The  circumstances  were
    the same as in R (on the application of Agyarko v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11
    and the appeal ought therefore to have been dismissed.

7.   In response Ms Patyna for the Claimant contended that even if  the  ETS
    evidence had been served in compliance with the Tribunal directions, it
    was nevertheless served too late. The error was not  material  even  if
    procedurally wrong because the FtT's findings and conclusions under  EX
    1 were sustainable.  The FtT  reasonably  proceeded  with  the  hearing
    having decided that although the ETS was  a  material  issue,  the  FtT
    concluded that the evidence was served late  and  taking  into  account
    also that the previous Tribunal in 2016 had not been provided with  the
    evidence of the ETS.  The Appellant failed to explain  why  the  bundle
    had been served using an incorrect email for the Claimant's solicitors.
     The fact that the FtT allowed the Claimant to rely  on  evidence  that
    was served late was not relevant to the ETS issue.  There had  been  no
    objection by the Appellant's representative.  The  FtT  had  considered
    the evidence in respect  of  Suitability  having  regard  to  the  work
    without permission but found that it was not serious enough to  support
    the Appellant's challenge. The FtT set out detailed considerations  and
    concluded that the  evidence  was  compelling  and  reliable,  and  the
    medical evidence was not challenged.  The issue was not whether or  not
    medical treatment was available in Sri Lanka, rather the impact on  the
    treatment and the ability to conceive would be  adversely  effected  if
    the wife, who is a British citizen,  had  to  leave  [29].   There  was
    evidence from  on  occupational  therapist  to  show  that  the  wife's
    employment was flexible in  light  of  that  fact  that  her  condition
    impacted on her day to day functioning. The facts in this  appeal  were
    different from Agyarko.  This Claimant  could  arguably  succeed  under
    Chikwamba principles (Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40) as  referred  to
    in Agyarko at [51].




Discussion and conclusion

8.    I have considered the issue of insurmountable obstacles  first  and  I
    conclude that the issue raised by the Appellant does not  amount  to  a
    material error of law.  The FtT fully considered all of the evidence of
    the Claimant's wife's serious and debilitating  medical  condition  and
    its impact on her fertility  treatment  which  the  Tribunal  found  to
    amount to compelling circumstances. The evidence  that  the  Claimant's
    wife worked full time was supported by the letter from an  Occupational
    therapist which established that whilst working full time she was  able
    to work flexibly  depending  on  her  condition  and  treatment,  which
    clearly had an impact on her ability to work day to day. Accordingly  I
    am not satisfied that the FtT erred in failing to place weight  on  the
    evidence of full time employment which was considered together with the
    letter from the Occupational therapist.

9.    The issue that I now go on to consider is whether or not there  was  a
    material error in the FtT's decision not to admit the ETS evidence  and
    if so whether that failure had a material impact on the decision as  to
    insurmountable  obstacles  and  or  proportionality.    Regardless   of
    whether or not the Appellant failed to comply with the directions as to
    service of documents, I take a pragmatic approach to  the  extent  that
    the real position was that the evidence was served in time and  it  was
    produced before the Tribunal on the morning of  the  hearing.   It  was
    clearly a matter that was raised in the refusal  letter  and  therefore
    the Claimant had notice that it was being pursued and relied on by  the
    Appellant. The fact that the  bundle  had  not  been  produced  at  the
    previous hearing in 2016 was not in my view relevant or material as the
    Appellant had raised it in the current refusal letter. The FtJ in  2016
    had not determined  the  deception  issue  as  there  was  no  evidence
    produced in support and no findings of fact were made,  but  it  was  a
    "live" issue that the Appellant relied on at that time as well. It  was
    entirely clear that the Appellant relied on the issue of  deception  in
    the present refusal letter and it was the main issue raised in terms of
    Suitability; it was a matter that ought to  have  been  determined  and
    thereafter the finding made ought to have been considered alongside the
    evidence as to compelling circumstances. I consider  the  reasoning  of
    the FtT at [9] (and as set out in paragraph 5 above) and conclude  that
    it is not sustainable on the evidence.  The Claimant  was  fully  aware
    that the issue was raised in the refusal letter and ought therefore  to
    have prepared for the evidence to be served at the hearing.  There  was
    no evidence to support the Claimant's belief that  the  matter  was  no
    longer being pursued. There was no specific reason  given  for  why  an
    adjournment would have been necessary to enable the Claimant to respond
    to the issues raised.  The evidence relied on in such cases is  generic
    and any specific evidence would have referred to the date in March 2013
    when it was shown that the test was taken.   The  issue  of  any  delay
    associated with the Claimant's wife's medical condition was not  in  my
    view entirely relevant to the question of fairness.

10.  There is a material error of law disclosed in the  decision.  Whilst  I
    accept that the FtT considered illegal working was relevant but not  of
    significance so as to outweigh the interest of  the  Claimant  and  his
    wife [32], it cannot be said that had the FtT also considered the  main
    issue of deception  that  the  outcome  would  not  be  different.  The
    findings at [24-33]  made  as  to  insurmountable  obstacles  shall  be
    preserved.  The matter is to be remitted for  limited  hearing  on  the
    issue of deception and thereafter the findings assessed in light of the
    preserved findings as to insurmountable obstacles [29].

Decision
11.   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. There is a material  error
    of law.  The appeal is to be remitted for  rehearing  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding FTJ Saunders) on the limited issue of deception  in  respect
    of  the  ELTS   and   thereafter   further   consideration   given   to
    insurmountable obstacles and proportionality under Article 8.




                               Signed                     Date 17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date  17.6.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
















