
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/09903/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 31 March 2021                     |on 22 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NADIA JAVAID
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, instructed by Law Lane, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge Foulkes-Jones, which
    at paragraph 5 (19) allowed the appeal because in  terms  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Pakistan".

 3. The judge's decision at paragraph 5  (18)  records  evidence  from  the
    appellant's  husband  that  he  and  the  appellant  are  "both  highly
    educated, skilled, hardworking,  experienced,  honest  and  law-abiding
    persons".  The judge goes on to say at 5 (18) and (19) that she has  no
    evidence of any work the appellant did in Pakistan;  no  occupation  is
    given on her marriage certificate; no evidence of her  working  in  the
    UK; and "no evidence ...  that  she  will  be  able  to  find  work  in
    Pakistan, despite being highly educated".  This is a major component in
    the conclusion on "very significant obstacles".

 4. Despite Mr Gajjar's valiant contentions to the contrary, I am satisfied
    that the SSHD's grounds disclose a conclusion  on  an  important  point
    reached without any cogent reason, and contrary to evidence provided by
    the appellant that she is not only highly educated but hardworking  and
    experienced.

 5. The judge also based her decision to a large extent  on  the  appellant
    having to live alone with no male protector.

 6. The respondent's decision, in dealing with family rather  than  private
    life, found no reason why the appellant and her husband could not  live
    in Pakistan.  The appellant made no case to the contrary  in  the  FtT.
    The judge gave no reason for assessing the appellant's private life  in
    Pakistan as if she would inevitably be on her own.

 7. The SSHD's grounds on this point are not as clear as  they  might  have
    been, being framed as if the matter  depended  on  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's husband's leave to remain in the UK.  There is  no  obvious
    relevance in that.  However, the grounds disclose a second clear error.



 8. The judge noted that the appellant has spent 27  of  her  32  years  in
    Pakistan, retains knowledge of the life,  language,  and  culture,  and
    speaks Urdu, before finding at paragraph 5  (19)  that,  despite  those
    factors, she "will not have the capacity to  participate"  in  life  in
    Pakistan.  That finding is left with no legally adequate support.

 9. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The case is remitted for a fresh
    hearing, not before Judge Foulkes-Jones.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      12 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

