
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09493/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           Mr GURVINDER Pal SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Manjit Singh Gill QC, Counsel, instructed by
Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 7 August 2019 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Minhas which refused the Article 8 ECHR  appeal  of
    the appellant.


    Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 27 February 1985.

 3. The appellant came to the UK on 4 October 2004 with entry clearance  as
    a student.  He was granted a further period of leave  until  4  October
    2012.  On 1 July 2011 he was convicted of obtaining leave to remain  by
    deception and was sentenced to six months' imprisonment.  Thereafter he
    has made four applications for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

 4. On 23 March 2018 the appellant made a fifth application  for  leave  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The appellant's claim was based on his marriage
    on 5 October 2017  to  Zahra  Haider,  a  dual  British  and  Pakistani
    national.

 5. The respondent refused that application in  a  decision  dated  16  May
    2019.  The respondent maintained that the appellant could not meet  the
    suitability  requirements  set  out  in  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.  of  the
    Immigration Rules because of his  conviction  for  obtaining  leave  to
    remain by deception.  The respondent also found  that  paragraph  EX.1.
    was not met as there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
    establishing their family life outside the UK and that the  refusal  of
    leave was proportionate.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and the  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Minhas on 10 July 2019.  The appellant
    maintained that paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of the  Immigration  Rules  should
    not have been applied. He also submitted that there were insurmountable
    obstacles to his wife accompanying him to  live  in  India.   This  was
    because of her dual Pakistani/British nationality and Muslim  religion,
    the appellant being a Sikh. The appellant maintained that life in India
    would be very difficult for them  as  a  result,   relying  also  on  a
    country expert report of Dr Livia  Holden  dated  7  June  2018  and  a
    Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled   "India:   Religious
    Minorities" published in May 2018 (the CPIN). He also  maintained  that
    his wife had health problems, including moderately  severe  depression,
    arising from her very abusive first marriage.  Further,  he  relied  on
    the additional factor  of  his  wife  having  to  leave  a  job  and  a
    profitable business in the UK in which she employed three people.   The
    appellant also maintained that, in  an  assessment  of  proportionality
    under  Article  8  ECHR,  outside  the  Immigration   Rules,   it   was
    disproportionate to expect him to leave the UK.  He relied also on  the
    principle set out in the case of  Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40,
    asserting that expecting him to leave the UK merely in  order  to  seek
    entry clearance where it is accepted that he could otherwise  meet  the
    Immigration Rules was not proportionate.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal found in paragraph 24 of the decision that  the
    appellant did not present with a character  or  conduct  that  put  him
    outside  the  suitability  requirements  of  the   Immigration   Rules,
    concluding that paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of  Appendix  FM  did  not  apply.
    That finding has not been challenged by way of a cross-appeal or  in  a
    Rule 24 response and stands.

 8. In paragraph 26 of the decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on  to
    consider whether the appellant met paragraph EX.1. of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge found as follows in paragraph 26:

         "The appellant relies upon the report of Dr Holden to evidence  the
         difficulties he and his wife will face in both Pakistan and  India.
         At a general level, I accept this evidence.  I acknowledge it  will
         be difficult, as does the respondent.  However,  the  test  I  must
         consider is whether the difficulties they  face  will  be  so  very
         significant that they cannot  be  overcome  and  will  entail  very
         serious hardship for the appellant and his wife.  The  respondent's
         position is that the appellant can continue his private  life  with
         his wife in India.  The appellant is an Indian  national.   He  has
         lived in India for the first nineteen years of his  life.   He  has
         family in India with whom he is in contact.  The appellant  asserts
         he cannot return to his family in view of their disapproval of  his
         marriage.  Equally, the appellant asserts  he  cannot  relocate  to
         another part of India as the risks to  his  Pakistani  Muslim  wife
         will be the same from society in general.  I find this assertion is
         not supported by the  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   The
         appellant's evidence is that his family considered  he  had  shamed
         them, in their view the worst thing he could have done is  marry  a
         Muslim.  Despite this, the  appellant  and  his  family  remain  in
         contact.   This  behaviour  is  not  consistent  with   a   totally
         unsupportive family.  The appellant puts forward the report  of  Dr
         Holden to support his assertion that his wife is at risk in  India.
         I have considered this document in detail.  Dr  Holden  reports  in
         depth in relation to visa and citizenship requirements and comments
         generally on the increased  political  tension  between  India  and
         Pakistan.  Her report does not assist me  on  the  subject  of  the
         risks specifically to Pakistani Muslim females visiting or residing
         in India.  I therefore attach little weight to the report  in  this
         regard.  The legal opinions of Aakash Gupta and K Sehgal, advocates
         in India, in my view, both go beyond their expertise in  commenting
         on the risks  to  Pakistani  Muslim  visitors  to  India.   Neither
         advocate specifies how they reached  their  brief  conclusions  nor
         state any particular experience or qualification which equips  them
         to comment on the risks of violence or otherwise to the appellant's
         wife in view of her background.  Accordingly, I place little weight
         on their opinion to this issue.  The respondent refers me to India:
         CPIN  May  2018,  in  particular  chapter  9  regarding  interfaith
         marriages.  The CPIN at paragraph 9.3 states 'While  it  isn't  the
         norm for interfaith couples to be  subject  to  violence,  it  does
         happen.  The threat of violence would exist, in the  vast  majority
         of cases, from the families involved. Only in certain  rural  areas
         would individuals  outside  the  family  take  an  interest  in  an
         interfaith marriage and take any action.  'The  CPIN  continues  at
         paragraph 9:3:1 'There is  a  very  stark  difference  between  the
         treatment of interfaith couples in rural  areas  and  urban  areas.
         Whereas in urban areas, it  is  not  uncommon  for  inter-religious
         marriages to take place, they are much more controversial in  rural
         areas. ... In urban areas it would be more  difficult  to  identify
         interfaith couples.  Even where an interfaith couple is identified,
         it is not likely they would face serious  hardship'.  At  paragraph
         9:5:1 the CPIN provides 'marriages between Hindus and Muslims would
         face the most opposition and, marriages where the woman is  Muslim,
         were more 'problematic' than other inter-religious marriages'.  The
         CPIN does not address marriages between Sikhs and Muslims in India.
          I have had regard to all of the evidence before me.  Based on  the
         information within the CPIN,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  other
         reliable evidence to suggest the appellant's wife will be  targeted
         because  of  her  background,  I  do  not  find  the  risk  to  the
         appellant's wife to amount to an insurmountable obstacle preventing
         the appellant and his wife continuing their private life outside of
         the United Kingdom.  I concede that it may be more problematic than
         an interfaith marriage involving parties where neither is Muslim".

 9. The First-tier Tribunal went on in paragraph  28  of  the  decision  to
    consider whether the appellant's wife would be able  to  obtain  Indian
    citizenship, finding even if that took many years that Ms Haider  would
    be able to obtain visit visas.  Towards the middle  of  that  paragraph
    the judge stated "there is no evidence before me  of  dual  nationality
    for the appellant's wife. The judge went on in paragraph 28 to state:

         "I have not been made aware of any difficulty with the  appellant's
         wife providing evidence of the renunciation or cancellation of  her
         Pakistan passport and applying  for  a  visit  visa  as  a  British
         citizen.  There is no evidence before me to suggest that a  British
         citizen, even of Pakistani descent, will  be  unable  to  obtain  a
         visit visa for India.  Even if I accept the evidence that obtaining
         citizenship will take many years, the appellant's wife is  able  to
         obtain a visit visa.  Accordingly, the appellant and his  wife  are
         able to continue their family  life  together  outside  the  United
         Kingdom.   I  therefore  find  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to the appellant and his  wife  continuing  their  family
         life together outside of the United Kingdom in India".

10. In paragraph 29 of  the  decision  the  judge  found  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple exercising their family life  in
    Pakistan, relying on the report of Dr Holden and a Country  Policy  and
    Information Note on interfaith marriage in Pakistan.

11. In paragraph 30 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  a
    psychological assessment prepared by Kevin O'Doherty, a  specialist  in
    mental health and psychological trauma. Mr O'Doherty commented  on  the
    physical and mental  abuse  experienced  by  Ms  Haider  in  her  first
    marriage and how this had had an "adverse psychological impact on her".
    He recorded her evidence that in the past she had  taken  overdoses  of
    prescribed medication which had led  to  attendance  at  hospital.  She
    continued to experience migraines and was  seeing  a  neurologist.  The
    appellant's bundle included  confirmation  of  neurology  appointments.
    However,  whilst  not  questioning  Mr  O'Doherty's  expertise  or  his
    conclusions on the health  of  the  appellant's  wife,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal placed little weight on the report as it was not  disputed  by
    the appellant that medical treatment would available to the appellant's
    wife in India.

12. In paragraph 31 the Tribunal  considered  Ms  Haider's  employment  and
    business and in the UK, as follows:

         "31. The appellant's wife is employed in the United  Kingdom.   She
             also operates a business employing three others.   Neither  of
             these facts amount to an  insurmountable  obstacle  preventing
             the appellant and his wife from continuing their  family  life
             together outside of the United Kingdom."

13. The judge concluded in paragraph 32 that  the  test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles was a "stringent" one and that  it  was  not  met  here.  She
    summarised her findings in paragraph 33:

         "The appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  since  2011  in  breach  of
         immigration rules. He remains an Indian national and lived in India
         for the first 19 years of his life. He  is  a  qualified  transport
         professional and able to work in India. He is supported by his wife
         and friends. The appellant's wife is able to obtain  a  visit  visa
         and travel to India. The risks to them  as  an  interfaith  married
         couple can be mitigated by moving to an urban area.  The  appellant
         has not demonstrated to me that there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to his integration into India. I have  no  hesitation  in
         concluding that the appellant  would  be  able  to  re-establish  a
         private life there within a relatively short period of time."

14. In paragraphs  35  to  50  of  the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    conducted an assessment of proportionality outside of  the  Immigration
    Rules, finding that the refusal of leave was proportionate and that any
    temporary separation while the appellant applied for entry clearance to
    return was also proportionate.

    Grounds of Appeal

15.  The  appellant's  challenge  to  the  finding  that  there   were   no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  continuing  family  life  in  India   is
    contained in Grounds 4 and 5.  Ground  4  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took an incorrect approach to the evidence on the difficulties
    that would arise from the appellant's wife  no  longer  being  able  to
    operate her business and work in the UK were the couple to relocate  to
    India and ignored her  vulnerabilities  arising  from  her  history  of
    domestic violence in her previous marriage. Those vulnerabilities  were
    still relevant even if counselling, neurological  treatment  and  other
    treatment was available in India. The wife's subjective fear  of  going
    to India had to be taken into account.  Further,  there  was  objective
    support for her fear of societal hostility towards those  of  Pakistani
    nationality or heritage and to interfaith marriages where one party was
    Muslim, set out in the report of Dr Holden, letters from Indian lawyers
    and the  CPIN.  Even  if  the  couple  did  not  require  international
    protection the evidence on the difficulties they would face because  of
    their particular profile was still capable of showing that there  would
    be very significant difficulties for them in India.

16. Ground 5 set out a challenge to the approach taken  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the  CPIN, maintaining that even  if  it  did  not  comment
    specifically on an interfaith marriage between a Sikh man and a  Muslim
    woman, the judge had to place some weight on the evidence  of  societal
    hostility  towards  interfaith  marriages,  particularly   where    the
    appellant's wife was a Pakistani national and a Muslim. Also, the First-
    tier Tribunal was incorrect to state in paragraph 26  that there was an
    "absence of any  other  reliable  evidence"  on  difficulties  for  the
    appellant and his wife in India where the report of Dr  Holden  clearly
    identified such difficulties. The judge stated that Dr Holden's  report
    was reliable "at a general level". It was incorrect to go on  to  place
    no weight on Dr Holden's report only because "it did not assist  me  on
    the subject of risks specifically to Pakistani Muslim females  visiting
    or  residing  in  India"  when  it  specifically   addressed   systemic
    discrimination and difficulties towards those of Pakistani  nationality
    or heritage and towards those in interfaith marriages.

17. Ground 5 also submitted  that  the  finding  in  paragraph  26  of  the
    decision on the appellant's family not being "totally unsupportive" was
    not open to the judge. The appellant's evidence was  consistent  as  to
    his family having nothing to do  with  him  if  he  returned  to  India
    because of his inter-faith marriage. His evidence at the  hearing  that
    he remained in contact by telephone and that his mother remained of the
    view that he had brought shame on the family did not  provide  a  basis
    for inferring any support on return. Ground 5 also maintained that  the
    approach taken to the evidence of the two Indian lawyers was  incorrect
    where they had provided qualifications showing that they were qualified
    lawyers and their evidence on the systemic difficulties  faced by those
    of Pakistani nationality or heritage in the Indian  immigration  system
    was consistent with other evidence,  for  example  the   report  of  Dr
    Holden and the respondent's CPIN.

18. The appellant also maintained that the judge erred in proceeding on the
    basis set out in paragraph 28 of the  decision,  that  the  appellant's
    wife only had British  citizenship  and  had  renounced  her  Pakistani
    nationality. This had never been her evidence; see paragraph 8  of  her
    witness statement.  In any event, the evidence of Dr  Holden  was  that
    even if the appellant's wife were to renounce her Pakistani nationality
    and retain only British nationality, her Pakistani heritage would still
    leave her facing difficulties when  dealing  with  the  authorities  in
    India. Indeed, even the respondent's refusal letter recognised that  it
    would be difficult for the appellant's wife to obtain a  visa,  stating
    "whilst it may be difficult and challenging to obtain the correct  visa
    entry clearance for your wife to enter India, this does not  amount  to
    an insurmountable obstacle".

19. The grounds also maintained that even if any one of the factors  relied
    upon by the appellant in and of itself did not amount to insurmountable
    obstacles, the First-tier Tribunal failed to approach this part of  the
    assessment in a holistic and cumulative manner.

    Decision on Error of Law

20. When considering  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed a material error on a point of law concerning the  assessment
    of whether there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being
    exercised outside the UK, I referred to the recent guidance provided by
    the Court of Appeal in the case of Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.  In
    paragraph 35 of that decision the Court of Appeal gave its view  as  to
    the correct interpretation of insurmountable obstacles.  The  Court  of
    Appeal indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

         "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of  all  to
             decide whether the alleged obstacle to continuing family  life
             outside the UK amounts to a very significant  difficulty.   If
             it meets this threshold  requirement,  the  next  question  is
             whether the difficulty is one which would make  it  impossible
             for the applicant and their partner to  continue  family  life
             together outside the UK.  If  not,  the  decision-maker  needs
             finally to consider whether, taking account of any steps which
             could reasonably be taken to avoid or mitigate the difficulty,
             it would nevertheless entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner (or both).

         37.  To apply the test in what Lord Reed in  the  Agyarko  case  at
             para 43 called  'a  practical  and  realistic  sense',  it  is
             relevant and necessary in addressing these questions  to  have
             regard to the particular characteristics and circumstances  of
             the individual(s) concerned.  Thus, in the present case  where
             it was established by evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
             tribunal  that  the  applicant's   partner   is   particularly
             sensitive to heat, it was relevant for the  tribunal  to  take
             this fact into account in assessing the  level  of  difficulty
             which Mr Wilmshurst would face and the degree of hardship that
             would be entailed if he were required  to  move  to  India  to
             continue his relationship.  We do not accept, however, that an
             obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India  is  shown
             to be insurmountable - in either of the ways  contemplated  by
             paragraph EX.2. - just by  establishing  that  the  individual
             concerned would perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and
             would in fact be deterred by it from relocating to India.  The
             test  cannot,  in  our  view,  reasonably  be  understood   as
             subjective  in  that  sense.   To  treat  it  as  such   would
             substantially dilute the intended stringency of the  test  and
             give an unfair and perverse advantage to  an  applicant  whose
             partner is less resolute or committed  to  their  relationship
             over one whose partner is ready to endure greater hardship  to
             enable them to stay together".

21. In paragraph 41 of the decision the Court of Appeal  pointed  out  that
    the question of the difficulties a person might face on relocation  did
    not necessarily require objective confirmation by third party evidence,
    stating:

         "The question is  one  of  fact  and  there  is  nothing  wrong  in
         principle with basing a finding about  a  person's  sensitivity  to
         heat on evidence given by the person concerned and members of their
         family, as the FtT judge did in this  case,  if  such  evidence  is
         regarded as sufficiently compelling".

22. In paragraph 45  of  Lal,  the  Court  of  Appeal  also  identified  an
    assessment of whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  should  not
    proceed "by considering the matters  relied  on  separately  from  each
    other without also assessing their cumulative impact".  In paragraph 46
    the Court of Appeal concluded that the 70  year  old  British  spouse's
    proven sensitivity to heat, the fact of his living all of his  life  in
    the UK, and his ties to friends and family including his four  children
    and six grandchildren, left it open as to whether an  assessment  would
    lead to a finding  that  he  would  face  insurmountable  obstacles  on
    relocation to India.

23. I found that the grounds challenging  the  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant  and  his  wife  would  face  insurmountable   obstacles   to
    establishing their family life in India  had  merit.   My  reasons  are
    essentially those set out in the appellant's Grounds 4 and  5  but,  in
    particular, as follows.

24. Firstly, the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    appellant's wife had dual Pakistani and British nationality and had not
    renounced  her  Pakistani  nationality.   The  judge  proceeded  on  an
    incorrect basis when stating otherwise in paragraph 28 of the  decision
    and proceeding to distinguish Dr Holden's opinion on  the  difficulties
    the couple would face on the basis that she addressed the situation for
    a Pakistani national seeking to enter India. The report  of  Dr  Holden
    and the respondent's refusal letter confirmed  particular  difficulties
    for a Pakistani national in entering and remaining in  India  and  this
    factor required consideration.

25. Secondly, the judge indicated in paragraph  26  that  she  accepted  Dr
    Holden's opinion "[a]t a general level".  In  paragraph  28  the  judge
    appears to accept also that Dr Holden  provided  reliable,  "in  depth"
    evidence on Indian visa and citizenship requirements.  In paragraph  29
    the judge accepts Dr Holden's  evidence  at  its  highest  and  without
    question regarding the difficulties for the appellant and his  wife  in
    Pakistan. As found above, in paragraph 28 the judge  was  incorrect  to
    decline to place weight on other aspects of Dr Holden's report  because
    the appellant's wife is, in fact, a  dual  Pakistani/British  national.
    Also, the statement in paragraph 28 that the appellant's wife was not a
    dual national is  not  easily  reconciled  with  the  criticism  of  Dr
    Holden's report in paragraph 26 which states that the report "does  not
    assist me on the subject of the risks specifically to Pakistani  Muslim
    females visiting or residing in India". Why would that be a reason  for
    finding the report of little use if the  appellant's  wife  was  not  a
    Pakistani national? As will be clear from the matters set out above, Dr
    Holden's report does provide evidence  on  such  a  situation,  in  any
    event.

26. It is my conclusion that the approach taken by the First-tier  Tribunal
    to Dr Holden's evidence was not rational and  amounted  to  a  material
    error where the report at its highest  was  capable  of  leading  to  a
    different outcome as to whether the couple  would  face  insurmountable
    obstacles to living in India.

27. Thirdly, the  appellant's  wife  has  a  undisputed  profile  of  being
    vulnerable as a result of the domestic violence she experienced in  her
    first marriage.  Her evidence was she has a subjective fear of going to
    India as a Pakistani Muslim woman who has mental  health  and  physical
    problems. This was a factor that required  consideration  even  if  she
    would be able to obtain medical treatment in India. As set  out  above,
    there  was,  in  any  event,  country  evidence  capable  of  providing
    objective support for  her  subjective  concern  that  she  would  face
    systemic,  adverse  treatment  in  India  because  of   her   Pakistani
    nationality and Muslim religion.

28. Fourthly, the judge also erred in finding that the couple could  expect
    some support from the appellant's family when  his  evidence  had  been
    consistent as to this not being the case.

29. Fifthly, the approach taken in the paragraphs set out above  show  that
    the judge approached the various factors relied upon by  the  appellant
    and his wife individually and  not  cumulatively  as  required  by  the
    guidance in Lal.

30. For these reasons, I found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    on  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles   to   the   couple
    establishing family life in India, disclosed  a  material  error  on  a
    point of law such that it had to be set aside to be re-made.  Where the
    findings under the Immigration Rules are a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account in  the  proportionality  assessment  that  must  be  conducted
    outside the Immigration Rules, this  also  meant  that  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment set out in  paragraphs  35  onwards  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had to be set aside to be re-made and  it  was  not
    necessary to address in detail the other grounds challenging that  part
    of the decision.

31. The parties were in agreement that were I to find an  error  of  law  I
    would be in a position to proceed  to  re-make  the  appeal  without  a
    further hearing.  I therefore proceeded to re-make the appeal.

    Decision Re-making the Appeal

32. The evidence of the appellant and  his  wife  was,  in  the  main,  not
    disputed. The evidence was that the appellant will not be  offered  any
    support by his family on return to India because he has entered into  a
    marriage with a Pakistani Muslim woman.  The evidence on the  treatment
    that a couple with their profile would  face  in  India  was  generally
    consistent.

33. The report of  Dr  Holden  and  the  CPIN  show  that  they  will  face
    difficulties by way of discrimination  and  some  hostility.  The  CPIN
    provides relevant evidence but was prepared as  a  tool  for  assessing
    protection claims and requires a little caution where the assessment to
    be made here is a holistic one as to whether there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being exercised in India.  Section  7  of  the
    CPIN describes a raised level of societal hostility towards Muslims  in
    India. Paragraph 7.2.27 of the CPIN refers  to  discrimination  against
    Muslims in the housing sector, stating:

         "... discrimination against Muslims (as  well  as  Dalits)  can  at
         times be a barrier to access to housing.  Private  landlords,  real
         estate brokers and property dealers will often refuse  to  rent  to
         someone who is Muslim, or impose unfair  conditions  on  them.  The
         Special Rapporteur was informed that in some parts of the  country,
         Muslims have felt compelled to leave their neighbourhoods and  move
         to places  where  other  Muslims  are  living,  often  in  informal
         settlements."

34. The CPIN in paragraph 9.3.1 quotes an Immigration and Refugee Board  of
    Canada (IRB) report stating that those in mixed marriages would not  be
    likely to face serious hardship if they relocated  to  an  urban  area.
    Immediately after this, however, in the same paragraph, the  CPIN  sets
    out an extract from a Reuters report expressing a different view, that:



         "... inter-religious relationships are  'a  taboo'  both  in  rural
         areas and for "educated, well-off families in urban India".

35. The CPIN also states in paragraph 9.5.1:

         "In 2012, the IRB cited academic sources which noted that marriages
         between Hindus and Muslims would  face  the  most  opposition  and,
         marriages where the woman is Muslim, were more  'problematic'  than
         other inter-religious marriages"

36. Paragraph 9.5.2 states:

         "BBC News reported in March 2018:

         'Marriages between Hindus and Muslims have long  attracted  censure
         in conservative Indian families, but the attachment  of  a  deeper,
         sinister motive to them is a recent phenomenon."

37. The appellant also relies on the report of Dr Holden.  Dr  Holden  sets
    out her duty to the Tribunal at the outset of the report. She sets  out
    appropriate qualifications, experience and expertise for commenting  on
    the difficulties that would be faced by the appellant and his  wife  in
    India because of the wife's Pakistani nationality, Muslim religion  and
    the marriage being  inter-faith.  There  was  no  submission  from  the
    respondent that she was not a reliable expert witness.

38. In paragraph 9 of her report, Dr Holden set out:

         "As per information on the United Kingdom foreign travel advice for
         India '[a]ll applicants of Pakistani origin who hold dual  British-
         Pakistan nationality  must  apply  for  an  Indian  visa  on  their
         Pakistan passport.   Those  who  have  either  renounced  Pakistani
         nationality or cancelled their Pakistani  passport  would  need  to
         submit documentary proof of this'.  Hence the wife of the Applicant
         will  either  need  to  provide   documentary   evidence   of   the
         renounciation (sic) or cancellation of her  Pakistani  passport  or
         will be treated as a Pakistani applicant."

39. Referring back to the test from Lal,  I  am  doubtful  that  having  to
    renounce her Pakistani nationality is  a  reasonable  step  by  way  of
    mitigation that the appellant's wife could be expected to take in order
    to avoid serious difficulties  in  obtaining  a  visa  for  India.  The
    respondent does not appear to have made a  submission  to  this  effect
    before the First-tier Tribunal and did not do so before me.

40. Paragraph 10 of Dr Holden's report sets out that a  Pakistani  national
    can apply for a three month visit visa, limited to a maximum  of  three
    cities on provision  of,  amongst  other  requirements,  a  sponsorship
    certificate signed by a particular official who can certify  that  they
    know the Indian sponsor. The appellant can be expected to  be  able  to
    obtain that certificate after a period of time, if not  immediately  on
    return, given that he grew up and studied in India before coming to the
    UK. Dr  Holden  sets  out,  however,  that,  in  addition,  the  Indian
    authorities require further documents  from  Pakistan,  including  what
    would appear to be an ID card and a utility bill. Given  her  residence
    in the UK, I accept that Ms Haider cannot provide those  documents  and
    could not do so without relocating to Pakistan without her husband.  As
    found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  her  history  in  Pakistan  is  a
    difficult one and requiring her to go back now without her  husband  in
    order to obtain documents to support her application for a three  month
    visit visa to go to India appears to me to be unreasonable.

41. In paragraph 11, Dr Holden sets out the additional requirements if  the
    appellant's wife applied for a  two-year  multiple  entry  spouse  visa
    valid for up to five places in India. The appellant's  Indian  passport
    would have to show a valid Pakistani  visa  or  residence  permit.  The
    appellant does not have such a visa or permit. As  before,  it  is  not
    seriously argued here  that  the  couple  can  be  expected  to  go  to
    Pakistan.

42. Dr Holden comments in paragraph 25 of her report on  the  deteriorating
    political relationship between India and Pakistan and the  impact  this
    would have on the appellant and his wife. She comments that:

         "Whenever relations worsen this has an adverse impact  on  citizens
         of the country that is perceived as enemy and this is the source of
         added  difficulty  and  bureaucratic  delays  for   Pakistan/Indian
         couples. This can have very  serious  consequences,  which,  in  my
         experience, materialize  in  visa  refusals  and  impossibility  to
         travel or situations of illegality that cannot be  imputed  to  the
         applicants."

43. Dr Holden's conclusion is that it  would  be  "quite  taxing"  for  the
    appellant and his wife to live  together  in  India  because  of  these
    various difficulties.

44. In paragraphs 32 and 33 of  the  report,  Dr  Holden  comments  on  the
    likelihood of family disapproval of an interfaith marriage and I  found
    that this, together with the information in  the  CPIN,  supported  the
    appellant's evidence  of  his  family  disowning  him  because  of  his
    marriage.

45. In paragraphs 34 to 43 of her report Dr Holden sets out her view of the
    position for inter-faith couples where there is family  disapproval  to
    the extent that honour killings can arise. I accept that  the  examples
    she sets out are at odds with some of the material in  the  CPIN  which
    does not reflect a significant level of honour  killings  and  provides
    some support for a couple being able to relocate to urban area. In  the
    context of the evidence as a  whole,  it  is  my  conclusion  that  the
    interfaith marriage of the appellant and his wife where Ms Haider is  a
    Pakistani Muslim would not lead  to  physical  violence  but  would  be
    capable of giving rise to unpleasant discrimination on  a  day  to  day
    basis even in urban areas and that factor being more  significant  here
    given the context of Ms Haider's particular vulnerabilities which  will
    make it harder for her to deal with such discrimination.

46. The appellant also relies on letters from two  immigration  lawyers  in
    India, Mr Gupta (letter dated 27 June 2019 pages  180  to  184  of  the
    appellant's bundle) and Mr Sehgal (letter dated 21 June 2019  at  pages
    185 to 188 of  the  appellant's  bundle).  Mr  Gupta  comments  on  the
    societal and systemic prejudice against those of Pakistani  nationality
    or heritage leading to delays or obstacles being put in the way of visa
    applications being considered, to difficulties in obtaining  some  form
    of settled status or Indian  nationality  to  the  non-Indian  national
    being considered adversely, as an "enemy" of India.  Mr  Sehgal  merely
    sets out the provisions of Indian law on obtaining  Indian  nationality
    showing  that  nationality  provisions  are  more  significantly   more
    difficult for those with Pakistani (and Bangladeshi)  backgrounds.  His
    comment  at  the  end  of  his  report  that  Ms   Haider   will   face
    "difficulties" in India as a woman of Pakistani  heritage  is  somewhat
    general but consistent with the  comments  of  Dr  Holden.  Mr  Gupta's
    comments are also consistent with Dr  Holden's  evidence.  Where  these
    letters were generally consistent with the information in the CPIN  and
    Dr Holden's report and where they  addressed  relatively  uncontentious
    matters  such  as  the  visa  requirements  for  those   of   Pakistani
    nationality or heritage, they appeared to me capable of  carrying  some
    weight.

47. My conclusion, from the information contained in the CPIN, Dr  Holden's
    report and the letters from the Indian lawyers, is that the immigration
    system in India sets additional and  onerous  hurdles  for  appellant's
    wife because of her Pakistani nationality.  A  visit  visa  application
    requires documents which the appellant would  not  be  able  to  obtain
    immediately upon return and such a visa  would  be  strictly  time  and
    geographically limited. It is not reasonable for Ms Haider to  have  to
    return to Pakistan to obtain documents required for a visa  for  India.
    The couple do not appear to be in a position to obtain  a  spouse  visa
    where the couple cannot provide the documents from Pakistan  which  are
    required by the Indian  authorities.  The  adverse  view  of  those  of
    Pakistani nationality or  heritage  would  be  capable  of  leading  to
    discrimination in the  processing  of  visa  applications  and  in  the
    couple's dealings  with  the  authorities  generally.  These  obstacles
    appear  to  me  to  approach  the  threshold  of  a  very   significant
    difficulties albeit they do not make relocation impossible.

48. In addition, I must also  take  into  account  Ms  Haider's  particular
    background. The evidence on her vulnerability arising from abuse in her
    first marriage is not disputed. She has  moderately  severe  depression
    and suffers from migraines.  There is no argument  as  to  there  being
    medical treatment available for her in India but I  am  satisfied  that
    she is a vulnerable person who  will  find  relocation  to  India  more
    difficult as a result. She has  a  subjective  fear  of  discrimination
    because  of  her  Pakistani  background  and  being  in  an  interfaith
    marriage, the country  evidence  before  me  certainly  supporting  her
    concerns on the former and also on  the  latter,  albeit  to  a  lesser
    extent.  In addition to her  personal  vulnerabilities,  Ms  Haider  is
    employed in the UK and  employs  three  others  in  her  own  business.
    Having to leave her job and give up her business  in  order  to  go  to
    India are not factors which could amount to an insurmountable obstacles
    but they are not wholly negligible either and add some  weight  to  the
    appellant's case that the couple should not be required to go to India.

49.  It  is  my  conclusion  that  the  particular  factors   here,   taken
    cumulatively, show that the appellant and  his  wife  will  face  "very
    significant difficulty" in relocating to  India,  that  there  are  not
    steps that they can reasonably take to  mitigate  that  difficulty  and
    that the "very serious hardship" that they would face  shows  that  the
    test of insurmountable obstacles is met. I reach  that  conclusion  not
    solely because the wife's Pakistani background,  her  Muslim  faith  or
    because  the  marriage  is  inter-faith  or  because  of  Ms   Haider's
    vulnerability or her employment and business interests in  the  UK  but
    because of the particular combination of those factors here.

50. The appellant has therefore shown  that  he  meets  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and the Article 8 ECHR  appeal  is
    allowed on that basis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be re-made.


The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR where the provisions of  Appendix
FM are met.

Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 5 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt







