
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09727/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 28 October 2020                        |On 09 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between
                           MOSES OLABODE LADEGBAYE

                        (nO anonymity direction made)

                                     AND
                                                                   Appellant

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adeniran, Solicitor on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:



      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision
         to refuse his human rights claim in a decision promulgated on the 2
         January 2020.

Background:

      2. The background is set out in the decision of the FtTJ and the
         evidence in the bundle. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. The
         appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 24 November
         1994.


      3. On 26 January 2010, the appellant made an application for leave
         outside of the rules. This was refused with no right of appeal on
         10 November 2010. He submitted a pre-action protocol letter on 21
         January 2011. The respondent's decision to refuse his application
         was maintained on 9 March 2011. He lodged an appeal on 29 March
         2011 which he withdrew. His appeal rights were exhausted on 3 June
         2011.


      4. On 9 March 2011 he was served with a RED.0001.


      5. He made a human rights claim in an application for leave to remain
         on the basis of his family and private life on 18 December 2018.


      6. In a decision issued on 16 May 2019 the respondent refused that
         application. It was noted that he did not make reference to a
         partner or dependent children in the UK. Thus, his application was
         considered in respect of his private life.

      7. As to private life, it was noted that he could not satisfy the
         provisions of paragraph 276ADE. It was noted that he claimed to
         have entered the UK on 24 November 1994 but that he had provided no
         evidence of his claimed entry into the UK and is not provided any
         evidence of the residence in the UK prior to 2003. It was therefore
         not accepted that he had lived continuously in the UK for at least
         20 years and that he failed to meet the requirements of paragraph
         276ADE (1) (iii) of the rules. As he was not aged between 18 and
         under 25 years he could not meet the requirements of paragraph
         276ADE (1) (v) of the immigration rules.

      8. As to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) the decision letter noted that an
         applicant must show that they are aged 18 or above and that there
         would be very significant obstacles to their integration into the
         country to which they would have to go if required to leave the UK.
         In the appellant's case it was not accepted that there would be
         very significant obstacles to his integration to Nigeria if
         required to leave the UK taking into account his previous length of
         residence, including his childhood, formative years and a
         significant portion of his adult life, having retained his
         knowledge of life, language and culture and that he would  not face
         significant obstacles in  re-integrating in life there.

      9. Under "exceptional circumstances" respondent considered whether
         there are any circumstances which would render refusal a breach of
         Article8 because it would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for the appellant but on the evidence provided, it was
         considered that there were no such consequences.

     10. As to his private life, it was considered that any private life or
         ties he had developed in the UK had been done with his full
         knowledge that he did not have permission to remain here
         permanently and had never been given any legitimate expectation of
         stay. As such, he should have prepared himself for the possibility
         of return to Nigeria. Whilst he may have made ties during his stay
         in United Kingdom, he had failed to demonstrate that those ties
         currently went beyond normal emotional ties.

     11. It was further noted that there was nothing to prevent him
         exercising his right to private life in Nigeria. The Secretary of
         State had the right to control the entry of non-nationals into its
         territory and Article 8 does not mean individuals can choose where
         they wish to enjoy their private life when it can reasonably be
         expected of them to continue that private life elsewhere. It was
         further noted that he had already demonstrated his ability to adapt
         to life in another country, which on his arrival to the UK was a
         completely new environment to him. Given his ability to integrate
         into life in the UK, a country he had no knowledge or experience of
         it was considered that he would be able to reintegrate into the
         culture and way of life in his country of origin which was a
         country which had previously lived.

     12. It was acknowledged that it may be initially difficult upon his
         return but there was no evidence of any exceptional circumstances
         which might prevent him from re-establishing his private life in
         Nigeria. He had already shown resourcefulness in obtaining work and
         establishing a private life in the UK in a country where we had no
         right to reside or work since his claimed entry of 24 November
         1994. Any skills and experience gained can be used to support
         himself on return to Nigeria.

     13. As to his claim to have family and friends in the UK, respondent
         considered that it was open to the family and friends to visit him
         in Nigeria or for him to apply for the appropriate entry clearance
         to visit friends and family in the UK. Any financial support from
         family and the UK could continue. Whilst the current economic
         situation in the country may be poor, the respondent was not
         satisfied that he would suffer any greater hardship than other
         people of that nation. His application was therefore refused.

     14. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT on
         12 November 2019. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal in a decision
         promulgated on 2 January 2020.



     15. Permission to appeal was issued and on 12 May 2020 permission was
         granted by FtTJ Grant-Hutchinson for the following reasons:-


         "it is arguable the judge has erred in law (i) by failing to give
         adequate and proper consideration as to whether there would be very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria if
         required to leave the UK in terms of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of
         the Immigration Rules and (ii) by erring in his assessment of
         section 117B in inferring that the appellant is likely to rely on
         public funds in the future when there is nothing in the present
         circumstances to support that assertion.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     16. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  on the 23 June  2020   Upper
         Tribunal Judge Sheridan issued directions, inter  alia,  indicating
         that it was provisionally of the view that the error of  law  issue
         could be determined without a face to face hearing  and  that  this
         could take place either on the papers or  in  the  alternative  via
         Skype.

     17. The hearing took place on 28 October 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote  hearing.   I  conducted  the  hearing  from
         court. The advocates attended remotely via video. Mr  Adeniran  had
         not been able to use his camera and therefore joined the hearing by
         telephone and was accompanied  by  the  appellant.  There  were  no
         issues regarding  sound,  and  no  other  technical  problems  were
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

     18. There was a Rule 24 response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 7 July 2020. There were also written submissions submitted on
         behalf of the appellant sent on the 20 July 2020.

     19. I also heard oral submissions from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance when giving their submissions.

     20. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Adeniran  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds and the  grant  of  permission  which  I  have  taken  into
         account.

The grounds:

     21. The written grounds assert that the FtTJ erred in his assessment of
         the applicant's case under paragraph 276ADE leading to an error  in
         the determination. The judge had considered that the earliest  date
         that has presence in the UK can be taken is from 2003. As such,  in
         the alternative the grounds submit  that  the  applicant  satisfies
         paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of the rules as he was aged 51 years  old
         and has resided in the UK for less than 20  years  but  that  there
         would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration  to
         Nigeria.

     22. The grounds set out those reasons; that  he  has  no  family  ties,
         support network or resources in Ecuador for him and  that  is  only
         meaningful private life was established in the UK;  if  considering
         his claim from 2003 he lived  in  the  UK  for  16  years  and  the
         appellant had formed his own links within the community (AB  9-15).
         Finally, if comparing the time spent in Nigeria to the  time  spent
         in the UK, he spent the majority of his life in the UK and that  he
         has not been to his home country and  has  lost  contact  with  his
         homeland and as such this amounts to a "significant  obstacle"  the
         appellant reintegrating there.

     23. The second ground asserts that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
         and proper consideration to the appellant's  case  and  surrounding
         circumstances under Article8 of the ECHR. The written grounds  cite
         the well-established five stage structured  approach  under  Razgar
         and submit that the appellant had established a private life in the
         UK  given  his   lengthy   residence   and   that   it   would   be
         disproportionate  in  the  circumstances  and  that  he  cannot  be
         expected to return to a country he is not been to since 1994.

     24. It is finally submitted that the judge erred in his  assessment  of
         section 117B as it relates the appellant's case. The  ground  state
         that the judge did infer that the appellant is likely  to  rely  on
         public funds in the future when there was nothing  in  the  present
         circumstances to support that  assertion.  The  appellant  was  not
         relying on public funds and has no intention to  do  so.  The  fact
         that the appellants be things languish and the length of  years  he
         has been United Kingdom had also been a factor in the determination
         of his case.

     25.  In his oral submissions, Mr Adeniran  relied  upon  those  written
         grounds. He submitted that the appellant had no family ties in  his
         country of origin and had established a private and family life  in
         the UK having spent more than 20 years in the UK .He submitted that
         all the links the appellant had had been in the  UK  and  that  the
         judge did not take into consideration  all  the  circumstances.  He
         submitted that the judge should have taken a holistic view.

     26. As regards ground to, he submitted that  the  section  117B  public
         interest  considerations  had  not  been  properly  or   adequately
         considered. As he had  lived  in  the  UK  for  over  20  years  he
         established a presence in the UK and therefore a private  life  and
         had established himself as a law-abiding citizen. He submitted that
         it would be unjustifiably harsh bearing in mind that he  had  spent
         most of his life in the UK and that he had not left the UK since it
         entered.  It  was  submitted  that  any   interference   would   be
         unjustified and not in pursuit of legitimate means.

     27. Mr Adeniran directed the Tribunal to paragraph  5  of  the  grounds
         (dealing with S117B) and that looking at the decision of the judge,
         he came to the conclusion that the appellant  would  be  likely  to
         rely on public funds when since he had entered he had  not  applied
         for any such funds. At the hearing he provided evidence of  support
         from members of the local community and family who  would  continue
         to support the appellant and had done so since he entered  the  UK.
         Thus there was no reason the judge to come to the  conclusion  that
         the appellant was likely to rely on  public  funds.  The  appellant
         could speak English and therefore the reliance  upon  public  funds
         was an error. Mr Adeniran finally submitted that the appeal  should
         be remitted to be heard afresh by another FtTJ.

     28. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response. It was argued that the
         decision did not contain any errors of law such that it  should  be
         set aside. Whilst the first ground argued that  the  appellant  met
         the immigration rules, the judge may clear findings that  the  date
         upon which he could first substantiate been United Kingdom was 2003
         and gave cogent reasons based  on  the  documentary  evidence,  the
         appellant's evidence, and letters of support. It  was  also  stated
         submitted that it was incorrect to say that the appellant spent the
         majority of his life in United Kingdom. If he had been  in  the  UK
         since 2003 had spent 35 years in Nigeria, compared to 16  years  in
         United Kingdom.

     29. As regards ground 2, it was submitted that the judge did not err in
         his assessment of whether the appellant might in the future have  a
         claim on public funds. In his oral submissions Mr Diwnycz submitted
         that at paragraph 43 it was not clear whether the judge was in fact
         counting that issue against him.

Decision on error of law:

     30. The question whether the Decision contains a material error of  law
         is not whether  another  Judge  could  have  reached  the  opposite
         conclusion  but  whether  this  Judge  reached  a   conclusion   by
         appropriately  directing  himself  as  to  the  relevant  law   and
         assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     31. I have considered the submissions made  by  the  advocates  in  the
         context of the decision of the FtTJ.

     32. The FtTJ's assessment of the claim can be summarised as follows.

     33. The FtTJ began his assessment and considering whether at  the  date
         of his application he lived continuously in the UK for at least  20
         years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  or  whether  there
         were at the date of  his  application  for  leave  to  remain  very
         significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria.

     34. The judge went on to consider the evidence in support of  his  long
         residence in the United Kingdom at paragraphs [27]-[31].  The  FtTJ
         set out that evidence at [27] which included the  contents  of  the
         application form, the letter from a  church  administrator  stating
         that the appellant had attended the church since May 2014,  letters
         to people stating that they know the appellant the various  periods
         of time, letters and various businesses addressed to the  appellant
         at an address in London and an undated witness statement  and  oral
         evidence.

     35.  At [28] the FtTJ considered the letters  from  the  businesses  as
         providing some support for his claim that he been resident in 2003,
         2005,  2006,  2008  and  2009  and   considered   the   appellant's
         explanation for him not being possible to provide evidence prior to
         2003 as a result of the passage of time but also  is  a  change  of
         several addresses on several occasions. The judge however concluded
         that the changes of address given in the  account  given  over  the
         claim. Residents were not that many and that the reference  to  the
         passage of time did not adequately explain the lack of evidence  of
         residence in the United Kingdom since 2009.

     36. At [29] the FtTJ address the evidence set out in the  letters  from
         various individuals. The judge found that only four of the  letters
         stated that they actually knew that the appellant was in the United
         Kingdom the time stated stop the  other  letters  did  not  specify
         where the writer met or saw the appellant  (save  that  one  stated
         that the writer knew him at a local church for the locality is  not
         specified). The judge went through that evidence but  gave  reasons
         as to why he could attach little or no  weight  to  them.  At  [30]
         there was a letter from the  church  administrator  but  again  the
         judge stated that it was lacking in anything "but  the  most  basic
         details of the circumstances in which the writers claim to know the
         appellant, and neither the  right  of  the  letter  nor  any  other
         representative of the church appeared as a witness at  the  hearing
         in order that their evidence could be tested,  and  no  explanation
         was offered as to why they were unable to do so,". Thus the weighty
         could attach was minimal.

     37. At [31] the FtTJ considered the appellant's witness statement to be
         inconsistent with his claim length of residence  and  gave  reasons
         for reaching that conclusion. The judge also found the contents  of
         the application was "lacking in the  level  of  detail  that  would
         reasonably  expect  it  to  be  provided  by  truthful   applicant,
         including the lack of  detail  of  the  appellant's  financial  and
         accommodation   circumstances,   such   as   how   much   rent   as
         accommodation, who lives with, and who is paying  his  rent  stop".
         The judge also refers to "very little details  added  in  his  oral
         evidence".

     38. He concluded that having considered the evidence "in the round" and
         on the balance of probabilities, he found that  the  appellant  had
         not demonstrated that he had lived continuously in the  UK  for  at
         least 20 years at the date of his application for leave to  remain.
         The judge accepted that he resided in the UK from 2003 -  2009  and
         that he is present in the United Kingdom for his appeal that he did
         not accept that he had proved that he lived in  United  Kingdom  at
         any other times.

     39. At paragraph [35] the judge stated that he did  not  consider  that
         the appellant had established that there would be very  significant
         obstacles to his integration in Nigeria on the evidence that he had
         considered and that the  respondent's  reasoning  in  the  decision
         letter was correct.

     40. At paragraphs [36] - [49] the FtTJ set  out  his  consideration  of
         Article8 and the public interest by reference to s 117B.

     41. At [37]-[38] the FtTJ stated  that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
         appellant enjoyed a private life in the United Kingdom, even on the
         "relatively low threshold" that applied because "I  do  not  accept
         that the appellant has resided in the United Kingdom at  any  times
         other than from 2003 to 2009 and that he is present in  the  United
         Kingdom for his appeal, and also the lack of anything but the  most
         basic details of the appellant's claim life in United Kingdom or of
         any personal relationship that he claims to enjoy that country.  He
         therefore found that the decision to refuse  leave  to  remain  was
         "not therefore a decision  that  interferes  with  the  appellant's
         private life". However, the judge went on to  consider  it  in  the
         alternative and by reference to the public interest  considerations
         set out within part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 "the public interest question" which he set out at [40].

     42. At  [41]  he  stated  that  the  immigration  rules  reflected  the
         respondent's assessment as a general level of the  relative  weight
         to be given to individual factors in striking a  fair  balance  and
         Article 8 (section 117B(1)) and went on to state that the appellant
         did not satisfy the requirements for grant of leave  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom and  that  this  would  "count  against  him  in
         relation to the public interest question".

     43. At [42] the FtTJ considered section 117B(2) and that the  appellant
         appeared speak English to a reasonable standard  but  applying  the
         decision of Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC did not find that that  was
         a consideration which would "propel a conclusion that  there  is  a
         public interest in favour of his claim".

     44. At [43] the FtTJ made reference to section 117B(3) in  the  context
         of the decision in Rhuppiah. The FtTJ stated; " there is an absence
         of a reasonable level of detail of how the  appellant  is  and  has
         been supporting himself in the United Kingdom and, although he  may
         not have received financial assistance from the United  Kingdom  in
         the past, there is insufficient evidence on which could  reasonably
         be found that it would not be a burden on the United Kingdom if  he
         was permitted to remain in that  country.  Therefore,  this  public
         interest consideration would normally count against him."

     45. At [44] the FtTJ considered sections 117B(4) (a) and S 117B(5) that
         provide that little weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
         established by person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is unlawful or precarious. Anyone who, not  being  a  United
         Kingdom citizen, is present in the United Kingdom and who has leave
         to reside here other than to do so indefinitely  has  a  precarious
         immigration status for this  purpose:  (see  Rhuppiah).  The  judge
         stated "the appellant  has  not  claimed  that  any  of  his  claim
         residence  in  United  Kingdom  has  been  lawful,  therefore   the
         consideration of sections 117B(4) (a) would appear to apply to  all
         of his claimed residence, I would normally limit the weight  I  can
         give to that private  life  in  relation  to  the  public  interest
         question to the specified "little" weight.

     46. At [45] the judge recorded that S117B(6) had no application to  the
         appellant's case.

     47. Having made that assessment he then turned to  whether  there  were
         "any other considerations that are relevant to the public  interest
         question" and made a self-direction to the decision in Rhuppiah and
         that "generalised normative guidance (that) may be overridden in an
         exceptional case by particularly strong features."

     48. The FtTJ's assessment  was  set  out  at  paragraphs  [47]-[48]  as
         follows:

         "47. It is appropriate to consider that, whilst the public interest
         is not  adversely  affected  by  the  appellant's  English-language
         ability, it is legitimate  to  have  regard  to  those  factors  as
         lending some minimal positive way to the strength  of  his  private
         life (which is not to suggest that  the  relevant  public  interest
         consideration subsections of part five of the  2002  act  propel  a
         conclusion that there was a public  interest  in  favour  of  their
         claim): see Rhuppiah at paragraph 57.

         48.  I  also  have  regard  to  my  findings  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's claim long residence in United Kingdom and  it  claimed
         personal relationships, and the factors relied on by the  appellant
         and by the respondent in relation to whether there were or are very
         significant  obstacles  or  exceptional  circumstances  such   that
         refusal of the appellant's application would breach  Article  8  of
         the Human Rights Convention. It is significant in my  consideration
         that the appellant has claim  that  he  has  been  able  to  secure
         employment in the United Kingdom and pay  rent  for  accommodation,
         and I agree that he has not established  that  he  would  have  any
         significant difficulty doing  the  same  in  Nigeria,  which  would
         enable him to support himself whether  or  not  he  has  family  in
         Nigeria and/or  any  friends  or  family  the  United  Kingdom  are
         prepared to continue to support him for any period of  time  on  or
         after his return. The appellant has not given any reason as to  why
         he could not continue similar  religious  activities  to  any  such
         activity presently engages in in the United Kingdom."

     49. Having reached his conclusions, he concluded that  interference  in
         the private life of the appellant was justified  having  regard  to
         the public interest. He concluded that the  decision  under  appeal
         was not unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  and
         dismissed his appeal.

     50. The grounds upon which permission was sought  and  granted  do  not
         expressly challenge the finding that he could not meet the Rules on
         the basis of his long residence of 20  years.   If  that  were  so,
         there  would  be  proper  particularisation  by  reference  to  the
         evidence. No particularisation was provided  in  oral  submissions.
         What is challenged in ground 1 is the assessment of  whether  there
         were very significant obstacles to his re-integration.  The  points
         made by Mr Adeniran in his oral submissions is that  the  FtTJ  did
         not take account of his length of residence.  The  written  grounds
         refer to him having lost ties to Ecuador. That must be an error  as
         the appellant is a national of Nigeria and not Ecuador. He  further
         submits that his only meaningful private life  was  established  in
         the United Kingdom  and that the appellant had formed his own links
         within the community and that he had lost  contact  with  his  home
         country and that this amounted to a "significant obstacle".

     51. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response  submitted  on  7  July
         2020. In that response it states that it was incorrect to say  that
         the appellant has spent the majority of  his  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom. The judge found that he was in  the  UK  since  2003,  the
         appellant therefore had spent 35 years in Nigeria  compared  to  16
         years in the United Kingdom. As to consideration  as  to  community
         links and United  Kingdom,  the  judge  had  considered  that  that
         properly concluded that his private life is not sufficient for  him
         to meet the rules.

     52. In respect of paragraph 276ADE(1) (vi) and  the  issue  of  whether
         there were "very significant obstacles"  to  his  reintegration  to
         Nigeria the FtTJ made a self-direction  to  the  meaning  of  "very
         significant obstacles" in the decision of Treebhawon v SSHD  [2017]
         UKUT  at [33] and at [34] the judge made reference to the  decision
         of the Court of Appeal in Parveen v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  932  at
         paragraphs 33-34.

     53. When considering  very  significant  obstacles  the  assessment  of
         integration is considered relevant and Sales LJ in the decision  of
         the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA
         Civ 2016 held that integration called for a:

         "broad evaluative judgement to be made as to whether the individual
         be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the
         society in that other country is carried on  and  the  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time variety  of  human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life."

     54. The factual circumstances in the case of Kamara are different to
         the present appeal; that was a deportation appeal but the reference
         to a "broad evaluative judgement" is the necessary assessment to be
         made on all appeals when considering whether there are "very
         significant obstacles". The decision in Kamara refers begin to
         develop within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life.

     55. The FtTJ made a self-direction to the decision of Parveen v SSHD
         [2018] EWCA Civ 932.

     56. In that decision the Court of Appeal accepted following Treebhawon,
         that the phrase "very significant" connoted an "elevated" threshold
         and accepted the Upper Tribunal's view that the test was not met by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval" (see paragraph 9 per Underhill
         LJ).  The court went on, however, not to accept all that had been
         said in Treebhawon

         "But I am not sure that saying that "mere" hardship or difficulty
         or hurdles, even if multiplied, will not "generally" suffice adds
         anything of substance. The task of the Secretary of State, or the
         Tribunal, in any given case is simply to assess the obstacles of
         integration relied on, whether characterised as hardship or
         difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they regard them
         as "very significant".

     57. The conclusions reached on that issue were considered on the  basis
         of the findings of fact made by the FtTJ  that  the  appellant  had
         only demonstrated that he had lived in the United Kingdom from 2003
         - 2009 and that he had been present in the United Kingdom  for  his
         appeal. The judge made it plain that he did not accept that he  had
         proved that he lived in the United Kingdom at any other  times.  On
         that basis, it cannot be said that  he  had  lived  in  the  United
         Kingdom longer than he had in  Nigeria.  The  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the appellant failed to take into  account  that  finding
         which was relevant to the length of residence in the UK.

     58. Furthermore the FtTJ set his reasoning out  at  [35]  in  which  he
         stated that the appellant had not established that there  would  be
         "very significant obstacles to his integration in  Nigeria  on  the
         evidence I have considered, and I consider  that  the  respondent's
         reasoning in the decision letter is  correct."   Looking  at  those
         reasons which the judge agreed with and  adopted  as  part  of  his
         reasoning again related to having spent a  significant  portion  of
         his life in Nigeria. That finding was supported by the findings  of
         fact made by the judge set out at paragraphs 27 -  32.  That  being
         the case, and contrary to the grounds, he had not spent more of his
         life in United Kingdom than in Nigeria. Having spent his childhood,
         formative years, and part of his adult life in Nigeria,  the  judge
         accepted that  he  would  have  retained  knowledge  of  the  life,
         language and culture in Nigeria and thus would not face significant
         obstacles to reintegrating to Nigeria.

     59. Furthermore at [48] the FtTJ returned to that issue and  considered
         his claim that he would not be  able  to  re-establish  himself  in
         Nigeria. The judge found  that  that  claim  was  contrary  to  his
         evidence that he had been able to secure employment in  the  United
         Kingdom and pay rent for accommodation and thus the judge concluded
         "he  has  not  established  that  he  would  have  any  significant
         difficulty in doing the same in Nigeria, which would enable him  to
         support himself whether or not he has family Nigeria. The FtTJ also
         found that any friends  or  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  could
         continue to support him for any period of  time  on  or  after  his
         return." As to any religious activities,  the  judge  concluded  no
         reasons were given as to why he could not continue this  activities
         in Nigeria. At [47] the FtTJ noted that the appellant spoke English
         which is a language spoken in Nigeria.

     60. On the basis  of  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtTJ,  his
         rejection of the appellant's long residence claim for  the  reasons
         that he set out in his decision between the paragraphs 27 - 32, the
         finding made as to his length of residence, his continuing language
         and cultural links, the length of time that he had spent in Nigeria
         which included his formative years in part of his adult life,  that
         he would be able to re-establish himself by employment and that  he
         had support from the UK that he could rely upon, were  all  factors
         which the judge was entitled to take into account in  reaching  his
         conclusion. I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law  in
         his decision on the basis advanced on behalf of the appellant.

     61. Dealing with the second ground, it  is  submitted  that  the  judge
         failed to give adequate consideration to  Article  8.  The  grounds
         cite the well-established five stage structured approach set out in
         the decision of Razgar.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  decision  at
         paragraphs 36 - 49, the FtTJ lawfully and  rationally  applied  the
         assessment under  Article  8  and  expressly  directed  himself  in
         accordance with the five- stage test.  Whilst  the  grounds  submit
         that he established a private life given his lengthy residence  and
         that it would be disproportionate to expect  him  to  return  to  a
         country he has not been to since 1994, that submission ignores  the
         factual findings made by the judge as set out at paragraphs 27 - 32
         where the  judge  firmly  rejected  his  claim  on  long  residence
         grounds. Whilst the judge at [37] stated that  he  did  not  accept
         that the appellant had enjoyed a private life  given  the  lack  of
         evidence to demonstrate residence other than from 2003 -  2009  and
         that he was present in the United Kingdom for the appeal, the judge
         also stated that "the most basic details of the  appellant's  claim
         life in the United Kingdom or of any personal relationship that  he
         claims to enjoy in the country, was a further reason. It  is  plain
         that the judge was critical of the lack of evidence in  support  of
         any private life. However, at [39]the judge proceeded on the  basis
         that even if there was an interference with his private  life,  the
         judge would be required to consider proportionality of removal  and
         by applying the public interest considerations under Part 5A of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which he described  as
         the "public interest question".

     62. This brings me to the second part of the  submissions  made  by  Mr
         Adeniran. He submits that the judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
         section 117B. In particular by reference to paragraph [43] and  the
         finding or inference made by  the  judge  that  the  appellant  was
         likely to rely on public funds in the future when there was nothing
         in the present circumstances to support that. Mr Adeniran submitted
         that there was nothing in the evidence to support that point.

     63. I have considered the submissions made on behalf of  the  appellant
         in relation to the S117 factors set out in  the  decision.  As  the
         FtTJ set out at [41], he properly applied  the  law  at  [41]  when
         addressing the test set out in Agyarko of "striking a fair  balance
         under Article 8". Furthermore,  with  respect  to  Article  8,  the
         Immigration Rules are the starting point for any  consideration  as
         they set out the position of the respondent in relation to a  claim
         on private life grounds under Article 8. For the reasons  given  by
         the FtTJ in the earlier part of the decision, the  appellant  could
         not satisfy the requirements for grant of leave to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom under the Rules. Therefore the judge was correct  in
         stating that section 117B(1) applied and that  the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control was in the public interest.

     64. The judges self-direction at [42] properly reflected the decision
         in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 that whilst the appellant spoke
         English to a reasonable standard, that would not count against him
         in the public interest question however the property concluded that
         that did not "propel a conclusion that the public interest was in
         favour of his claim". The judge was entitled to note that that was
         a neutral factor.

     65. As to the assessment of financial dependence upon the state,
         S117B(3) states that it is in the public interest and in the
         particular interests of the economic well-being of the United
         Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
         Kingdom are financially independent because such persons, (a) not a
         burden on taxpayers and (b) better able to integrate into society.
         The FtTJ considered the evidence of the appellant and noted "there
         is an absence of a reasonable level of detail of how the appellant
         is and has been supporting himself in the United Kingdom and,
         although he may not have received financial assistance will United
         Kingdom the past, there is insufficient evidence on which could
         reasonably be found that he would not be a burden on the United
         Kingdom if he was permitted to remain in that country. Therefore,
         the public interest consideration would normally count against
         him."

     66. Having considered the assessment of the evidence set out in the
         earlier paragraphs, the finding made that there was an "absence of
         reasonable level of detail" as to how the appellant had been
         supporting himself in the United Kingdom was one that was open to
         him. However, even if the judge had found that he was "financially
         independent" that was a neutral matter which did not militate
         positively in his favour in the scales of proportionality as set
         out in the decision of Rhuppiah at paragraph 57. The judge properly
         identified that the appellant had not claimed that any of his
         residence in the United Kingdom was lawful and thus attaching
         little weight that private life for those reasons. Section 117B(6)
         relating to having a parental relationship with a qualifying child
         did not apply on the circumstances of the appellant's claim.
         However, contrary to the grounds the judge did consider whether
         there were any other features of the appellant's case that might be
         relevant in the decision (see paragraph [46] and the reference made
         to the decision in Rhuppiah and the reference to the normative
         guidance that may be overridden in an exceptional case by
         particularly strong features.) The judge then returned to his
         assessment, taking into account his length of residence, his
         claimed personal relationships, that there were no very significant
         obstacles to his reintegration, that he could secure employment and
         that he could support himself with the assistance of friends if
         necessary and could continue his private life in terms of religious
         activity upon return. Having considered those factors and at [49]
         stating "having considered the public interest considerations
         relevant factors "in the round" "I conclude that the interference
         in the private life of the appellant is justified, having regard to
         the public interest." On the evidence before the FtTJ that was a
         conclusion that was reasonably open to him to make.

     67. I now turn to a document that was attached to the skeleton argument
         of the appellant sent on 3 July 2020. The skeleton argument itself
         repeated the matters in the grounds of appeal relating to the S117B
         considerations and that the FtTJ did not properly consider whether
         there were "very significant obstacles to his integration". That
         skeleton argument does not make any reference to fresh evidence. It
         attaches to it an NHS medical card in the name of the appellant
         with a typed issue date of 3/7/00 on the back of the document is an
         unrelated photocopy with a signature and date 7 - 11 - 11.

     68. In the rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent dated 7 July
         2020 refers to the appellant's ground stating that the material had
         only just come to light. It is not clear where that reference came
         from. However the respondent stated that she objected to the
         submission of the evidence as it was unclear why it was not before
         the judge or part of the original application to the respondent. In
         any event it was submitted that it did not mean that the appellant
         was continuously the United Kingdom since the year 2000.

     69. Following this a response on behalf of the appellant was issued
         stating that the NHS card was not new to the respondent and that
         the document was included in the respondent's bundle. The reply
         then goes on to cite authorities as to the respondent's duty of
         disclosure. The submission concludes that the Home Office have
         failed to disclose a material fact.

     70. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, no further reference was
         made either in writing or in any oral submissions as to this
         evidence. The only reference was made to it was when after the rule
         24 response was read out (because Mr Diwnycz did not have a copy of
         it at hand) and it was after this that Mr Adeniran referred to the
         document. He was asked why it was not before the judge and he
         stated it was as a result of a subject access request. He made
         reference to the previous solicitors having made an application.
         When asked why this was not put forward as a ground of appeal, he
         stated that the solicitors and become aware of this when the
         appellant informed his solicitors a few days before the FtTJ's
         hearing. When asked why an application was not made to adjourn the
         hearing, it was stated that the appellant had contacted his
         previous solicitors who confirmed that he had sent the original
         documents the Home Office and requested for a file of papers to be
         returned. It was confirmed that the appellant wanted to go ahead
         with the hearing and not to wait.

     71. Mr Diwnycz made the point that the appellant was represented by
         counsel and if this were the position he would have known but that
         there was no request for any adjournment.

     72. The grounds upon which permission was sought and granted are
         clearly set out in the grounds which were sent to the Tribunal on
         13 January 2020. The hearing of this appeal took place on 12
         November 2019. There is nothing in those grounds that makes any
         reference to further material that was or could have been relevant
         to the decision made by the FtTJ or was outstanding at the time of
         the hearing.  In fact, the grounds do not expressly challenge the
         FtTJ's findings that he could only establish residence in the UK
         between 2003 - 2009 and based on him being present at the hearing
         in 2019 (the omnibus conclusion set out at [32]. The appellant has
         been represented by the same solicitors through these
         proceedings/as indicated by the notice of appeal, the requirement
         to pay a fee correspondence, issues relating to an out of time
         appeal and before the FTT J.

     73. The first reference to it is in the correspondence sent on 20th
         July 2020, which I have set out above. No further information has
         been provided either a written statement on behalf of the appellant
         setting out any events, the circumstances in which the document was
         provided or any further material in support of that claim.

     74. The notice of hearing that was sent includes in bold the following;
         "the Upper Tribunal not consider evidence which was not before the
         first-tier Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal has specifically
         decided to admit that evidence. That is a reference to Rule 15
         (2A).



     75. Rule 15(2A)
         The Tribunal is empowered to permit new or further evidence  to  be
         admitted in the re-making of a decision. In  any  case  where  this
         facility is sought the parties must comply with Rule  15(2A)  which
         is in these terms:

         In an asylum case or an immigration case -

         (a)                    if a  party  wishes  the  Upper  Tribunal to
         consider evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that
         party must send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal  and  any
         other party -

         (i)              indicating the nature of the evidence; and

         (ii)            explaining why it was not submitted  to  the First-
         tier Tribunal; and

         (b) when considering whether to admit evidence that was not  before
         the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal  must  have  regard  to
         whether  there  has  been  unreasonable  delay  in  producing  that
         evidence.

     76. A failure to comply with Rule 15(2A) will be regarded as a serious
         matter and may result in fresh or further evidence not being
         considered by the Tribunal (see appendix to decision of Lama
         (video recorded evidence -weight - Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16
         (IAC)).

     77. There has been no compliance with Rule 15(2A). As set out above,
         there was no application in writing at any time prior to the
         hearing nor was there any application either in writing or in oral
         terms before the Upper Tribunal. Furthermore, there had been no
         application to amend the grounds of challenge to include a
         challenge to the decision made by the FtTJ on the basis of his
         findings of fact on long residence of 20 years. There was no
         explanation in writing as to how that document had come into the
         appellant's possession, or any circumstances surrounding it beyond
         that in the written information provided in July. It does not
         satisfy the test in Ladd v Marshall.

     78. For those reasons, there is no material before the Tribunal to
         demonstrate the judge was an error in his findings. Even if that
         document had been provided by way of disclosure, as the respondent
         sets out in the rule 24 response there is no supplementary evidence
         provided in support that the document or any other evidence that
         demonstrates that the appellant was continuously in United Kingdom
         since July 2000; the judge having found that he was only satisfied
         that he was in the United Kingdom between 2003 - 2009 and on a date
         in 2019 at the hearing (see [32]).  The requirements of paragraph
         276AD(1) require a person to have been resident for that period of
         time continuously in the United Kingdom. Nor does it support his
         claim that he had been in the UK since 1994, which was the basis of
         his claim.  Also the document gives an address of xxx C C London as
         at July 2000 whereas the appellant's witness statement sets out
         that he lived at that address between 2006 and 2012 and therefore
         the document is inconsistent with that statement. The document
         therefore does not undermine the judge's overall findings made.

     79. For those reasons I am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ discloses the making of a material
         error of law and the decision should therefore stand.

     80. If the appellant has further evidence he wishes to rely upon, it
         would be open to him to make a further application to the Secretary
         of State who will consider the evidence and any further submissions
         provided.




Notice of Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated 2 December2020


NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email



