


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number
HU/09913/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 3rd December 2018                                                  On
07th January 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     D L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr H Kanangara (Counsel, instructed by Lisa's
Law, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:     Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant's application to remain in the UK on the basis of his
   family life was refused and his appeal dismissed for the reasons given in
   the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill promulgated on the 28th of
   June 2018. The Judge found that the Appellant's removal would not require
   the children to leave the UK and that there was a decision for the
   Appellant and his wife to make about their future.

2. The grounds of application argue that the Judge erred in respect of the
   assessment of the best interests of the children and the assessment of
   reasonableness as the Judge had not identified on what basis the public
   interest outweighed the best interests of the children. It was further
   argued that the Judge then erred with respect to the considerations in
   section 117B(6) with reference to Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6))
   [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC).

3. Permission to appeal was granted on the 4th of October 2018. It was
   observed in the grant that it was arguable that the Judge had not fully
   appreciated the significance of the British nationality of the children
   and the effect of Zambrano. The submissions are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings. Both representatives maintained their respective positions
   that had been set out before.

4. The legal position has changed since the decision was promulgated with
   the decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. Although the appeal in KO
   was a deportation appeal there were removal appeals heard at the same
   time of which NS (Sri Lanka) is perhaps the most relevant. From paragraph
   19 of the judgment it was observed that reasonableness in the context of
   assessing the reasonableness has to be assessed "in the real world in
   which the children find themselves." In paragraph 44 Lord Carnworth
   confirmed the correctness of the withdrawal of the concession that had
   been made in Sanade (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 28
   (IAC), that meant that it can be reasonable to expect a British citizen
   child to leave the UK. Those 2 paragraphs have to be read in conjunction
   with each other.

5. From Dereci and Jeunesse [2014] ECHR 1036 the decision as to where the
   family lives is made in the real world and circumstances that the family
   find themselves in. If the removal of the Appellant does not require the
   child or children to leave the UK because there is a parent or carer with
   whom they can remain then the child is not required to leave. A
   comparison with the finding in Jeunesse shows that the family may then be
   faced with a difficult decision but the state is not obliged to accept a
   fait accompli simply because family life has been created in a host state
   when an Appellant's presence is either illegal or precarious.

6. To the extent that the Judge relied on the Appellant's immigration
   history and conduct that was not relevant. In that regard paragraphs 38
   and 39 are erroneous but they are not material and can effectively be
   excised from the decision without affecting the decision that was made or
   the reasoning applied.

7. The fact was that the Appellant did not have leave to remain and
   independently of the children had no basis on which to remain in the UK.
   How that had come about was not relevant to the decision to be made but
   that basic fact was part of the real world in which the decision had to
   be made. The children's best interests were assessed independently by the
   Judge in paragraphs 30 and 31 of the decision and there is nothing
   erroneous in the assessment made. there was no evidence to show that the
   children had any particular needs or requirements that elevated their
   best interests beyond those that would usually arise, i.e. to be with
   both parents in a stable and caring environment.

8. In other words there was nothing about the children's best interests
   that would outweigh the public interest in the enforcement of immigration
   control. The Judge fully and properly assessed the situation in paragraph
   40 and the findings made clearly arose from the facts of the case. As the
   Judge observed in paragraph 41 the decision did not require the children
   to leave the UK leaving the Appellant and his spouse with a choice which
   is a reflection of the practical effect of the decisions in Dereci and
   Jeunesse.

9. Given how the position has changed and with the confirmation that it can
   be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK but where the child is
   not required to do so I am satisfied that the decision made by Judge
   Mills was open to him on the basis of the facts as found. That there is
   slightly different route by which the result is reached does not assist
   the Appellant, any error is not material as the end result remains the
   same.




CONCLUSIONS


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th December 2018

























