
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10048/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2020                     |On 15 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
It is appropriate to make an  anonymity  order  because  the  case  involves
child welfare issues. I make clear that the order is  not  made  to  protect
the appellant's reputation following a conviction for  a  criminal  offence,
but to protect his family members. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Wilcox, instructed by ASK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically this is  an  appeal
    by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (AA) appealed the respondent's (SSHD) decision  dated  06
    September 2017 to refuse  a  human  rights  claim  in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Loke ("the  judge")
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 31 October  2019.   She
    set out the factual background of the case  including  the  appellant's
    immigration history and those of his wife and children.   She  outlined
    the nature of the index offence that led  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    begin deportation proceedings.  She noted that it was a serious offence
    against one of his children for which he  received  a  two-year  prison
    sentence.  His  wife  received  a  twelve-month  sentence,  which   was
    suspended for eighteen months with  a  supervision  requirement.  As  a
    result of the offences the appellant's children were placed under child
    protection plans.   The  judge  noted  that  after  the  appellant  was
    released from prison, arrangements were made for him to return  to  the
    family home and that two more children were born in 2017 and 2019.

3.   The judge considered the nature of the criminal offences [11-13].   She
    outlined the serious harm done to the appellant's son (P) by his father
    and the concerns that were expressed by P's teachers about the injuries
    he received.  She also took into account the damning  remarks  made  by
    the sentencing judge.  The  sentencing  judge  indicated  that  he  was
    alarmed to read the letters from  the  school  and  Greenwich  Council,
    which outlined the negative impact that the offence and the  subsequent
    proceedings had on the child. The sentencing judge  also  commented  on
    the lack of insight or any remorse shown by the parents at the time.

4.   The judge's decision was confined to consideration  of  the  effect  of
    deportation on the  appellant's  child  P  and  did  not  consider  the
    situation of any other members of the family. The judge noted that  the
    length of sentence allowed the appellant to rely on  the  exception  to
    deportation under section 117C(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").  She set out the provisions at  [22]  to
    [27].

5.   The Secretary of State accepts  that  the  judge  directed  herself  to
    correct statements of the law at [27] but argues that she erred in  her
    assessment of whether it would be 'unduly harsh' on the  child  if  his
    father were to be deported.  I find that the judge's summary of the law
    at [27] is correct and demonstrated that  she  had  in  mind  the  high
    hurdle required to show that deportation would be unduly harsh  on  the
    child.

6.   The judge outlined her findings at [24-28].  She took into account  the
    evidence given  by  the  appellant  as  well  as  the  child's  witness
    statement.  She also took into account what was said in a report by  an
    independent social worker who concluded that it would  not  be  in  the
    best interests of the four children for the appellant to  be  deported.
    It was open to the judge  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    independent social worker observed that it was likely  to  have  had  a
    negative effect on P's wellbeing when he was separated from his  father
    while he was in prison.  The judge found:

         "Notwithstanding  the  criminal  offences  having  been   committed
         against P, it is plain that as a  matter  of  fact  P  was  and  is
         attached to his father.  Whilst the Appellant was in  custody,  not
         only did P suffer from his father's physical absence, but  he  also
         would have experienced entirely misplaced guilt in relation to  the
         circumstances of his father's imprisonment; all  of  which  clearly
         had a significant impact on his emotional health."

7.   The judge went on to note that the appellant  and  his  wife  completed
    parenting programmes in May 2017.  She went on to say:

         "As indicated,  social  services  deemed  it  appropriate  for  the
         Appellant to return to the family home  in  July  2017.   In  fact,
         correspondence referred to in Mr Dooley's report indicate that  the
         family's social worker's view was that  the  children  need  to  be
         reunited  with  the  Appellant,  which  indicates  the   level   of
         attachment between the appellant and his children.  At the date  of
         the hearing the appellant had returned to the family home for  over
         two years.  Mr Dooley's report confirms that the Appellant, and his
         wife, have benefited enormously from the parenting programme,  that
         the Appellant has made adjustments to parenting  practices  and  is
         now a warm and nurturing father to his children."

8.   The judge went on to say [25]:

         "There have been no issues of concern raised since the  Appellant's
         return to the family home.  On this evidence,  I  accept  that  the
         family have made significant progress since the Appellant's return,
         which  has  led  to  a  great  improvement  in  P's  emotional  and
         behavioural well-being".

9.   The judge considered whether the circumstances would  be  unduly  harsh
    on P if he relocated to Nigeria with his  parents  and  siblings.   The
    judge noted that P had already suffered as the victim of  his  parents'
    criminal offences.  She found that if he were to move to  Nigeria  this
    would impose an additional punishment of disrupting his  education  and
    life in the United Kingdom.  She noted his age, the fact  that  he  was
    about to enter secondary school, and was therefore at a critical  stage
    of his education.  The judge also took into account background evidence
    relating to Nigeria noting that the type of physical chastisement  that
    he had already suffered was  common  in  schools  in  Nigeria.  In  the
    circumstances, being uprooted to live in Nigeria would  merely  add  to
    the suffering he had already experienced.

10.  The judge then went on to consider what the situation would  be  for  P
    if he remained in the UK and his father was  deported.   She  concluded
    that in light of the behavioural issues that developed while his father
    was in prison that it was "eminently likely that this  would  signal  a
    return to P's emotional and behavioural  issues  and  that  therapeutic
    intervention will once again be required".  The  judge  concluded  that
    the child's separation from his father, albeit he was the victim of the
    offence, would merely add to  the  difficulties  that  he  had  already
    faced.

11.  At [28] she stated:

         "At present, P is currently progressing  and  moving  on  from  the
         circumstances which led to his father's incarceration.  Whether  or
         not P is required to go to Nigeria, or remain in the United Kingdom
         without his father, either circumstance is very likely to undo  the
         progress P has made to date, and lead to a  significant  regression
         in P's mental state.  P will be prevented from drawing a line under
         these proceedings from which his allegation  emanated,  which  will
         certainly lead to a  significant  deterioration  in  his  emotional
         health.  P has already suffered physically  and  emotionally  as  a
         result of being the victim of  the  Appellant's  criminality.   The
         effect of the  Appellant's  deportation  will  be  to  further  and
         significantly victimise P; the effects of which  in  my  assessment
         would be over and above what is generally expected in circumstances
         where a child is separated from a foreign national parent,  and  to
         the extent that the high threshold of being unduly harsh  has  been
         met in this case."

Decision and reasons

12.  The  grounds  make  general  submissions  without  particularising  any
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision. At the hearing,  the
    oral submissions expressed general disagreements with the findings  but
    did nothing to articulate any discernable, let alone  material,  errors
    of law.

13.  As far as I can discern any legal points from the  grounds,  the  first
    point appears to be that the judge was not  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusions she did  because  of  the  damning  comments  made  by  the
    sentencing judge. The Secretary of State argues that it was not open to
    her to take into account the  conclusions  of  the  independent  social
    worker. Clearly the judge considered  the  remarks  of  the  sentencing
    judge.  She took into account the serious nature of the offence and the
    detrimental effect it was likely to have had on the appellant's  child.
    However, it was open to the judge to go  on  to  consider  up  to  date
    evidence of what has happened since sentencing. The evidence  indicated
    that the appellant and his  wife  made  progress  in  developing  their
    parenting skills, which was monitored by children's services.   It  was
    open to the judge to  take  into  account  evidence  that  showed  that
    children's services were satisfied that the appellant could  return  to
    the family home and indeed it appeared to be in the best  interests  of
    the children for the family to be  reunited.  Nothing  in  the  judge's
    findings was outside a range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

14.  The second point I  could  discern  from  the  grounds  relates  to  an
    assertion that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for concluding
    that it was unduly harsh for P to relocate with his family to  Nigeria.
    The second point does not begin to disclose an  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.  It was open to the judge to take  into  account  the
    unusual circumstances of this case whereby the child  in  question  was
    the victim of the crime. It was rational for the judge to conclude that
    the further upheaval of relocating to Nigeria, and the conditions  that
    P would face there, would be unduly harsh  given  his  history  as  the
    victim of the offence. Similarly, when the  judge  turned  to  consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without his father it was open to her to consider the evidence relating
    to the bond between father and child.  The  evidence  showed  that  the
    child continued to have a loving relationship with his father.  Despite
    the past history of violence  towards  him,  he  was  still  negatively
    affected by his father's absence while he was in prison. It was open to
    the judge to find that further separation and upheaval  would  compound
    the difficulties the child had already faced over an  above  the  usual
    negative effects of deportation. It was clear that children's  services
    had been involved in the case and that it was considered to be  in  the
    children's best interests for the  family  to  be  reunited.  There  is
    nothing in  the  judge's  findings  at  [28]  that  could  possibly  be
    described as irrational or outside the range of reasonable responses to
    the evidence.

15.  When properly analysed, the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  do
    no more than disagree with the judge's conclusions and fail to identify
    any arguable errors of law in her decision that  would  have  made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

16.  I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.

17.  The appellant succeeds in his appeal on this occasion.  The  threat  of
    deportation arose as a result of  his  violent  behaviour  towards  his
    child. The appellant should be aware that if  he  commits  any  further
    offences, especially if they relate to domestic abuse of  his  wife  or
    children, it would be open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider
    further deportation proceedings. Any evidence of continued abuse  might
    lead to a different conclusion as to what is in the best  interests  of
    his children and  where  a  fair  balance  might  lie  in  relation  to
    deportation.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]                  Date 23 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


