
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/10961/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th August 2017                    |      On 15th August 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               mr younes fecih
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PARIS (ALGIERS)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Susan Fecih, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Algeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 24th
    March 2016 to refuse his application for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  as  the  partner  of  Susan
    Fecih.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Graves considered the appeal  on  the
    papers and dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 11th January  2017.
    The Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal contend that the Appellant sent documents to  the
    Tribunal for consideration by the judge and that these  documents  were
    received by the Tribunal on 20th December 2016.  However  it  is  clear
    from the judge's decision that these papers were not before  the  judge
    when she reached her decision on 11th January  2017.  It  is  contended
    that this administrative error led to procedural unfairness.

 3. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett considered it
    arguable that there was a procedural unfairness in light  of  the  fact
    that it was likely that the original bundle went astray.  In  the  Rule
    24 notice dated 13th July 2017 the Respondent indicated that  she  does
    not oppose the Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  and
    invites the Tribunal to remit the appeal for a fresh hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell indicated that he had  nothing  to
    add to the Rule 24 notice.  He accepted that  there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity in this case which means that the decision has to  be  re-
    made.

 5. A procedural irregularity had occurred and the Appellant  has  not  yet
    had a proper hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. In these circumstances
    I considered it appropriate, and the parties agreed, that the matter be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing.   Mrs  Fecih
    advised that she would prefer this to be undertaken by way of  an  oral
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  I set it  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
