

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/10391/2015
      HU/10393/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 August 2017                         |On 18th August 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                             bham maya paija pun
                                     and
                             dil maya paija pun
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Jaisri of Counsel, instructed by Sam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants are sisters who challenge the determination of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  L  K  Gibbs  dismissing  their  joint  appeals
         against the respondent's refusal on 12 October 2015 to  grant  them
         entry clearance to join their parents in the UK. They are  Nepalese
         nationals, born on 13 April 1984 and 29 November 1986 respectively.
         The appeal was dismissed by way of a determination  promulgated  on
         17 May 2017 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 27  April  2017.
         Their father was a Gurkha for fifteen years and was  discharged  in
         October 1969.


      2. The appellants made an earlier  application  for  entry  clearance;
         that was refused in 2009 and an appeal  against  the  decision  was
         dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson in December 2010. The
         appellants' parents who applied at the same time were successful in
         their applications and moved to the  UK  in  February  2010.  Since
         then, they have made four visits back.



      3. Judge Gibbs took account  of  the  determination  of  the  previous
         Tribunal. She accepted that there had been family life in 2010  and
         she found that there continued to be  genuine  love  and  affection
         between the appellants and their parents. She  also  accepted  that
         they were allowed to use their father's pension in Nepal for  their
         expenses.   She  concluded,  however,  that  when  the  appellants'
         parents left Nepal, the appellants were already living outside  the
         family home and that the evidence  did  not  show  that  there  was
         dependency that went beyond what was expected. She found that seven
         years had passed since the first determination and that the  second
         appellant had even moved to study in Japan for at least 18  months.
         She found that in total the parents had spent 12 months in Nepal on
         visits since their departure.  She  concluded  that  there  was  no
         family life between the appellants and their sponsor.


      4. The appellants  sought  and  obtained  permission  to  appeal.  The
         grounds argue firstly, that the judge placed significant weight  on
         the fact that the appellants were living away from home when  their
         parents left Nepal even though this was considered by Judge  Wilson
         who still found there were strong emotional bonds.   It  is  argued
         that the judge should have taken this finding as a  starting  point
         and not re-assessed it.



      5. Secondly, it is maintained that  the  judge  adopted  an  erroneous
         approach akin to that identified by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rai
         [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and that  the  critical  question  was  whether
         family life continued to subsist notwithstanding  the  decision  of
         the parents to leave the appellants in Nepal.


      6. Thirdly, it is argued that, whilst the  judge  made  findings  with
         regard to the lack of communication between  the  second  appellant
         and her parents when she was in Japan,  she  did  not  address  the
         circumstances of the first appellant. Nor did she take  account  of
         the three-month visit by the parents in November 2011. As a result,
         it is maintained that her finding on family life was flawed.



      7. In her Rule 24 response, the respondent maintained  there  were  no
         errors of law, that the  judge  had  taken  note  of  the  previous
         determination and that a significant  period  of  time  had  passed
         since that decision. Subsequent events were said to be relevant  to
         the assessment of family  life  and  to  also  shed  light  on  the
         historic situation.



      8. The Hearing



      9. At the hearing before me on 2017,  I  heard  submissions  from  the
         parties. Mr Jaisri  submitted  that  Judge  Wilson's  determination
         should have been the starting point but Judge Gibbs had re-assessed
         the situation as it had been at that time. Notwithstanding the fact
         that the appellants had been living away from  home  and  studying,
         Judge Wilson had found  that  there  were  strong  emotional  bonds
         between  them  and  their  parents  and  that  there  was  economic
         dependency. It was not, therefore, open to Judge Gibbs without good
         reason to re-evaluate family life  on  the  evidence  before  Judge
         Wilson.



     10. Mr Jaisri also submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  appellants'
         parents to move to the UK and leave them  in  Nepal  could  not  be
         construed as the end of family life. He relied upon the judgment of
         the Court of Appeal in Rai (op cit). He submitted Judge Gibbs  took
         the wrong approach when she found that their separation from  their
         parents meant there was no dependency beyond the norm.



     11. The third and last complaint was that no findings had been made  on
         ongoing family life between the first appellant  and  her  parents.
         She had not left Nepal to study elsewhere and given Judge  Wilson's
         determination, there were no findings on whether the family life he
         had found to exist in 2010 was continuing for this appellant.



     12. Mr Jaisri clarified that Judge Wilson had dismissed the  appeal  in
         2010 because of  the  extant  case  law  at  the  time.  Since  his
         determination there had been the cases of Gurung [2013] 1 WLR  2546
         and Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  160
         and the respondent had formulated policy about former  Gurkhas  and
         their families. Under current law, Judge  Wilson's  proportionality
         assessment would be erroneous.



     13. Mr Armstrong responded. He  relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24
         response as his starting point. He submitted  that  the  judge  was
         required to assess the circumstances as at the date of the decision
         and the judge had therefore properly taken account  of  the  events
         occurring since the earlier decision. The judge was  aware  of  the
         history of the case and gave reasons for her conclusion that  there
         was no family life. Rai was promulgated  after  her  decision.  The
         parties had lived apart  in  different  countries  for  some  eight
         years. There was no  material  error.   The  grounds  were  just  a
         disagreement with the decision of Judge Gibbs.



     14. In reply, Mr Jaisri submitted that  the  judge  had  accepted  that
         there was a reliance on the sponsor's pension and that he had  also
         paid the tuition fees and expenses of the second  appellant  whilst
         she was in Japan. Judge Wilson had found there was  no  independent
         family unit and so Judge Gibbs had to consider  whether  they  were
         still emotionally and financially dependent upon  the  sponsor.  At
         the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination.



     15. Conclusions



     16. Essentially the complaint with Judge Gibbs' determination  is  that
         she re-evaluated the situation as it was in 2009 and  did  not  use
         Judge Wilson's findings as her starting point.  It  is  helpful  to
         consider what those findings were before  assessing  whether  Judge
         Gibbs departed from them or sought to re-evaluate them. I summarise
         them  below  using  the  paragraph  numbering  of  Judge   Wilson's
         determination.
    . As at the date of ECO's decision in 2009, the appellants were studying
      and living in rented accommodation  some  considerable  distance  away
      from the family  home  which  they  occasionally  visited.  They  were
      financially supported by their father (at 12).

    . They were living together and had not formed a separated household (at
      14).

    . The issue of family life between the appellants and their parents  was
      not straightforward. They were adults and had lived apart  from  their
      parents for a number of years but there  were  strong  emotional  ties
      between them and there was economic dependency. There  was  sufficient
      family life still enjoyed as to constitute that within the meaning  of
      article 8 (at 19).

    . Family life was not of the nature that would be  expected  with  young
      children (at 20).

    . The evidence suggested that they would be a burden  on  the  state  if
      admitted (at 23).

    . Adequate accommodation was available (at 24).

    . There were exceptional circumstances to the extent that the UK owed  a
      debt to Gurkha veterans (at 25).

    . However, the appellants should not be allowed to enter the UK  because
      their parents decided to leave them and come to the UK with the result
      that they now lived in different countries. The parents  could  return
      to Nepal to live with them or visit and the  appellants  could  travel
      here to visit them (at 26).

    . The appellant had (four) other siblings and other relatives in  Nepal,
      there was a family house and their pattern of  life  had  not  altered
      with the departure of their parents (at 27).

    . They were unmarried but were persons of maturity (at 27).

     17. Judge Gibbs commences her findings at  paragraph  13.  She  accepts
         that there is genuine love and affection between the parties,  that
         the  appellants  spend  their  father's  pension  on  their  living
         expenses and that they receive additional funds from him in the  UK
         (at 13).  So far, she concurs with  Judge  Wilson's  findings.  She
         then proceeds to place weight on the fact that when the appellant's
         parents left Nepal, the appellants had  already  been  living  away
         from the family home and she finds that the decision to emigrate is
         evidence that family life "did not  involve  levels  of  dependency
         that go beyond the usual" (at 14).  Whilst this would appear to  be
         a divergence  from  Judge  Wilson's  acceptance  of  emotional  and
         economic dependency, Judge Gibbs clearly acknowledges that  in  the
         next paragraph (at 15). Those findings demonstrate a  contradiction
         in that whilst Judge Gibbs purports to acknowledge  Judge  Wilson's
         finding of family life, she also makes her own finding on the  same
         evidence which directly conflicts with it.


     18. I accept that Judge Gibbs is entitled to assess the situation since
         2009/2010 and to make findings on that and it may well be that  she
         is right to say that the many years that  have  since  passed  have
         altered the situation between the appellants and their  parents  so
         that family life no longer exists, however I have to agree with  Mr
         Jaisri that there are problems with the judge's reasoning and  that
         these have infected her assessment.



     19. First, as mentioned above, the judge has sought to  substitute  her
         own finding on family life for that of Judge  Wilson's,  using  the
         same facts. Whilst she is entitled to depart from the  findings  of
         an earlier judge's determination, she is required to  provide  good
         reasons for so doing and I have seen  none.  She  should  therefore
         have taken the family life finding as her starting point  and  then
         proceeded to set out why she did not accept that there was  ongoing
         family life.



     20. Second, her reliance on the decision of the appellants' parents  to
         leave Nepal for the  UK  as  a  basis  for  finding  there  was  no
         dependency beyond the norm is contrary to the guidance of the Court
         of Appeal in Rai (op cit). I acknowledge that in the  case  of  Rai
         the flaw in the decision of the Upper Tribunal was that  it  placed
         significant weight on that single factor whereas Judge  Gibbs  also
         took account of the separate residential arrangements and the  long
         period of separation, however I cannot be satisfied that  the  same
         conclusion would have been reached had the issue  of  the  parents'
         departure not features in her assessment. The issue for  the  judge
         to consider was whether the appellants had  demonstrated  that  the
         family life they enjoyed with their parents, which had  been  found
         to  exist  at  the  time  of  their   departure,   had   continued,
         notwithstanding that they were no longer in Nepal.



     21. Third, Judge Gibbs' conclusions  on  family  life  appear  only  to
         address the circumstances of the second appellant (at 15). There is
         no assessment of the circumstances of  the  first  appellant  whose
         position remained unchanged in the years following  Judge  Wilson's
         determination.



     22. For these reasons, I find that the judge made  material  errors  of
         law and her  decision  cannot  stand.  There  was  some  discussion
         between the parties as to the appropriate form of disposal  and  it
         was agreed that the best course of action would be a fresh  hearing
         at which the decision would be re-made. The matter shall  therefore
         be transferred to the First-tier Tribunal for that to be done.



     23. Decision


     24. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. It shall be remade by another judge of that  Tribunal
         at a date to be arranged.



     25. Anonymity



     26. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 17 August 2017










