
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10995/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|(remotely via Skype for Business)             |                              |
|On 9 February 2021                            |On 25 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SUGANTHAN SIVARAJAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Yeo


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1984 and is a citizen of Sri Lanka.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on international protection  and
    human rights grounds against a decision of the Secretary of State.  The
    Secretary of State' refusal of the appellant's international protection
    and human rights claims followed the  making  of  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant who, on 15 August 2016,  had  been  convicted  of
    sexual assault on a female and sentenced to 27 months imprisonment. The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  4  September  2020,
    allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.  The  appellant's  asylum
    appeal was dismissed; at [42] the judge found that  the  appellant  was
    not at real risk on return to Sri Lanka from either state or  non-state
    actors, a finding which has not been challenged by the appellant.

 2. There are several challenges to the decision all of which  concern  the
    judge's finding that there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration in Sri Lanka.  First,  the  respondent  submits
    that  the  judge  overlooked  or  gave  insufficient  weight   to   the
    availability of treatment in  Sri  Lanka  for  the  appellant's  mental
    health problems. Such treatment is referred  to  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision letter and to which the judge refers at [3] and [6]. I
    agree with Mr Yeo, who appeared for the appellant at the Upper Tribunal
    initial hearing, that the availability of treatment is raised  in  that
    letter in connection with Article 3 ECHR, not Article 8. In my opinion,
    the judge was well aware that some treatment may  be  available  (at  a
    cost) but he did not fall into legal error by emphasising, as  he  does
    at [54], that medical evidence  specific  to  the  appellant  indicated
    unequivocally that the appellant's mental health  problems,  which  are
    already significant, would worsen on return to Sri Lanka. It  may  have
    been helpful if the judge had expressly considered the availability  of
    treatment in the course of his analysis but I am satisfied that he  was
    entitled  on  the  evidence  to  find  that  a  deterioration  of   the
    appellant's mental health, which it is clear from the  doctor's  report
    would be likely to occur notwithstanding the availability of treatment,
    would constitute a very significant obstacle to his integration. As the
    judge notes at [55], should to appellant return now  to  Sri  Lanka  he
    would be returning to a country which he not only left as a  child  but
    from which he was trafficked, a trauma which the medical evidence shows
    has played a significant part in his mental health difficulties  as  an
    adult.

 3. Secondly, the respondent submits that the judge has failed to reconcile
    his finding that the appellant's mental health would 'relapse' with his
    finding at [63] that the appellant had successfully addressed his  drug
    and alcohol addiction. The respondent asserts that this  inconsistency,
    together with his failure to consider the availability of treatment  in
    Sri Lanka, led the judge into error. I disagree. I find that  there  is
    no contradiction or inconsistency. The judge has made a cogent  finding
    based firmly on the evidence that, whilst here in the  United  Kingdom,
    the appellant has been able to address his addictions. There is nothing
    whatever  inconsistent  with  the  judge  also  finding  that  for  the
    appellant to return now to Sri Lanka, a country in which the  appellant
    has not resided since the age of 12 and from where he was trafficked to
    the  United  Kingdom  in  distressing  circumstances,  would  cause   a
    significant deterioration in his mental health.

 4. Thirdly, the respondent submits that the judge failed to  identify  the
    positive factors in favour of the appellant's integration in Sri Lanka.
    This ground also has no merit. As Mr Yeo submitted, the test imposed by
    section 177C(4) of the 2002 Act concerns  obstacles  to,  not  positive
    factors in favour of, integration. The judge was well  aware  that  the
    appellant speaks Tamil and that short term financial  assistance  might
    be available from third parties in  the  United  Kingdom  but,  on  the
    evidence, it was manifestly open to him to conclude that the  appellant
    would nonetheless encounter very significant obstacles on  return.  The
    judge had regard to all relevant evidence in reaching  that  conclusion
    and the challenge of the Secretary of State  is  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the legitimate findings of the judge.

 5. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Melvin,  who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State, sought to 'enlarge' upon  (and  should  the
    Tribunal consider it appropriate, amend)  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
    asked  me  to  consider  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  record  of
    proceedings; his own Presenting Officer colleague's record of the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing indicated that the  appellant  and  his  partner,
    under cross examination, had stated that the appellant  had  maintained
    contact with his parents and 'one or two brothers'  in  Sri  Lanka.  Mr
    Melvin submitted that the judge had failed to take account of this fact
    when assessing  whether  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Sri Lanka. He submitted that  this  was
    an 'obvious' error and that the Upper Tribunal should  give  permission
    to amend accordingly. Mr Yeo opposed the application.

 6. I do not consider that it is necessary in the interests of  justice  to
    give permission to amend the grounds.  The  respondent  has  had  ample
    opportunity to make an application but has chosen not  to  do  so.  The
    appellant would be potentially put  at  a  disadvantage  by  having  to
    respond at the initial hearing itself and with no proper opportunity to
    respond to the amendment. I also note from the judge's typed record  of
    proceedings (which I read out at the hearing and  which  neither  party
    sought to challenge) that the appellant had said in  evidence  that  he
    had no contact with anyone in Sri Lanka  'at  the  moment'  whilst  the
    witness LG said that she believed  the  appellant  had  'very  sporadic
    contact but [I] can't comment how often.'  Even  if  I  were  to  grant
    permission to amend, I should still dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal. Even assuming that the appellant has  'very  sporadic'  contact
    with family members in Sri Lanka, the medical evidence  does  not  come
    close to suggesting that such  limited  assistance  as  family  members
    (whose concern with the appellant's welfare is not  obvious)  might  be
    able to offer the appellant would be enough to prevent his relapse into
    addiction and very  serious  mental  illness  which  would  thwart  his
    integration into Sri Lankan society.

 7. For the reasons I have given above, the Secretary of State's appeal  is
    dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
