
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10255/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 6 November 2020                         |On 11 November 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           BIBIAN NAMUDDU LUNKUSE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Wood, legal representative, I A S (Manchester)
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video  (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business.  A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Mark Davies promulgated on 17 February 2020 dismissing the
         appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  ("the  Decision").  The
         human rights claim is in the  context  of  an  application  by  the
         appellant to join her father, Mr Sembatya ("the  sponsor")  in  the
         UK, which was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer ("respondent")
         on 3 May 2019.

      2. The appellant is a national of Uganda.  She is now an adult but, at
         the time of the application, was just under the  age  of  eighteen.
         The sponsor asserted  that  he  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
         appellant and/or that there were serious and compelling reasons why
         the appellant should be allowed to come to the UK.

      3. The respondent considered the application under  paragraph  297  of
         the immigration rules. To succeed under paragraph 297 the appellant
         had to show, so far as is material to the basis of  her  particular
         application, that she

             '(i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  ...

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                  the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement and there are serious and compelling family
                  or other considerations which make exclusion of the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; ...'

      4.  The  respondent  was  not   satisfied   the   sponsor   had   sole
         responsibility for the appellant or that  there  were  serious  and
         compelling reasons making her exclusion from  the  UK  undesirable.
         The respondent acknowledged a letter  written  by  the  appellant's
         mother on 21 February 2019 indicating that the appellant would have
         a better education and  a  brighter  future  in  the  UK,  but  the
         appellant's mother did not claim to be unable  to  look  after  the
         appellant any longer. The respondent was not  satisfied  there  was
         sufficient evidence that the sponsor had supported  the  appellant,
         who lived since birth with her mother, or that they had even met in
         person. The respondent concluded that the  appellant's  mother  was
         the one who had made the important decisions  about  her  care  and
         upbringing and that the sponsor did not have  sole  responsibility.
         Further, as the appellant was nearly 18 years old there  were  said
         to be no serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         making  her  exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.  The  appellant
         appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. In the documents prepared for the appeal the appellant  raised  for
         the first time a claim that she  had  been  subjected  to  domestic
         violence  and  that  this  constituted  a  serious  and  compelling
         consideration making her  exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.  A
         bundle of documents provided by the appellant included a  statement
         from the sponsor signed and dated 15 January  2020  asserting  that
         the appellant had  been  subjected  to  domestic  violence  by  the
         partner of her mother and that reports had been made to  police  in
         Uganda by her mother and by  the  school  authorities.  In  further
         support of this claim the appellant provided a document purportedly
         issued by the Uganda Police  Force  dated  2  January  2020  headed
         "Analysis of Lunkuse Bibiana Namuddu's domestic violence case"  and
         referring to four occasions where reports of violence  against  the
         appellant had been made, one in 2017, two in 2018 and one in  2019.
         The allegations of domestic violence were said in each case to have
         been carried out by the appellant's paternal uncle.

      6. The judge additionally heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsor  and
         submissions  from  the  Presenting  Officer  and  the  sponsor.  He
         reserved his decision.

      7.  The  judge  recorded  the  cross-examination  of  the  sponsor  at
         paragraphs 14 to 16 of his decision. Paragraph 15  of  the  judge's
         decision reads, in material part,

             "The Sponsor said that the first incident of violence  against
             the Appellant took place in 2017 but  she  did  not  tell  him
             about it. He 1st became aware of it at the  end  of  2018  but
             only raised this issue with the Respondent in his letter of 15
             January 2020. He did not raise it  because  he  knew  that  he
             would be  asked  for  evidence  and  could  not  produce  that
             evidence. Nobody had been charged as a result  of  the  police
             investigation. When asked who was being charged  he  said  the
             paternal uncle of his daughter. When asked  if  that  was  the
             Appellant's paternal uncle he said no.  When  asked  who  this
             person [sic] he did not answer the question and then  said  it
             was the Appellant's mother's partner  who  had  used  violence
             against her."

      8. Paragraph 16 of the decision reads,

             "The Appellant was still living with her mother under a lot of
             difficulties. He confirmed that he had allowed  the  Appellant
             to remain with her mother since 2018 because  he  had  nowhere
             for her to go. There were no Social Services in Uganda.  Women
             are abducted and raped and there  are  lots  of  kids  on  the
             streets and he was worried that she would have to  go  on  the
             streets or she might be raped so at the end of  December  2018
             it was decided she would apply  to  join  him  in  the  United
             Kingdom. After failing to answer a  number  of  questions  the
             Sponsor confirmed he had been told by the  Appellant's  school
             that violence had been used against her."

      9. Having summarised the  submissions  from  the  parties,  the  judge
         rejected the claim that the sponsor has sole responsibility for the
         appellant. At [33] the judge found that the evidence indicated that
         the appellant had been cared for her whole life by her mother, with
         whom she still lives. Although the sponsor may have visited  Uganda
         on a regular basis and seen the appellant and  may  have  paid  her
         school fees, that did not  satisfy  the  judge  that  it  was  more
         probable  than  not  that  he  had  sole  responsibility  for   her
         upbringing.

     10. The judge also rejected the sponsor's evidence  about  the  reasons
         why it was said that the appellant should be permitted to  come  to
         the UK for compelling reasons.  At [34] the judge found that if the
         sponsor had had sole responsibility for the appellant he would have
         been aware of the alleged violence and would have  taken  steps  to
         remove the appellant from a violent situation. The fact  that  he'd
         not do so was clear evidence that violence did not take place.  The
         judge attached no weight to the letter purportedly from the  Uganda
         Police Force. The judge stated,

             "No credible explanation has been given as to why that  refers
             to the perpetrator of the violence upon the Appellant  as  the
             paternal uncle  whilst  the  Sponsor  has  stated  it  is  the
             Appellant's  mother's  partner  who  is  not  related  to  the
             Appellant in any way. It seems more  probable  than  not  that
             this document has been obtained by dishonest means  simply  to
             support  the  Sponsors  claim  that  the  appellant  had  been
             subjected to violence and thus  that  there  are  serious  and
             compelling reasons why she should not  be  excluded  from  the
             United Kingdom. I am not satisfied that it  is  more  probable
             than not that that is the case."

     11. At [35] he found the sponsor not to be credible, including based on
         his failure to answer questions as identified at [15] and  [16]  of
         the Decision. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The grounds assert that it was incumbent on the judge  to  identify
         which  questions  the  sponsor  had  failed  to  answer  and   that
         "[w]ithout examples of at least some of the questions that are said
         not to have been answered it is not possible to discern whether the
         criticisms of the Sponsor's  evidence  are  ones  that  are  fairly
         made".  That  is  the  more   so,   it   is   said,   because   the
         sponsor/appellant did not have the benefit of legal representation.
         The grounds also rely on failure by the judge to identify  evidence
         supporting the finding that an  Ugandan  Police  document  was  not
         genuine. The second ground contends that the judge failed  to  have
         regard to a legal document, namely a statutory declaration from the
         appellant's mother, regarding the issue of sole responsibility.  It
         is said that this is contrary to the guidance given  QZ  (Children;
         Sole Responsibility; Entry  Clearance)  China  [2002]  UKIAT  07463
         ("QZ").

     13. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Keane on 30 April 2020 in the following terms:

             "The grounds disclose an arguable error of law but  for  which
             the outcome of the appeal  might  have  been  different.   The
             judge found that the appellant's  sponsor  had  not  had  sole
             responsibility  for  her  upbringing  (paragraph  37  of   his
             decision). A concern which led the judge to such a finding was
             the judge's understanding that the sponsor, 'prevaricated on a
             number of occasions through his testimony and simply  did  not
             answer  questions'.  (Paragraph  35  of  his  decision).   The
             evidential basis which seemingly influenced the judge  towards
             such a finding was perhaps to be found at paragraph 16 of  the
             decision where the judge remarked, 'After failing to answer  a
             number of questions the sponsor confirmed he had been told  by
             the appellant's school that violence  had  been  used  against
             her'.  In fairness to the judge at paragraph 34 he did  remark
             that, 'The sponsor has not given credible  evidence  that  the
             appellant  has  been  subjected  to  violence  from   anyone'.
             However, the ground or basis on which  the  judge  disbelieved
             the sponsor, namely that  he  had  prevaricated  and  had  not
             answered questions in a manner which fairly detracted from his
             tacit  claim  to  be  characterised  as  a  truthful  witness,
             arguably did not  reflect  that  reasoned  assessment  of  the
             evidence which was intrinsic to the judge's function.  Indeed,
             although the judge complained at paragraph 16 that the sponsor
             failed to answer a number of questions  he  acknowledged  that
             the sponsor had then confirmed that he had been  told  by  the
             appellant's school that she had  been  subjected  to  acts  of
             violence.  The judge was  after  all  acknowledging  that  the
             sponsor did after all answer questions put to him under cross-
             examination.  The application for permission is granted."

     14. In her written submissions filed on 28 July 2020,  in  response  to
         directions issued  as  a  result  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic,  the
         respondent  contended  that  the  statutory  declaration   by   the
         appellant's mother was not in the same category of document as that
         dealt with in QZ. The respondent also submitted that the  appellant
         has provided nothing to show there was any  error  in  the  judge's
         findings or reasoning concerning the sponsor's  failure  to  answer
         questions  which  would  undermine  the  reasons  provided  in  the
         Decision, nor had the appellant sought a record of the  proceedings
         to ascertain whether the  judge's  comments  in  that  regard  were
         justified. It is also said that the judge provided adequate reasons
         for finding the Ugandan police document not to be genuine.

     15. At the outset of the remote "error of law" hearing  I  emailed  the
         judges typed Record of Proceedings ("ROP") to  the  representatives
         and gave them an opportunity to consider the ROP. Mr Wood relied on
         his written grounds. He submitted that the appellant  was  entitled
         to know why her appeal was dismissed based on the Britain  decision
         and that it should not be necessary  to  have  regard  to  external
         documents, such as the ROP, to understand  the  judge's  reasoning.
         The appellant in any  event  ultimately  provided  answers  to  the
         questions that were asked. It was therefore wrong for the judge  to
         say at [35] that the appellant "simply did not  answer  questions".
         The judge gave insufficient reasons for finding that there had been
         dishonesty in the application and appeal process and the fact  that
         there was a discrepancy between the  perpetrator  of  violence  was
         incapable of supporting a finding that there  had  been  an  active
         attempt to trick or full or deceive the respondent or the Tribunal.
         It is one thing to place no wait on a document and another thing to
         suggest that there had been dishonesty. The judge failed to provide
         sufficient reasoning to justify his allegation. In respect  of  the
         2nd ground, Mr Wood accepted that there was a difference between  a
         "statutory declaration" and a court order such as the Custody Order
         considered in QZ. The judge however gave no consideration at all to
         the Statutory Declaration and there had been  no  consideration  of
         its contents, and in particular, the assertion by  the  appellant's
         mother that she was incapable of providing for the appellant.

     16. Mr Walker submitted that there appeared to be a  conflict  in  what
         the judge said at [16] and [35] about the sponsor failing to answer
         a number of questions but then going on to answer those  questions.
         Mr Walker submitted that the final sentence of [16]  was  ambiguous
         and that it could be read in different  ways.  In  respect  of  the
         judge's finding that the  police  document  had  been  obtained  by
         dishonest means Mr Walker submitted that the judge "went  a  little
         bit too far" and that there was no particular basis for  the  judge
         to have made this "harsh finding",  particularly  since  there  was
         nothing to compare the document to. Mr Walker agreed with  Mr  Wood
         that the statutory declaration had not  been  referred  to  engaged
         with by the judge.

Discussion

     17. It is unfortunate that the judge did not  expressly  identify  what
         questions the sponsor did not answer by reference to [16] and  [35]
         of the First-tier Tribunal decision. I note from the context of the
         judge's summary of the oral  evidence  at  [16]  that  the  sponsor
         failed to answer questions when he was being asked  how  he  became
         aware that domestic violence was taking place. One way  of  reading
         of the paragraph is that the sponsor  failed  to  answer  questions
         relating to how he became aware of the alleged violence.  This  was
         ultimately made clear by reference to  the  Record  of  Proceedings
         maintained by the judge, but it was not  clear  from  the  decision
         itself. I accept Mr Walker's observations relating to the ambiguity
         of the last sentence of [16]. I additionally accept  the  criticism
         made by Mr Wood,  acknowledged  by  Mr  Walker  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent, that the judge's assertion at  [35]  that  the  sponsor
         "simply did not answer questions" is not  accurate.  The  ROP  does
         indicate that the sponsor prevaricated, and that  he  was  told  to
         answer questions, but he did eventually provide answers to all  the
         questions he was asked. [35] gives the impression that the  sponsor
         entirely failed to answer questions which was  not  the  case,  and
         that the judge considered this in finding  the  sponsor  to  be  an
         incredible witness.

     18. I am additionally concerned that  the  judge  failed  to  make  any
         reference to or engage with the 'statutory declaration' prepared by
         the appellant's mother. This  was  a  relevant  document  from  the
         parent  of  the  appellant  going  both  to  the  issues  of   sole
         responsibility and whether there  existed  serious  and  compelling
         family or other considerations  making  the  appellant's  exclusion
         undesirable.  Although  no  reference  was  made  to  any  domestic
         violence the 'statutory declaration' did suggest  that  the  mother
         was financially incapacitated and unable to  meet  the  appellant's
         essential needs and requisites as a mother. Whilst it may well have
         been open to the judge to reject the  accuracy  of  the  assertions
         made in the 'statutory declaration', the judge was  still  required
         to make a factual finding in relation to this relevant document.  I
         do not however accept the argument that a  'statutory  declaration'
         is similar to the type of document considered in QZ (Children; sole
         responsibility;  entry  clearance)  China  [2002]  UKAIT  07463.  A
         'statutory declaration' is not the same as a court order  and  does
         not apportion or accord legal  responsibility  for  a  child.  This
         statutory declaration is evidence that the appellant's mother  made
         various assertions under oath relating to her  ability  to  provide
         for her daughter, but it does not confirm the truthfulness of those
         assertions. It is not apparent that the statutory  declaration  has
         been before the Courts, that it has been tested in Court,  or  that
         it has the imprimatur or authority of any Court.

     19. I am satisfied that the two legal errors  identified  above  render
         the judge's decision legally unsafe. It is not therefore  necessary
         for me to determine whether the judge erred in law in finding  that
         the police document had been obtained by dishonesty. I  acknowledge
         Mr Walker's view that in making this  finding  the  judge  "went  a
         little bit too far" and Mr Wood's submission that the judge  failed
         to set out the requisite cogent evidence to support his  dishonesty
         finding, but I note the  clear  inconsistency  between  the  police
         document and the sponsor's testimony as to the perpetrator  of  the
         alleged violence, and I also note with some concern the absence  of
         any  reference  to  violence  by  the  appellant's  mother  in  her
         statutory declaration, despite her being  the  complainant  to  the
         police in 2017 and 2018. This last point however was not ventilated
         at the hearing and can be considered  by  the  judge  remaking  the
         decision.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     20. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     21. I have determined that the judge's decision is  unsafe  because  of
         errors affecting his credibility assessment and his failure to take
         into  account  relevant  evidence.  In   the   circumstances   both
         representatives agreed that it was appropriate for the case  to  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mark
Davies.

No anonymity direction is made.


D.Blum   6 November 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

