
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10586/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                             natalya mudrochenko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Harman of Chattertons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the Ukraine  born  on  13th  March
    1949.  After various visits to the UK, the Appellant last  entered  the
    country on 31st August 2009 with a multi-entry visit visa valid to 10th
    August 2011.  She did not embark and  on  10th  December  2015  applied
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and also  on  compassionate
    grounds outside those Rules.  That  application  was  refused  on  20th
    April 2016 for the reasons given in the  Respondent's  letter  of  that
    date.  The Appellant appealed and her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Caswell sitting at Bradford  on  12th  April  2017.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his  Decision
    dated 19th April 2017.  The  Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision and on 14th November 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    decision is not contested in this appeal.  The Judge also dismissed the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.   The  Judge
    found that the Appellant had  a  family  life  with  her  daughter  and
    grandchildren in the UK, and also a private life having resided in  the
    UK since August 2009.  The Judge was satisfied that the decision of the
    Respondent would amount to an interference with that family and private
    life of such a degree of gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8
    ECHR rights.  However, the Judge also found the  Respondent's  decision
    to be proportionate.  His reasons  for  that  decision  were  given  at
    paragraphs 19 to 23 inclusive of the Decision.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Harman referred to his  Skeleton  Argument
    and submitted that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  coming  to  this
    conclusion.  He had failed to fully consider the evidence and had  made
    errors of  fact  as  regards  the  Sponsor's  ability  to  support  the
    Appellant should she return to the Ukraine; whether it was unreasonably
    harsh to expect the Appellant to safely relocate  within  the  Ukraine;
    and whether the Sponsor and her children could  maintain  contact  with
    the Appellant by modern means of communication  or  by  visits  to  the
    Ukraine.  The Judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision and had failed to carry out properly  the  balancing  exercise
    necessary for any assessment of proportionality.   In  particular,  the
    Judge had failed to fully consider  the  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    Sponsor's financial circumstances were sufficient to maintain  herself,
    her  three  children,  and  the  Appellant  resident  in  the   Ukraine
    especially as the Sponsor would have to pay childcare costs in order to
    keep her employment if the Appellant was absent.  The  Judge  had  also
    erred in  law  by  assuming  that  the  Appellant's  pension  could  be
    reactivated if she returned to the  Ukraine.   Further,  the  Appellant
    came from the Donetsk region and the Judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the travel guidance of  the  Foreign  Office  advising  against
    travel there.  Finally, the Judge had found that the  Appellant  had  a
    strong relationship with  her  grandchildren,  but  had  erred  in  not
    appreciating that it was too dangerous for the Sponsor and her children
    to visit the Appellant.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    the Judge had not erred in law as alleged.  The Judge  had  taken  into
    account all the relevant  evidence  before  him  which  was  listed  at
    paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Decision.  The Bundle now submitted by  the
    Appellant had not been before the Judge.  The Judge had made  no  error
    in  his  calculation  of  the  ability  of  the  Sponsor's  family   to
    financially support the Appellant in the Ukraine.  At paragraph  17  of
    the Decision the Judge had considered all the relevant evidence and had
    come to a conclusion in this respect which  he  had  been  entitled  to
    make.  Further, it had not been argued by the Judge that the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return to  the  Ukraine  and  had  found  that  the
    Appellant could  safely  relocate  within  that  country  only  in  the
    alternative.  Finally, Mrs Aboni argued that the Appellant's grounds of
    application amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the  judgment
    of the Judge.  The Judge had taken into account all the relevant  facts
    and had been entitled to find that  the  Appellant's  poor  immigration
    history meant that the public interest carried the most weight.

 6. I find no material error in the decision of the Judge which I therefore
    do not set aside.  It is for the Judge to  consider  all  the  relevant
    facts and to exercise his judgment in deciding if the decision  of  the
    Respondent is proportionate.  This the Judge did in  this  appeal.   He
    carried out a careful analysis of the evidence at paragraph  17  to  23
    inclusive of the Decision.  He came to a conclusion open to him on that
    analysis and for which he gave sufficient reasons.  He was entitled  to
    attach significant weight to the public interest as the  Appellant  had
    been an overstayer for a significant period of time.  I find  there  to
    be no material errors of fact in the Judge's analysis.  The Judge found
    that taking into account the probability that the Appellant could again
    receive her pension in the Ukraine, she would not be destitute in  that
    country with the assistance of financial help from  the  Sponsor  which
    clearly the Sponsor was able to provide.  It was not an  error  of  law
    for the Judge to be satisfied that the Appellant could safely return to
    the Ukraine as nothing to the contrary  was  argued  before  him.   The
    Judge was right to conclude that the relationship between the Appellant
    and her grandchildren could be maintained  through  modern  methods  of
    communication even if it is the case  that  the  Sponsor  for  whatever
    reason would find it difficult to visit the Appellant  in  the  Ukraine
    with her children.  I find the grounds relied upon by the Appellant  to
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the decision  of  the  Judge
    and therefore not to amount to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 19th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
