
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10577/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th February 2020                |On 16th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                IAU & Others
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Knorr, Counsel instructed Central England Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") made an anonymity direction and it is
      appropriate to continue that direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal
      or court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity.  No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them
      or any member of their family.  This direction applies both to the
      appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellants are all nationals of Nigera and are a family unit,
      comprising of mother, father and their two children.  Each of their
      claims for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights
      grounds was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in
      decisions dated 29th August 2019. The appellants appealed to the FtT
      and their appeals were dismissed on Article 3 grounds but allowed on
      Article 8 grounds, by First-tier Tribunal Judge James ("the judge")
      for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 18th February
      2018.


   3. For the purposes of this decision it is sufficient to note that taking
      the totality of evidence before her into account, the judge found that
      the decision to refuse leave to remain amounts to an interference with
      the eldest child's physical and psychological integrity and thus an
      interference with his private life.  The judge found that the
      interference is disproportionate to the legitimate aim, and is not
      outweighed by the public interest considerations set out in s117B of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The respondent
      does not challenge the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8
      grounds.


   4. Insofar as the Article 3 claim is concerned, the judge stated at
      paragraph [32] of her decision:


          "In regards to Article 3 submissions (fully addressed in the
          skeleton argument submitted), I am not persuaded that the
          threshold of article 3 in these circumstances are met in applying
          the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and N v United Kingdom (2006)
          47 EHRR 39.  Not least because the medication for dealing with
          [VU]'s epilepsy is available in Nigeria, there are reduced costs
          in both the private and public sector for this medication, and as
          stated above I do not find that the parents coming from an
          educated and financially secure family background in Nigeria,
          would not have the support of their extended families and social
          networks to aid them upon their return with their two children."

   5. What follows at paragraphs [33] and [34] of the decision, is a
      consideration of the Article 3 claim based upon the health of the
      eldest child [VU].  The judge concluded at paragraph [50] that there
      is no breach of Article 3.


   6. The appellant advanced four grounds of appeal.  They were summarised
      by Ms Knorr before me as follows.  First, the judge misdirected
      herself in law by applying the line of authorities relating to Article
      3 and medical care (i.e. N -v- SSHD), but that was not the claim being
      advanced by the applicant.  The applicant relied upon the decision of
      Mr Justice Collins in JA (Child - risk of persecution) Nigeria [2016]
      UKUT 00560 and claimed that the particular vulnerability of [VU] as a
      child who suffers from epilepsy and would therefore be viewed in a
      negative manner in Nigeria, should have been considered and the judge
      should have assessed whether the treatment, including discrimination,
      to which he would be subject, reaches the minimum level of severity
      needed to attract the protection of Article 3.   Second, the judge's
      approach to the evidence was not procedurally fair. The credibility of
      the appellants had not been challenged.  The judge rejected the
      evidence concerning the risk posed by the second appellant's family,
      although that evidence was not challenged by the respondent who was
      unrepresented at the hearing, and the appellant's were not given any
      opportunity to address any concerns that the judge had about the
      evidence.  Third, the judge erred in the assessment of the expert
      report of Ms Nwogu and finally, the judge failed to take into account
      relevant matters by failing to take into account the discrimination
      that [VU] might face in Nigeria on account of his health.  The
      appellant claims that all these factors were relevant to the
      assessment of the Article 3 risk that [VU] is exposed to, and,
      unsurprisingly, none of those factors were properly addressed by the
      Judge, because the judge erroneously focused upon an Article 3 claim
      on health grounds.


   7. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on
      15th May 2019 and by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 2nd July 2019.
      The appellant's issued a claim for judicial review of the decision of
      Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman refusing permission and permission was
      granted by Lieven J on 19th November 2019.  Lieven J observed that the
      consideration of the Article 3 claim by the First-tier Tribunal judge
      focuses entirely on the N v UK line of cases although that  does not
      appear to have been  main part of the argument advanced by the
      appellants in the skeleton argument that was before the FtT.


   8. Mr Kotas on behalf of the respondent acknowledges, rightly in my
      judgment, that the judge has not addressed the claim that was being
      advanced on Article 3 grounds, but confined her consideration to
      whether there would be access to medical care.  He accepts that in
      reaching her decision, the judge failed to have regard to the wider
      evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal regarding the
      treatment to which [VU] as a vulnerable child who suffers from
      epilepsy, may be subjected to in Nigeria, and whether that treatment
      reaches the minimum level of severity required to establish an Article
      3 claim.  He accepts there was evidence before the Tribunal of
      epilepsy being associated with social stigma and discrimination and
      the judge failed to engage with that evidence and its potential impact
      upon the access to education, and the risk of discrimination and
      corporal punishment.


   9. Mr Kotas accepts that there is also an issue of fairness in respect of
      the judge's conclusions, in circumstances where the appellants were
      present at the hearing but were not given any opportunity to address
      any concerns that the judge may have regarding the evidence relied
      upon. He acknowledges that where there is a defect or impropriety of a
      procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance, this may
      amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the First-
      Tier Tribunal to be set aside.


  10. I have carefully considered the lengthy decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge and I accept the decision of the FtT judge to dismiss
      the Article 3 claim is infected by an error of law and should be set
      aside.  I am satisfied that the judge failed to address the Article 3
      claim that was being advanced on behalf of [VU] in particular, and
      simply treated the claim as an Article 3 claim on 'medical care'
      grounds.  As to disposal, although my provisional view was that the
      decision upon the Article 3 claim should be remade in the Upper
      Tribunal, I am persuaded by the submissions made by Ms Knorr and Mr
      Kotas that the appropriate course is for me to remit the matter to the
      First-tier Tribunal.


  11. First-tier Tribunal Judge James refers in her decision to the claim
      for asylum that was made by [VU] in April 2018.  I was informed by the
      parties that a decision has not been made by the respondent upon that
      application.  Ms Knorr informed me  that in a reply to a pre-action
      protocol letter challenging the delay in reaching a decision upon that
      asylum claim, at the end of December 2019, the respondent assured the
      appellant's representatives that a decision would be made upon the
      asylum claim within three months.  A decision is therefore expected by
      the end of March 2020.  Ms Knorr submits the asylum claim made by
      [VU], is closely aligned to the Article 3 claim, and if [VU] is
      granted refugee status, there may be nothing further to be gained by
      pursuing this appeal.  If however, the asylum claim is refused by the
      respondent, there will be an appeal against that decision and it would
      be inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal to be considering the Article
      3 claim at the same time as the First-tier Tribunal is considering an
      asylum appeal, based upon essentially the same facts, circumstances
      and evidence.  Both Ms Knorr and Mr Kovats submit that in the
      circumstances, the appropriate course is for the decision to be remade
      in the First-tier Tribunal, but with the matter to be listed for a
      case management hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in mid-April so
      that if there is an appeal against a refusal of the claim for asylum
      made by [VU], that appeal can be linked to this appeal and the asylum
      and Article 3 claims can be heard and determined together.  If [VU] is
      granted refugee status, the appellants can confirm at the case
      management hearing whether there is anything further to be gained by
      continuing this appeal.


Decision:


  12. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James to dismiss the appeal
      on Article 3 ground is set aside, with no findings preserved insofar
      as they are relevant to the Article 3 claim.  For the avoidance of
      doubt, the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds stands.


Signed                                  Date          28th February 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
