
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10357/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th July 2017                             |On 20th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MR ABDIRIZAK OSMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Thirumaney (Shervins, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the  Appellant  against  the
    Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.  Following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 12th April 2017, in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated
    on 20th April 2017 Judge Lucas dismissed this Human Rights appeal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Kenya, had applied to the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in Pretoria for entry clearance to join his wife  and  children
    in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on the  basis  that
    large amounts of required evidence were missing. Before the  First-tier
    Tribunal it was accepted that  the  requisite  evidence  had  not  been
    placed before the Entry Clearance Officer or indeed the Entry Clearance
    Manager at the time of review. However, it  was  all  provided  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis that Article 8 could not assist the Appellant as  a
    means to circumvent the Immigration Rules. If  the  Appellant  can  now
    meet the Rules he should make a fresh application.

 4. Given that Article 8 was clearly engaged in this case it was  incumbent
    on the Judge to consider proportionality and the matters  contained  in
    s.117 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Judge did not  do  so
    and failed to give any consideration to  the  best  interests  of  this
    couple's two children born in 2014 and 2016 who are UK citizens and nor
    did he consider section 55 as he is required to do. Mr Tarlow  conceded
    that this was a material error of law. Both parties indicated that  the
    appropriate way forward is for the matter to be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues. I do not preserve the
    findings in relation to the Immigration Rules because the situation may
    not now be as it was in April  2017.   I  was  not  in  a  position  to
    redecide the appeal as the Home Office file is missing.




Notice of Decision


    The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent
    that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  for  a
    full rehearing on all issues.




          There was no application for an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
reason to make one.




Signed                              Date 20th July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

