
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10663/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 14 January 2021                 |On: 27 January 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                MEHADI HASAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose date of birth is given as  1
January 1989. He entered the UK on 23 March 2014 as a Tier  4  student  with
leave to enter valid until 24 August 2015. That leave  was  extended  to  24
December 2018 but was subsequently curtailed to expire  on  31  August  2018
when he was considered to have academically withdrawn  from  his  university
course.

On 31 August 2018 the appellant made a human rights claim in an  application
for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his  family/private  life  with  his
partner Dhalia Zaman whom he stated was residing in the  UK  as  the  family
member and dependent child of her father Mr Zamal Hossein, an  EEA  national
exercising EEA treaty rights as a worker in the UK.  The  appellant's  claim
was refused and certified as clearly unfounded on 13  March  2019,  but  was
subsequently reconsidered and re-refused with a right of appeal, on  6  June
2019. In the decision refusing the claim the respondent considered that  the
appellant was not eligible to apply as a partner under Appendix  FM  because
his partner was not British, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee  or
HP leave; that he could not meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
immigration rules on the basis of his private life; and that there  were  no
exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of   leave   outside   the
immigration rules.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 16 October 2019 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bibi,  and  was
allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds, outside the immigration rules.

The respondent sought, and was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

The matter was listed for a hearing to determine the  error  of  law  issue,
but in light of the need to take precautions against the  spread  of  Covid-
19, the hearing was vacated. Following directions from  the  Upper  Tribunal
and submissions made in response by both parties, the matter was decided  on
the papers without a hearing and, in a decision dated 19 May 2020,  I  found
that Judge Bibi had materially erred in law and I set aside her decision  on
the following basis:

         "12. I  am  entirely  in  agreement  with  the  assertions  in  the
         Secretary of State's grounds and submissions, as well as  the  view
         of the judge granting permission, that  Judge  Bibi's  findings  in
         regard to family life go nowhere near the Kugathas test. There is a
         lack of any proper reasoning as to how the appellant's  input  into
         the family, as detailed at [43], [46] and [47], meets the test  for
         dependency over and above  normal  emotional  ties  between  family
         members, in particular where the appellant is not directly  related
         and where he had only been part of the household for 18 months.  Ms
         Pinder, in her submissions, accepts that the judge failed  to  make
         any findings on whether the  family  could  be  assisted  by  other
         relatives, or other means of support, in the UK, a  point  made  by
         the respondent in the grounds. Contrary to Ms Pinder's view at [8],
         it seems to me that that is a  further  and  relevant  matter  when
         considering the  level  of  dependency  relied  upon  to  meet  the
         Kugathas test and the  fact  that  the  judge  did  not  appear  to
         consider the matter is a material error.  In  the  circumstances  I
         agree with the respondent that the judge materially erred in law in
         her findings on family life for the purposes of Article 8.


         13. I also find merit in the second ground of appeal, in regard  to
         the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality.  I  am  entirely  in
         agreement with Mr Avery's submission that the judge's  approach  to
         section 117B of the 2002 Act was superficial  and  failed  to  give
         weight to the fact that the appellant did not meet the requirements
         of the immigration rules. Whilst the judge had  regard  to  section
         117B and to the matters referred to by Ms Pinder  at  [12]  of  her
         submissions, the  judge's  decision  fails  to  give  any  material
         appreciation of the weight to be accorded to  the  public  interest
         and to the inability to meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
         rules. The grounds accordingly establish that the judge  failed  to
         conduct a full and proper proportionality assessment.


         Decision on the Error of Law


         14. For all these reasons the judge's decision is unsustainable and
         cannot  stand.  The   judge's   findings   on   family   life   and
         proportionality for the purposes of Article  8  are  therefore  set
         aside and the decision has to be re-made in those respects. "

              Directions for the Re-Making of the Decision


         15. As regards the re-making of the decision, I  note  that  there
        is, quite properly, no challenge to Judge Bibi's decision that  the
        appellant is unable to meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
        rules in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1), and no  challenge  by
        the Secretary of State to  the  judge's  basic  findings  of  fact.
        Accordingly, there is no reason why the decision cannot be  re-made
        in the Upper Tribunal on the basis of further submissions  and,  if
        relevant, further evidence from the appellant.


        16. Having regard to  the  Pilot  Practice  Direction:  Contingency
        Arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal from
        the Senior President of Tribunals dated 19 March 2020 and the UTIAC
        Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2020 dated 23 March 2020,  I  am
        provisionally of the view that the re-making of this  decision  can
        be undertaken without a hearing."

In response to further directions made by the Upper Tribunal, the  appellant
opposed the re-making of the decision without a hearing and made  a  request
for the matter to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
afresh. It was decided, however, to retain the case in  the  Upper  Tribunal
and the matter was listed for a  resumed,  remote  hearing  on  25  November
2020.  That  hearing  was  adjourned  at  the  request  of  the  appellant's
representatives and came before me today.

Unfortunately the matter could not proceed, once again, as the  Home  Office
network was down and, whilst Mr Lindsay was able to dial  in  by  telephone,
he  did  not  have  access  to  any  of  the  documents  and  requested   an
adjournment.

Having considered the fact that the matter could  not  proceed  today,  when
taken together with Ms Pinder's  previous  request  for  the  matter  to  be
remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
pursuing the European aspect of the case which  had  not  specifically  been
argued previously before the First-tier Tribunal, and the delay in  the  re-
hearing of the appeal such that oral evidence was required in regard to  the
appellant's current circumstances, it seemed to me  to  be  appropriate,  at
this stage, for the matter now to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for  a  fresh  hearing.  Mr  Lindsay  had  no  objection  to  that   course.
Accordingly, I remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  de
novo, with no findings preserved.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge aside from Judge Bibi.






Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 14 January
2021
