
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10835/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 17th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     KZ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Rashid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Sills in respect of his human rights appeal.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keith.  He
       observed when granting permission to appeal that:

           "Whilst the FTT carefully considered and applied  the  authority
           of SR (subsisting parental relationship-s117(6) Pakistan  [2018]
           UKUT 00334 (IAC); and  the  assertion  about  contesting  family
           proceedings with a sister's assistance  from  the  UK  does  not
           appear to be material to the reasoning in the Decision.  As  the
           main difficulty in maintaining contact is said to be the child's
           resistance to that  contact,  so  these  grounds  appear  to  be
           weaker, the FTT's explanation of why  he  concluded  that  there
           were  not  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
           integration in Pakistan, at [14] of the Decision,  was  arguably
           deficient,  and  so  amounted  to  an  arguable  error  of  law.
           Nevertheless permission is granted on all grounds"

    3. In his submissions, Mr Rashid said that there was an  order  for  the
       Appellant to engage in indirect contact with  his  child  until  2020
       with reconsideration thereafter. At [17] it was accepted  that  there
       was a biological relationship with the child.  The  mother  had  been
       trying to prevent contact with the father. AO (Nigeria) at  para  109
       was referred to. This paragraph made  the  position  very  clear.  Mr
       Rashid said it all came down to an Article 8  proportionality  issue.
       If lawful then not correct. Regarding proportionality, then  progress
       to direct contact. The best interests of the child required the child
       to remain with both parents.  The only issue was whether or not there
       was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

    4. Mr Rashid submitted that the Judge had materially erred in  law  when
       considering the case of JA and SR. Paragraph 15 of SR was relied  on.
       The best interests of the child and progression after 2020 needed  to
       be considered. The Judge's finding that the Appellant was  not  in  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship was against the law. Paragraph 6,
       which was ground 2 related to the Appellant  having  written  to  the
       children but the Judge made a finding that he had not done so.  There
       was no challenge to the finding. The other point in respect of ground
       had said at paragraph 15 what he did  about  private  life,  but  the
       Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
       Immigration Rules and I should look at paragraph 14 of the decision.

    5. Mr Rashid submitted that the Appellant had lived in  the  UK  for  15
       years. There was no reasoning in respect of AO  (Nigeria).   Fairness
       was raised in ground 3. The issue of the sister was not  put  to  the
       Appellant despite him being put forward for  cross  examination.  The
       Judge had pursued the wrong  theory  in  respect  of  the  case.  The
       decision in MH (Pending Family Proceedings) made it clear that it was
       unlawful to remove under Article 8 as the Appellant could not  pursue
       from outside the UK.

    6. Ms Aboni in response said she relied on her Rule 24 Reply.  She  said
       that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately
       and gave adequate reasons. The Judge did relate his findings and  the
       CAFCASS report and that there was  only  indirect  contact  and  that
       there was no genuine  or  subsisting  relationship  with  his  child.
       Whilst it was accepted that the  Appellant  does  not  need  to  show
       parental responsibility, the Judge had said that there was no genuine
       and subsisting relationship and the  CAFCASS  report  had  said  that
       there was no full compliance with the letter writing.

    7. Ms Aboni said it was open to the Judge  that  removal  would  not  be
       disproportionate as there was indirect contact  only.  The  Appellant
       could continue indirect contact via Skype. It was also submitted that
       there was no unfairness regarding the sister.  The  paragraph  276ADE
       matter was open to the Judge. It was for the Appellant to  show  very
       significant obstacles to integration in  Pakistan  and  not  for  the
       Judge to look for reasons.

    8. In reply Mr Rashid referred to the bundle at CF paragraph 19  whereby
       the Appellant had sent gifts instead of writing to his  daughter.  In
       respect of the fairness ground, the matter had  not  been  raised  in
       court. I should look at paragraph 21. It  was  submitted  that  there
       would be no difficulty in bringing such proceedings.  The  mother  of
       the Appellant's child is the sister's husband.

    9. I observe that at paragraph 4 it was noted in  the  Judge's  decision
       that the appropriate permission has been  obtained  from  the  Family
       Court for reliance on those documents in these  proceedings.  I  also
       made clear to the parties that  I  have  some  familiarity  with  the
       Family Court as I sit as a Recorder on such private  and  public  law
       proceedings. I told the parties this so  that  they  were  not  at  a
       disadvantage in terms of some of the terms used in the  family  court
       papers so I referred to these long hand  by  giving  explanations  of
       what I understood them to mean.

   10. In considering whether there is a material error of law,  I  set  out
       some of the findings  and  observation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge. These included:

        1) The CAFCASS report of September 2018 indicated that the  child's
           hostility to the Appellant was a major obstacle to contact;

        2) The Appellant had not written to  the  child  as  requested  but
           instead had [sent] gifts but which had not assisted the child in
           preparing her for direct contact;

        3) The direct contact did not progress due to the  child's  failure
           to engage;

        4) There were concerns that further attempts to  establish  contact
           may cause emotional harm to the child;

        5) It was felt that the mother was not encouraging the child to see
           her father;

        6) The CAFCASS report suggested 6 months letter writing followed by
           video calls for 6 months after which direct arrangements  should
           be considered;

        7) The final hearing took place at the  Family  Court  in  February
           2019. The Court made a finding that "a prime motivation for  the
           Appellant in making the  application  was  in  relation  to  his
           immigration application";

        8) The Court ordered indirect contact only in the form  of  monthly
           letters for 6 months and then fortnightly Skype or other  video-
           based calling; and any other contact between the  Appellant  and
           his child as agreed by the Appellant and the mother;

        9) The relevant immigration rule being  Appendix  FM  E-LTRPT.  2.4
           required that there be "direct access";

       10) Paragraph 177B was set out;

       11) The Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11
           was cited and paragraph 60 set out in respect of the requirement
           for a fair balance to be struct between the competing public and
           individual interests involved;

       12) The Judge's findings were that Appendix FM could not be  met  as
           there was no direct contact. There was a  mandatory  requirement
           which was not.  The  Appellant  had  not  established  any  very
           significant obstacles to integration under Paragraph 276ADE;

       13) In so far as the Appellant's outside of the Rules was concerned,
           the Judge had considered the cases  of  JA  (meaning  of  access
           rights) India [2015] UKUT 00225 (IAC). The Judge noted that this
           case focused on the interpretation  of  the  Rules,  which  this
           Appellant could not satisfy. The Judge said he was also referred
           to the case of SR  (subsisting  parental  relationship-s117B(6))
           Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC).  The Judge noted that the case
           gave helpful guidance. An individual can demonstrate  a  genuine
           and subsisting relationship with a  child  notwithstanding  that
           they cannot establish they are taking  an  active  role  in  the
           child's upbringing;

       14) The Judge accepted that the Appellant was the biological  father
           of the child. The Appellant had lived in the UK for 15 years and
           he had established private life;

       15)  The  Judge  considered  the  question  of  proportionality.  He
           considered s117B(6). There was no direct contact with the child.
           There had overall been very little  indirect  contact  too.  The
           Appellant had stopped having direct contact with  the  child  in
           September 2014 when she was aged 1;

       16) Direct contact previously ordered did  not  take  place  as  the
           child refused to leave her mother's car;

       17) The indirect contact currently took the limited form  of  letter
           writing once per  month  by  the  Appellant  to  his  child,  as
           recommended in the Family Court proceedings. Whilst the  sending
           of presents by the Appellant was noted, this was not  considered
           to be helpful  there  and  indeed  it  was  not  what  had  been
           recommended to the Appellant to do;

       18) Importantly in my judgment, the Judge specifically did note  and
           take into account the obstacles put  in  place  by  the  child's
           mother to the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  child  were
           relevant to the overall proportionality;

       19) Having considered all of the  matters,  the  Judge  went  on  to
           conclude that, "In circumstances where  the  Appellant  has  not
           demonstrated any  involvement  in  important  decisions  in  the
           child's li[f]e has no direct contact presently has had no direct
           contact for a number of years, and  only  partly  complied  with
           letter writing request of the family court, I find that  he  has
           not  established  that  he  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
           relationship with his child...".

       20) The Judge also considered  proportionality  more  generally  and
           noted matters such as the Appellant only having lived in the  UK
           lawfully for 2 out of his 15 years here;

       21) Important the Judge also said, "Moreover, I note the finding  on
           the final order that a prime motivation for the father in making
           the application was in relation to his immigration application'.



   11. I refer to some of the  case  law  that  that  the  Judge  mentioned.
       Firstly, in relation to the decision by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
       Lane in JA (meaning of  "access  rights")  India  [2015]  UKUT  00225
       (IAC), the headnote made clear (I refer in particular to paragraph  1
       and 4 of the headnote which I have underlined):

           "1.    Where  the   Immigration   Rules   are   silent   as   to
           interpretation, it may be necessary to refer to the Children Act
           1989 (as amended) and  other  family  legislation  in  order  to
           construe those parts of the Rules which provide a route to entry
           clearance or leave to remain as a parent.

           2.    "Access" in the latest version of  the  Immigration  Rules
           means the same as "contact"  in  the  previous  paragraph  284A.
           Neither term is  now  used  in  the  Family  Court  where  Child
           Arrangements Orders are made to regulate "(a) with whom a  child
           is to live, spend time or otherwise have contact; and (b)  where
           a child is to live, spend time or otherwise  have  contact  with
           any person."

           3.    The expression "access rights"  in  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.4
           (a) (i) may refer equally to parents who have "indirect"  access
           to a child by means of letters, telephone calls etc as  well  as
           to those who spend time with a child ("direct" access). A parent
           may also have "access rights" where there is no court  order  at
           all, for example, where parents agree access  arrangements  (the
           "no order" principle; section 1(5) of the Children Act 1989  (as
           amended)).

           4.    Having satisfied the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4
           (a) (i), an appellant must still prove that  he/she  "is  taking
           and intend to continue to take an active  role  in  the  child's
           upbringing"(paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4 (a) (ii)). Whether he/she will
           be able to do so will depend upon the evidence rather  than  the
           nature of the "access rights."  However,  it  is  likely  to  be
           unusual that a person having only "indirect" access rights  will
           be able to satisfy this provision. In some cases, Tribunals  may
           need to examine the reasons why the  Family  Court  has  ordered
           "indirect" rather than "direct" access."

   12. I then refer to the case of  SR  (subsisting  parental  relationship-
       s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC) which is also  within  the
       Judge's decision. The headnote  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer's
       decision makes clear:

           "1.   If a parent ('P') is unable to demonstrate he  /  she  has
           been taking an active role  in  a  child's  upbringing  for  the
           purposes of E-LTRPT.2.4 of the Immigration Rules, P may still be
           able  to  demonstrate  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child for the purposes of section
           117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the
           2002 Act'). The determination  of  both  matters  turns  on  the
           particular facts of the case.

           2.    The question of whether it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
           expect a child to leave the United  Kingdom  ('UK')  in  section
           117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  does  not  necessarily  require   a
           consideration of whether the child  will  in  fact  or  practice
           leave the UK. Rather, it poses a straightforward question: would
           it be reasonable "to expect" the child to leave the UK?"

   13. Again, this decision also refers to having to consider the particular
       facts of the case.

   14. I then refer to the Court of Appeal's judgment in AB (Jamaica) and AO
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661.  Singh  LJ  gave  the  first
       judgment, but King LJ's judgment is referred to by him  and  I  shall
       refer to that first because it succinctly  deals  with  the  indirect
       contact appeal, which is more relevant in the matter before me.  King
       LJ said (I have underlined several lines for relevance),

           "109. In order to demonstrate a genuine and substantial parental
           relationship, it is common ground that it is not  necessary  for
           the absent parent to have parental  responsibility  and,  in  my
           judgement, it is hard to see how it can be said  otherwise  than
           that  a  parent  has  the  necessary  "genuine  and  substantial
           parental relationship" where that parent is seeing  his  or  her
           child in an unsupervised setting on a regular basis, whether  or
           not he has parental responsibility and whether or not by  virtue
           of a court order.  Equally,  the  existence  of  a  court  order
           permitting direct contact in favour of the absent parent is  not
           conclusive evidence of the necessary parental  relationship.  It
           may be that a court would conclude that there is no "genuine and
           substantial parental relationship" where, for example, a  parent
           has the  benefit  of  a  court  order  but  does  not,  or  only
           unreliably and infrequently, takes up his or her contact.

           110.  So far as indirect contact  is  concerned,  it  should  be
           borne in mind that the Family Court typically strives to promote
           regular, unsupervised, face to face contact between a child  and
           his or her parent. If a court limits that  contact  to  indirect
           contact only, that is because the court, in  a  decision  making
           process in which the child's welfare is paramount (Children  Act
           1989, section 1) has decided that such a significant  limitation
           on the parental relationship is in the  best  interests  of  the
           child in question and the reasons for  such  a  decision  having
           been reached by  the  judge  will  be  highly  relevant  to  the
           tribunal's consideration of section 117B(6)(a).

           111.  Having said that, whilst perhaps more likely, it is by  no
           means inevitable that a tribunal will conclude that a parent has
           no "genuine and substantial parental relationship" absent direct
           contact. It may be that there has been a long gap in contact and
           that indirect contact marks a gentle re-introduction, or that  a
           parent has to show  (and  is  showing)  commitment  to  indirect
           contact before direct contact can be introduced. Where however a
           Family Court has made a final order limiting contact to indirect
           contact, particularly when there is no provision for progression
           to direct contact, the  tribunal  should  look  closely  at  the
           reasons which led to the court making such a restrictive order."

   15. Singh LJ said,

           "100. The Respondent AO was restricted by an order of the Family
           Court in the contact which he could have with his  son  R  in  a
           very  substantial  way.  Although  that  can  be  described   as
           "indirect  contact",  in  the  sense  that  direct  contact  was
           prohibited, it was of a  very  limited  kind  even  of  indirect
           contact. In essence he was permitted to communicate with his son
           only by post and,  furthermore,  those  letters,  postcards  and
           presents  had  to  be  sent  to  the  address  of  the  maternal
           grandparent and not to R or his mother's address."

   16. I am aware also  of  the  helpful  earlier  decisions  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal over which McFarlane LJ has presided. As indicated above,  I
       am also well aware of the difference between the  best  interests  of
       the child being the  primary  consideration  as  enacted  within  the
       Children Act 1989 and applied  in  the  Family  Court  and  the  best
       interests of the child being a primary consideration  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.

   17. Having set those matters out, it is also useful to refer to  some  of
       the documents provided to the First-tier Tribunal  by  the  Appellant
       from his family law proceedings. One of the bundles is dated 5  April
       2019 and is addressed to the Home Office Presenting  Officer's  Unit.
       It was sent by the Appellant's former solicitors  (Messrs  Rose  Dean
       Solicitors of Birmingham who  were  formerly  Stratford  Solicitors).
       Within that bundle there is an order  of  His  Honour  Judge  Rowland
       sitting in the Family Court dated 21 February  2019.  It  is  clearly
       recorded that the Court made a finding that the prime motivation  for
       the Appellant in making  his  application  was  in  relation  to  his
       immigration application.

   18. In the bundle for the Tribunal at page 100 of 110 the CAFCASS officer
       (I have anonymised the names of the child and the Appellant),  "...My
       recommendations were that letters should be sent to [the  child].  It
       appears that instead of letters one some  occasions  [the  Appellant]
       has chosen to send gifts instead. I do not believe that sending gifts
       alone would have assisted [the child] in beginning  to  identify  her
       father. Instead, as evidenced within the direct work, [the child] has
       failed or chosen not to relate to these gifts to  her  father.  I  do
       believe for this reason that the intended  outcome  of  the  indirect
       contact has failed somewhat  to  support  the  preparation  for  [the
       child] for directly spending time with her father".

   19. In my judgment there is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       decision. The Judge had cited  the  correct  case  law.  I  note  the
       reference to 'unusual' in the decision in JA when there  is  indirect
       contact. I also note the important references by Lady Justice King to
       'the need to look carefully' at the  reasons  why  only  an  indirect
       contact final order had been made.  In my  judgment,  the  Judge  had
       done so. He had also referred to the correct  Immigration  Rules.  He
       had applied the correct standard of proof.

   20. The Judge noted with care what the facts of the case  were,  both  in
       respect of the facts from the Family Court and  from  the  orders  of
       that Court, but also in respect of the matters before him.

   21. The Judge also noted that there were  several  aspects  of  the  case
       which led him to conclude that on the facts of this case why  he  was
       not able to conclude that indirect contact was sufficient  to  enable
       the appeal to be allowed.

   22. The  Judge  concluded  that  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship. He did so following the case law and correct  facts  as
       found by him. There  is  no  sufficient  basis  to  go  behind  those
       findings.

   23. These facts included that even the indirect  contact  recommended  by
       the CAFCASS officer had not  been  properly  been  taken  up  by  the
       Appellant. There was an important reason why letters  were  necessary
       to enable the child to  be  re-introduced  to  her  father,  yet  the
       Appellant sent presents which had little value in that regard. It was
       also noted that the order of HHJ Rowland was a final  order,  not  an
       interim order with other hearings to follow. I am aware and made  the
       parties aware that there are sometimes  cases  in  which  the  family
       courts order interim indirect contact to then monitor  the  situation
       with a view to moving onto direct contact. That was not  the  purpose
       of the final order made by HHJ Rowland though.  Indeed,  the  learned
       Judge had made a specific finding that the Appellant's motivation  in
       the  family  proceedings  was  to  assist  him  in  his   immigration
       application. Therefore, FTT Judge Sills was bound  to  have  that  in
       mind when making his decision in this case.

   24. I see no basis for  concluding  that  just  because  the  Appellant's
       relationship with his sister was one in which she was married to  the
       Appellant's former former's wife's brother is any way  sufficient  to
       find a material error of law. Either the Appellant decides to take up
       the option of indirect contact via e-mail and letters or he does not.
       He cannot use the excuse of not being able to use  his  sister  as  a
       reason not to take up the indirect contact.  It is just  as  easy  to
       send an e-mail from Pakistan as  it  is  within  the  UK.  Similarly,
       although it might take letters a little longer to reach the UK,  they
       can easily be sent by the Appellant to the UK. There is no reason why
       he cannot send the letters  directly  to  his  former  wife  for  his
       daughter. The family court order makes  it  clear  that  the  child's
       mother must read those letters to the child. I note that HHJ  Rowland
       had made several orders over some two years in respect of the  family
       case. He obviously had very good  knowledge  of  the  Appellant.  HHJ
       Rowland's findings and reasons had to be given the weight  that  they
       required. Including that the learned Judge was of the view  that  the
       Appellant's motivation for the application in the  family  court  was
       because of his immigration application seeking leave to remain in the
       UK. The Judge cannot  be  criticised  for  taking  into  account  HHJ
       Rowland's findings.

   25. Similarly, I conclude that the video contact  or  Skype  contact  can
       just as easily take place from Pakistan as it can within the UK.

   26. The argument that the Appellant intends to apply in 2020  for  direct
       contact is not something which enabled the Judge to conclude that the
       appeal should be allowed with those future events in mind. I  see  no
       basis for why or how the Judge could have 'used a  crystal  ball'  to
       predict what this Appellant may do in the future, especially  against
       a background of adverse  findings  by  the  family  court  about  the
       Appellant's motivation for making his applications and in view of the
       Appellant's failure to even abide by the simple requirement  to  send
       letters to his daughter.

   27. The Judge had  carefully  considered  the  arguments  in  respect  of
       Article 8 and he was perfectly entitled to conclude that because  the
       Appellant had been in the UK lawfully for just 2 out of his 15  years
       then that was a relevant matter.  The  Judge  was  also  entitled  to
       conclude that  reintegration  was  not  a  difficulty  of  sufficient
       magnitude in view of the Appellant's age and lack of  integration  in
       the UK. Indeed I  note  that  there  was  little  evidence  from  the
       Appellant as to why he could not re-integrate in Pakistan.

   28. As for the matter of making any further applications  for  a  Contact
       Arrangements Order to his child, in my judgment, it was open  to  the
       Judge to make the decision that he did on the application before him.
       It was not for the Judge to try to assess what might  happen  in  the
       future,  if  the  Appellant  might  decide   to   comply   with   the
       recommendation of the CAFCASS officer on future occasions

   29. Having reflected carefully  on  the  case  and  despite  the  helpful
       submissions of Mr Rashid who has so eloquently said  everything  that
       can be said on behalf of the Appellant, I conclude that there  is  no
       material error of law in the Judge's decision.  For  me  to  conclude
       otherwise would mean me merely disagreeing with the Judge's decision.
       The Judge's decision was one  which  he  was  perfectly  entitled  to
       reach.



NOTICE OF DECISION

There is no error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

That decision dismissing the appeal stands.


Signed: A Mahmood      Date: 01 10 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
