
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10044/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 Duncan [L]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Malawi, date of birth  28  February  1980,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated  22  August  2017  to
    refuse an application made under the ten year provisions in Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules.  His appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Garbett (the Judge) who on 4 May 2018  dismissed  his  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds  and  also  somewhat  surprisingly   under   the
    Immigration Rules. Nevertheless the Judge concluded, through the  prism
    of the Rules, that the Appellant's claim could  not,  as  then,  raised
    succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  7  August  2018  by  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Gibb  concentrating  somewhat  on  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's  daughter's  nationality  and  what  might  have   been   a
    contradiction between the Judge's conclusion  that  she  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    child's British  nationality  and  yet  at  another  paragraph  in  the
    decision reached a finding that the  Appellant's  daughter  was  not  a
    British national.  The contradiction was not actually  a  real  one  in
    that at the material  time  there  had  been  no  registration  of  the
    Appellant's daughter as a British citizen and no British  passport  had
    been issued to acknowledge that status.  The position has now moved  on
    since the date of the Judge's decision in that  the  Appellant's  child
    was issued with a British national passport on 5 September  2018.   The
    mother of the Appellant's child remained a person with indefinite leave
    to remain and has been long settled in the UK.

3.   I conclude therefore on the primary ground of concern  that  the  Judge
    did not at the date of the hearing make any error  of  law  as  to  the
    status of the Appellant's child.  What has moved on is just  that  were
    an application to be made on the parent basis it  was  clear  that  the
    wider considerations relating to the child as a  British  national  and
    the  settled  status  of  the  child's  mother  in  the  UK  that   the
    considerations before  the  Secretary  of  State  would  be  materially
    different.

4.   The Judge also  in  considering  the  wider  issue  of  proportionality
    through the prism of the Immigration Rules gave some  consideration  to
    the evidence that had been partially produced, through no fault of  the
    Appellant, as to him and his  wife's  joint  earnings  which  would  in
    respect of another aspect of the Rules have been  met.   The  Appellant
    fairly admitted that whilst he provided the  information  to  his  then
    lawyers representing him they did not include it in the  bundle  before
    the Judge. Therefore the adverse comments  which  the  Judge  had  made
    about maintenance provision  was  probably  as  a  fact  right  on  the
    evidence before her but nevertheless as a fact it may be that  had  the
    material been properly provided by the representatives this issue would
    not have been of concern.

5.   I therefore looking at the arguments  raised  conclude  notwithstanding
    what appeared to be the appropriate grant of permission that this is  a
    case where there is no arguable material error of law by  the  Original
    Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was made nor is one required or is it necessary.

FEE AWARD

A fee was paid but the appeal having failed no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 20 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



