
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10770/2017 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 July 2020                      |On 31 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision has been made  on  the  papers,  under  Rule  34  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further  to  directions
    issued by the Upper Tribunal on 6 May 2020.

 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia born  on  31  October  1974.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2000 and was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain as a  refugee  on  21  September  2001.  Following  his
    conviction for rape and indecent exposure, and a ten year  sentence  of
    imprisonment, the respondent made a decision to cease  the  appellant's
    refugee status and signed a deportation order against him on  18  March
    2013. The appellant made a request to revoke the deportation order and,
    following the refusal of that request, the setting  and  withdrawal  of
    removal directions and various judicial  review  applications,  further
    representations were made on human rights  grounds,  in  particular  in
    relation to his mental  health,  which  were  then  considered  by  the
    respondent as a fresh human rights claim. That claim was  then  refused
    by the respondent on  9  September  2017  and  the  appellant  appealed
    against that decision.

 3. The appellant's appeal was heard by First- tier Tribunal Judge Roots on
    20 January 2020 and was dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    February 2020, on Article 3 and 8 grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  appellant
    and was granted on 26 March 2020.

 5. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-
    19, the appellant's case was reviewed by the Upper Tribunal. In a  Note
    and Directions sent out on 6  May  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
    indicated that she had reached the provisional view that  the  question
    of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved  the  making  of
    error of law and, if so, whether the  decision  should  be  set  aside,
    could be made without a hearing.  Submissions  were  invited  from  the
    parties.

 6. Written submissions have been received from both parties.

 7. The appellant's submissions, made on  18  May  2020,  assert  that  the
    judge's decision ought to be set  aside  on  the  grounds  of  material
    errors of law in the assessment of Article 3 risk in  relation  to  the
    appellant's mental health and access to treatment in Somaliland. It  is
    requested that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    fresh determination or, in the event that  that  is  not  agreed,  that
    there be a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. The respondent, in her submissions, did not oppose the application  for
    permission and accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
    in its consideration of the availability of  medication  in  Somaliland
    and the consequential Article 3 risk on  return.  The  respondent  also
    agreed with the appellant's  submission,  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing,  given  that
    new findings would have to be made, in the context of the new framework
    under AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020]
    UKSC 17.

 9. In light of the fact that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  are  not
    challenged by the  respondent,  and  for  the  reasons  given  by  both
    parties, I find there to be material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision and I set it aside in its entirety. The appropriate course, as
    both parties agree, is for the case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge.

DECISION

10. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The
    appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before  any  judge  aside
    from Judge Roots.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 20 July
2020
