
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10368/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2021                      |On 3 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                JULIAN GJERGI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Lawfare Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft Teams. A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This  is  a  remaking  decision  following  the  identification  of
         material legal errors in the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal B A Morris, promulgated on 18 March 2020,  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  his  entry  clearance
         application (a human rights claim for the purposes of s.82(1)(b) of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act")  )
         as the spouse of a British citizen dated 28 May 2019.

      2. In my 'error of law' decision, promulgated on 9  February  2021,  I
         found that Judge Morris erred in her legal approach when assessing,
         as a condition precedent, whether the appellant  was  an  absconder
         and, if the appellant was an absconder, that Judge Morris erred  in
         her failure to factor into account the discretion within  paragraph
         320(11) of the  Immigration  Rules  when  determining  whether  the
         respondent's reliance on paragraph 320(11) breached  section  6  of
         the Human Rights Act 1998.

      3. As no issue has been  raised  by  either  party  with  the  judge's
         factual finding that the respondent failed to prove her  allegation
         that the appellant had worked illegally, and as this was a discrete
         issue, I "ring-fenced" this factual finding.

      4. The appellant's partner gave birth to their child (a  daughter)  on
         20 August 2020. The child is a British citizen and is residing with
         the appellant's spouse (Amy Gjergji) in the UK. At  the  conclusion
         of the 'error of law' hearing  conducted  on  4  February  2021  Ms
         Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,  indicated  that
         the respondent would not object to  the  Tribunal  considering  the
         birth of the child and the appellant's relationship with his child,
         to the extent that this may constitute a 'new matter' as understood
         in s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the
         2002 Act).

      5. The appellant is a national of Albania who was born on 16  February
         1997. He first entered the UK illegally in December 2013.  He  made
         an asylum claim but this was refused and certified under section 94
         of the 2002 Act as 'clearly unfounded'. According  to  the  instant
         decision  under  appeal  the   appellant   was   served   with   an
         Administrative Removal decision  on  15  January  2014  and,  on  3
         October 2014, he failed to comply with his reporting conditions and
         was considered an absconder. He was next encountered by  police  on
         11 March 2016 and served with a document  confirming  his  unlawful
         immigration status.  He  then  made  further  submissions  for  the
         purpose of lodging a fresh  human  rights  claim  which  eventually
         resulted in  an  appealable  decision  made  on  14  December  2017
         refusing his human rights claim.

      6. An appeal against this decision was dismissed by Judge of the First-
         tier  Tribunal  NMK  Lawrence  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19
         September 2018. In brief summary, whilst  Judge  Lawrence  accepted
         (as did the Secretary of State) that the appellant was in a genuine
         and subsisting relationship with his spouse, he  found  that  there
         were no insurmountable obstacles (as required by EX.1  of  Appendix
         FM of the Immigration Rules) to the couple relocating to Albania in
         order to maintain their relationship. Nor was the  judge  satisfied
         that  the  refusal  of  the  human  rights  claim  resulted  in   a
         disproportionate interference with Article 8 considered as a  free-
         standing right.

      7. The appellant voluntarily departed the UK on 14 December  2018  and
         made an application for entry clearance to join his  spouse  on  11
         February 2019. This application was refused on  28  May  2019.  The
         respondent accepted that the relationship,  financial  and  English
         language requirements of Appendix FM, relating to  entry  clearance
         as a partner, were all met. The  application  was  however  refused
         under both the Suitability requirements and  paragraph  320(11)  of
         the Immigration Rules.  In  respect  of  the  relevant  Suitability
         requirements  (S-EC.1.5.)  the  respondent  considered   that   the
         appellant's exclusion was conducive to  the  public  good  because,
         according to Home Office records,  the  appellant  entered  the  UK
         illegally and had been encountered working illegally. In respect of
         the refusal under paragraph 320(11), the respondent relied  on  the
         appellant previously being  an  illegal  entrant  and  having  both
         absconded and worked illegally. As mentioned  above,  Judge  Morris
         found that the respondent  failed  to  provide  evidence  that  the
         appellant was working illegally and this finding was ring-fenced.

The hearing to remake the decision

      8. Both the appellant and his spouse attended  the  hearing  remotely.
         The respondent relied on a bundle of  documents  prepared  for  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  including   the   appellant's   visa
         application, the respondent's decision and a  review  by  an  Entry
         Clearance Manager.

      9. The appellant relied  on  a  bundle  of  documents  that  had  been
         prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing. This included,  inter
         alia, statements from the appellant and his spouse, statements from
         the spouse's mother, father and grandparents, and  evidence  of  e-
         tickets relating to the spouse's visits to see the  appellant.  The
         appellant additionally provided a further supplementary  bundle  of
         documents including a second statement from Amy Gjergji relating to
         the birth of her daughter and confirming that she has a close  knit
         family in the UK and that she currently resides with her family  in
         the UK, her daughter's birth certificate, and pay slips relating to
         the appellant's mother and father's employment.

     10. At the outset of the  hearing  Mr  Linday  indicated  that  he  had
         reviewed the papers with some care  and,  although  the  respondent
         maintained that her decision was reasonable when made in  2019,  in
         light of the ring-fenced findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal,
         the absence of any further evidence from the respondent relating to
         the appellant's alleged absconding, and in light of  the  birth  of
         the  appellant's  child,  the  material  elements  supporting   the
         respondent's refusal of entry clearance have  largely  fallen  away
         and  that  the  respondent  would  not  be   making   any   further
         submissions. In these circumstances it was not  necessary  to  take
         any further oral evidence from the appellant's spouse and  Mr  Kerr
         made no submissions. I wish  to  thank  Mr  Lindsay  for  carefully
         considered and sensible approach to this appeal.

The legal framework

     11. It is not in dispute  that  the  appellant  meets  the  Eligibility
         requirements for entry clearance as a  partner  (Section  E-ECP  of
         Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules).  Given  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's retained factual findings there was no outstanding issue
         in respect of the Suitability requirements (which were only  linked
         to the unproven assertion that the appellant had worked illegally).



     12. Paragraph 320(11) falls under part 9 of the Immigration  Rules  and
         is  a  discretionary  basis  for  refusal  of  an  entry  clearance
         application. It reads:

             Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the  United
             Kingdom should normally be refused

             ...

             (11)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in  a
             significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

                  (i)  overstaying; or

                  (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

                  (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

                  (iv)  using  deception  in  an   application   for   entry
                  clearance, leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain
                  documents from the Secretary of State  or  a  third  party
                  required in support of the application (whether successful
                  or not); and

             there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
             not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
             conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple  identities,
             switching nationality, making frivolous  applications  or  not
             complying with the re-documentation process.

     13. The Immigration Rules should be  read  sensibly,  recognising  that
         they are statements of  the  Secretary  of  State's  administrative
         policy (see the observations of Lord Browne JSC in  Mahad  v  Entry
         Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16; [2010] 1 WLR 48, para. 10).

     14. The aggravating features identified in paragraph  320(11)  are  not
         exhaustive  but  illustrative.  The  requirement   of   aggravating
         circumstances must be in addition to the basic elements  identified
         in paragraph 320(11) (i) to (iv). This is  clear  as  a  matter  of
         construction. The use of  the  conjunctive  'and'  at  the  end  of
         paragraph  320(11)  (iv)  can  only  sensibly  be  interpreted   as
         requiring, in addition to one or more of the factors  in  paragraph
         320(11) (i) to (iv), the existence  of  aggravating  circumstances.
         The existence of "other aggravating circumstances" is  a  condition
         precedent to the exercise of discretion to refuse  entry  clearance
         under paragraph 320(11).

     15. The definition of an absconder is not contained in the  Immigration
         Rules. The Home Office "Removals, Enforcement and Detention General
         Instructions 'Non-compliance and absconder process',  version  8.0,
         published on 30 January 2018 (the guidance extant both at the  date
         of the respondent's decision and at the  date  of  the  hearing  to
         remake the First-tier Tribunal's decision) states, at page 6:

             In-country absconder

             An in-country absconder is defined as a migrant who either:

                  .    escapes from Immigration Enforcement detention

                  .    breaches one or more of the conditions imposed  as  a
                  condition of  immigration  bail  served  to  them  on  the
                  appropriate notice

             and, in all cases,  whose  whereabouts  are  unknown  and  all
             mandatory procedures to re-establish contact with the  migrant
             have failed.

Discussion

     16.  No  issue  has  ever  been  taken  with  the  genuineness  of  the
         appellant's relationship with his spouse. This had been put  beyond
         any doubt by the birth  of  their  daughter  in  August  2020.  The
         respondent has given her consent to the birth  of  the  appellant's
         daughter to be considered by the Upper Tribunal  as  a  new  matter
         (within the meaning of s.85 of the 2002 Act).

     17. It is readily apparent from the face of the statement from Mrs  Amy
         Gjergji, which was not challenged by Mr Lindsay, that, although she
         has never physically met her father,  the  appellant  does  have  a
         genuine parental relationship with his daughter. The  only  reasons
         they have not physically met are the respondent's decision refusing
         entry clearance and the travel restrictions imposed as a result  of
         the Covid-19  pandemic.  In  her  unchallenged  statement  Mrs  Amy
         Gjergji described how she and her daughter had video calls with the
         appellant  on  a  daily  basis  and  how  their  daughter   already
         recognised the appellant's voice and his image. I have no doubt  in
         finding that there exists a genuine parental  relationship  between
         the appellant and his daughter.

     18. Although Mahad disapproved  the  use  of  guidance  as  an  aid  to
         construction, in Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568  Jackson  LJ
         noted a qualification to that approach in cases  where  a  rule  is
         ambiguous and the Secretary of State has in her published  guidance
         adopted an interpretation more favourable to applicants. Given  the
         absence of any definition in the immigration rules  of  absconding,
         it is appropriate to consider the Secretary of State's own view  as
         to what is required for someone  to  be  considered  an  in-country
         absconder.

     19. In JC (Part 9 HC395- burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027  the
         Tribunal  held  that,  in  relation  to  all  the  general  grounds
         contained in part 9, the burden of  proof  rests  on  the  decision
         maker to establish any contested precedent fact. The  establishment
         of  a  person  being  an  absconder  in  paragraph  320(11),   when
         specifically raised in a refusal decision, constitutes a  precedent
         fact that must be established by the respondent.

     20. The respondent's guidance in respect of absconders indicated  that,
         in all cases, in order to be an absconder, the person's whereabouts
         had to be unknown and  all  mandatory  procedures  to  re-establish
         contact must have failed.  The  respondent  has  not  produced  any
         evidence that all mandatory procedures to re-establish contact with
         the appellant had failed, or  indeed  that  any  of  the  mandatory
         procedures had even  been  undertaken.  The  respondent  failed  to
         demonstrate that she had undertaken any procedures to  re-establish
         contact with the appellant. The question whether the appellant  was
         an absconder  was  one  of  precedent  fact  and  the  respondent's
         chronology of the appellant's immigration history contained in  the
         Reasons for Refusal Letter had no evidential value of its own.  The
         respondent failed to provide any evidence  to  establish  that  the
         appellant was an absconder and therefore failed  to  discharge  the
         burden of proving the precedent fact of absconding. The  respondent
         has therefore not discharged the burden of proving  that  the  only
         remaining condition precedent  for  the  application  of  paragraph
         320(11) has been made out. Given that the appellant meets  all  the
         requirements for a grant of  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  under
         Appendix  FM  (and  therefore  meets  the   requirements   of   the
         immigration  rules  designed  to  give  expression  to  Article   8
         considerations,  this  will  be  positively  determinative  of  his
         Article 8 appeal (TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 1109, at [34]).

     21. In the alternative, even if I am wrong in the above  assessment,  I
         am satisfied  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
         disproportionate.  I  will   assume   that   the   respondent   has
         demonstrated that the  appellant  was  an  absconder.  I  note  the
         absence of any indication in the  respondent's  decision  that  she
         appreciated   that   a   refusal   under   paragraph   320(11)   is
         discretionary. But even if the respondent had  considered  how  her
         discretion should be  exercised  and  was  rationally  entitled  to
         conclude that  the  discretion  should  be  exercised  against  the
         appellant, in the context of a human  rights  claim  a  judge  must
         consider for him  or  herself  whether  the  manner  in  which  the
         discretion was exercised breaches Article 8 ECHR.

     22. There is a public interest in refusing  admittance  to  the  UK  of
         those who have contrived in a  significant  way  to  undermine  the
         immigration laws. Of relevance in the context of an entry clearance
         human rights claim is s.117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act.  Account  must
         however also be given to  the  appellant's  conduct  after  he  was
         encountered again in 2016, conduct  which  demonstrated  compliance
         with the immigration laws. The appellant  maintained  contact  with
         the Home Office, complied with the conditions imposed on  him,  and
         voluntarily  left  the  UK  when  his  appeal  was  dismissed.   PS
         (Paragraph 320(11) discretion: caring needed) India [2010] UKUT 440
         (IAC) ("PS") indicates that regard should be given  to  the  public
         interest in encouraging those unlawfully in the  UK  to  leave  and
         seek  to  regularise  the  status  by  an  application  for   entry
         clearance. This is a relevant factor in the general proportionality
         assessment. I additionally note that the appellant was a minor when
         he first failed to comply with his reporting conditions.

     23. No issue has been taken with the maintenance and  English  language
         factors in s.117B(2) and  (3),  although  these  factors  are  only
         neutral. Although the relationship was  originally  commenced  when
         the appellant was in the UK unlawfully, he has since  left  the  UK
         and complied with the  requirements  of  the  immigration  laws  by
         making a proper application to  return  lawfully.  The  factors  in
         s.117B(4) and (5)  therefore  now  have  little  relevance  in  the
         circumstances of an entry clearance application.

     24. S.117B(6) does not in terms apply to the appellant  as  he  is  not
         facing removal. He does  however  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child. The  child's  mother
         (the appellant's spouse) is a British citizen  with  a  close  knit
         family in the UK with whom she currently lives  (having  regard  to
         the letters from the spouse's parents and grandparents) and she  is
         employed in  the  UK.  Applying  the  principle  considered  in  EV
         (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 there  is  no  doubt
         that the child's best interests are to be with  both  her  parents.
         Albeit in the context of EX.1 (which has no  applicability  in  the
         context of an entry clearance decision), the Home  Office  guidance
         (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
         uploads/attachment_data/file/957302/family-life-_as-a-partner-or-
         parent_-private-life-and-exceptional-circs-v13.0-ext.pdf) on family
         life relationships suggests that, as a starting point, it would not
         normally be expected that a qualifying child  would  leave  the  UK
         (page 51 of 96). Having cumulative regard to the fact that  child's
         mother is a British citizen with a right of abode, that  the  child
         is a British citizen, that it is in the child's best  interests  to
         remain in the UK with both her parents, and having  regard  to  the
         age of the appellant when he failed to comply  with  his  reporting
         conditions, and having regard to his subsequent compliance with the
         immigration rules and immigration laws, I find that the decision to
         refuse  him  entry   clearance   constitutes   a   disproportionate
         interference with Article 8 ECHR.



Notice of Decision

The human rights appeal is allowed.


D.Blum   19 July 2021

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

