
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/10254/2017
                                                               HU/10264/2017
                                                               HU/10281/2017
                                                             & HU/10283/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 4 December 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     RR
                                     IS
                                     HR
                                     ZR
                             (aNONYMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Hashmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal brought by all four  claimants,
    from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it sent
    to the parties on  28  February  2018;  whereupon  it  dismissed  their
    appeals against decisions of the Secretary of State of 30  August  2017
    refusing to grant them leave to  remain.  The  applications  have  been
    pursued under article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR).

 2. I have directed anonymity in this case. The  tribunal  did  so  on  the
    basis that two of the claimant s  are  minors  and  that,  accordingly,
    their personal circumstances should  not  be  disclosed  to  any  wider
    audience than was necessary. Nothing was said, one way  or  the  other,
    about anonymity before me but I have concluded it would be  appropriate
    to maintain the status quo.

 3. The claimants comprise a family unit. RR is a male national of Pakistan
    and IS, also a  national  of  Pakistan,  is  his  wife.  The  remaining
    claimants are the couple's two minor  children.  Both  of  those  minor
    children had been in the UK for a continuous period of seven  years  as
    at the date of the hearing before the tribunal, both having  been  born
    in the UK. But they are, like their parents, nationals of Pakistan.

 4. Shorn of all but essential detail, the background  is  as  follows:  RR
    entered the UK on 24 October 2007 with leave as a  student.  His  leave
    expired on 31 August 2009. He has been  unsuccessful  in  a  number  of
    applications for further leave as a student and so, it is right to say,
    he has been residing in the UK, without leave, for an extensive period.
    IS joined him in the UK, as his dependent, on a date in May 2008. Given
    that her leave was dependent upon his leave, she too has been in the UK
    without leave for a lengthy period. HR was born on 3 March 2009 and  ZR
    was born on 29 September 2010. Both have lived all of their young lives
    in the UK.

 5. On 8 August 2016 the claimant's solicitors applied, on behalf  of  each
    claimant, for  leave to remain, arguing, as I understand it, that  each
    met requirements contained within paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that in any event, failing that,  all  ought  to  be  granted
    leave under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules. Those applications
    were not successful  which  is  how  matters  came  to  be  before  the
    tribunal. The tribunal held an oral hearing of the appeal on 8  January
    2018 at which both parties were represented. As will be  apparent  from
    what I have already  said,  the  tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  with
    respect to all four claimants.

 6. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  behalf  of  all  four  claimants.
    Extensive written grounds  of  appeal,  taking  a  number  of  distinct
    points, were  supplied.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  and  the
    granting judge relevantly commented as follows:

         "2.      The grounds assert that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
         appreciate the impact of not speaking Urdu would have on the  minor
         appellants' education on return to Pakistan; in failing to consider
         properly the reasonableness of return for the minor appellants;  in
         misunderstanding the nature of submissions regarding discrimination
         which related to the question of the reasonableness of  return/  or
         obstacles to integration rather  than  protection  issues;  and  in
         referring to irrelevant case law relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.



         3. In my view only one of the grounds establishes an arguable error
         of law and that is the judge's assessment of the reasonableness  of
         expecting the minor appellants one of whom had spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom at the date of application and both of whom  had
         spent more than seven years here at the date of hearing. The  judge
         gives reasons for his findings that it is not reasonable to  expect
         the child to leave the United Kingdom  but  does  not  do  so  with
         reference to case law cited in the skeleton argument. In particular
         Azimi-Moayad and  others  (decisions  affecting  children);  onward
         appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 or MA (Pakistan) and another  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 705. Arguably the judge does not take  as  the  starting  point
         that leave should be granted under  paragraph  276ABE  (1)(iv)  and
         section 117B (6) in the absence of powerful reasons to the contrary
         and that he fails to assess  whether  or  not  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the  contrary  and/  or  identify  what  those  powerful
         reasons are".

7.    I have to say that I agree with the granting judge that  the  bulk  of
    the grounds offered are simply unarguable. So, I have focused, in  this
    decision, upon the  ground  which  the  judge  did  identify  as  being
    arguable. Permission having been granted this matter was listed for  an
    oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be
    considered whether the tribunal had erred  in  law  and,  if  so,  what
    should flow from that. Representation at that  hearing  was  as  stated
    above and I am grateful to each representative. I hope that  they  will
    forgive me for focusing on what I have considered  to  be  the  central
    issue and not addressing what they had to say  about  matters  which  I
    have found to be unpersuasive or peripheral.

8.    The situation before the  tribunal  was  such  that,  if  one  of  the
    claimants was to succeed,  all  would  effectively  or  at  least  very
    probably do so, because it could not be right to  separate  the  family
    unit and expect one or more of the claimants to return to  Pakistan  in
    circumstances where one or more was entitled to remain in the UK.   So,
    the tribunal had to  evaluate  the  claims  of  each  claimant,  on  an
    individual basis, but with a view to its allowing the appeal in respect
    of all claimants if even a single claimant was able to demonstrate that
    removal would offend Article 8 rights.

9.    The tribunal rejected  the  arguments  advanced  in  respect  of  each
    claimant  concerning  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph  276ADE)  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules. It is clear that,  in  setting
    about its task, it considered matters with diligence. It addressed much
    of the evidence before it with care and, as indicated, I have not found
    the bulk of the criticisms which have been made of its written  reasons
    to be persuasive. But whatever the position might have been within  the
    Immigration  Rules,  when  considering  the  situation  of  the   child
    claimants outside the rules, the tribunal was, as it noted, required to
    take account of  the  content  of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Subsection (6) of that  section  makes
    it clear that in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
    the public interest does not require  the  persons  removal  where  the
    person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Of  course,  insofar  as  the  rules  are
    concerned, that provision  is  effectively  mirrored  within  paragraph
    276(ADE). The tribunal in considering  the  position  of  the  children
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules  took  into  account  the
    wider circumstances rather than focussing solely on  the  situation  of
    the children themselves. It was entitled to have regard to wider issues
    following what was said as to that matter in MA (Pakistan) cited above.
    But it was required to give significant weight in  the  proportionality
    exercise to the residence of the children in the United  Kingdom  given
    that it had exceeded seven years. In MA (Pakistan) this was said:

         "49.     Although this was not in fact  a  seven-year  case,  on  a
         wider construction of section 117A (6), the same  principles  would
         apply in such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in
         the UK for seven years would need to be given significant weight in
         the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:  first,
         because of its relevance to determining the strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary".

10.   Although the tribunal's written reasons  are  thorough,  there  is  no
    indication that it did appreciate that significant weight ought  to  be
    given to the fact of seven years residence and no  indication  that  it
    appreciated that, given such  residence  had  been  established,  there
    would be a requirement for powerful reasons before  it  could  reach  a
    conclusion that the parents and children ought to be required to  leave
    the UK. I do not say, at all, that this was a case where  the  tribunal
    was required to find in favour of the claimants or  at  least  some  of
    them. But it did have to show that it appreciated  the  nature  of  the
    test it was applying. Had it properly directed itself  it  is  possible
    that a different outcome would have been reached. That is sufficient to
    establish that its decision ought to be set aside.

11.   I informed the parties, at the hearing that I would be  setting  aside
    the tribunal's decision on that  basis.  In  those  circumstances  each
    representative urged me to remit to the tribunal for a rehearing. That,
    therefore, is what I have decided to do.

12.   The rehearing before the tribunal shall be a  complete  rehearing.  It
    will not be limited to the grounds  on  which  I  have  set  aside  the
    tribunal's decision. The tribunal will  consider  all  aspects  of  the
    case, both fact and law, entirely  afresh.  Further,  it  will  not  be
    limited to the evidence and submissions  before  the  tribunal  at  the
    previous hearing. It will decide the case on the basis of  all  of  the
    evidence before it, including any further written or oral  evidence  it
    may receive.

13.   I direct that the tribunal rehearing the appeal  shall  hold  an  oral
    hearing. I direct that the tribunal must be differently constituted (in
    other words that the appeal must be heard  by  a  different  First-tier
    Tribunal judge). I shall not make any further  directions  as  I  think
    that task is best undertaken by a  Salaried  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the tribunal, with respect to each claimant, is  set  aside.
The appeal is remitted for rehearing by  a  differently  constituted  First-
tier Tribunal.


    Signed

                                   M R Hemingway
                                   Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Dated: 29 November 2018



Anonymity

I continue the  grant  of  anonymity  originally  given  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal with respect to each claimant.  I  do  so  under  rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless and until a court  or
tribunal directs otherwise, each claimant is granted  anonymity.  No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  any  of  the
claimants or any member of those claimants' family. This  direction  applies
to all parties of the proceedings. Failure to comply may  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.



    Signed


                                   M R Hemingway
                                   Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Dated: 29 November 2018

