
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/10675/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th March 2018                         |On 04th April 20128            |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [K b]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Albania born on [ ] 1985. His appeal against deportation was allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin on 24 January 2018 on  human
    rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  following  grounds:  "It  is
    arguable the judge did not engage with the  appropriate  case  law  and
    section 117C bearing in mind the conviction  represented  offending  at
    the higher end of the scale. The evidence of rehabilitation and lack of
    family ties  did  not  arguably  reach  the  test  of  very  compelling
    circumstances or unduly harsh given the great public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation."

3.   In the Rule 24 response the Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  did
    identify  the  correct  test,  namely  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances over and above  the  exceptions  in  paragraph  399A  and
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The
    judge reviewed relevant case law and attached appropriate weight to the
    public interest. His findings were open to  him  on  the  evidence  and
    there was no error of law in his decision to allow the appeal.

Submissions

4.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge set out the law in  relation  to  an
    Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules, but  he  failed  to
    have regard to section 117C. The judge's  starting  point  demonstrated
    that he had not understood the legal position. The appeal  was  against
    deportation not a refusal of leave. The judge refers to  a  possibility
    of a relationship and therefore there was no family life in this  case.
    The relevant exception was paragraph 399A on the basis of private life.



5.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge erred in law in  his  assessment  of
    compelling circumstances  for  the  following  reasons.  He  failed  to
    consider the  Appellant's  criminal  conduct  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was integrated in the  UK.  He  focussed  on  rehabilitation,
    which was not material given the seriousness of the offence. He  failed
    to assess whether the exceptions were met  and  then  consider  whether
    there were  compelling  circumstances.  Significant  obstacles  to  re-
    integration were not sufficient and any interruption to family life was
    the normal state of affairs in deportation cases.  The  fact  that  the
    Appellant had no  family  in  Albanian  was  not  enough  to  establish
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.

6.   Mr Lams submitted  that  the  judge  had  identified  and  applied  the
    correct test at paragraph 22. He then set out the facts relied upon and
    had  drawn  together  all  relevant  matters  in   finding   that   the
    circumstances were compelling. This was not  a  rationality  challenge.
    The Respondent may not agree with the reasons for the decision, but  it
    was open to the judge. Reading the decision as a whole  the  judge  had
    dealt  with  the  Appellant's  criminal  conduct.  Rehabilitation   was
    relevant to whether the Appellant was someone who  remained  integrated
    notwithstanding his offending behaviour. The  Appellant  was  extremely
    unlikely to re-offend and had taken advantage of courses in prison.

7.   Mr Lams submitted that the decision was well reasoned. The judge  found
    that the exceptions in 399A were met and he then went  on  to  identify
    other  elements  outside  the  Immigration   Rules.   The   Appellant's
    relationship was part of that, as was his background. The  decision  to
    allow the appeal was reasonably open  to  the  judge.  He  applied  the
    correct test and took into account all relevant matters.

8.   In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  structure  of  the  decision
    was important in understanding the tests to  be  applied.  The  judge's
    statements at paragraphs 19 and 20 were material wrong.  There  was  no
    express finding of very significant obstacles to  re-integration  which
    was a high test. The judge  considered  the  case  from  the  angle  of
    whether  the  Appellant  was  considered   British.   The   Appellant's
    relationship was not relevant  to  the  Appellant's  re-integration  in
    Albania   and   rehabilitation   was   not   relevant   to   compelling
    circumstances. The judge had made mixed findings of facts and  law  and
    had not demonstrated that he applied the relevant legal test.

Discussion and Conclusion

9.   The relevant facts in this case are as follows. The Appellant  came  to
    the UK when he was about 13 or 14  years  old.  He  had  no  memory  of
    Albania and none of his family remained there. His father is dead,  his
    mother is in Germany and he believes his sister is in Italy. His  claim
    for asylum was refused in 2001, but he was granted exceptional leave to
    remain until May 2005. In September  2005  he  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain. He excelled at  school  and  had  been  in  full  time
    employment since the age of 18. He had completed  several  courses  and
    was currently studying for a level  5  certificate  in  management  and
    leadership. He could barely read or  write  Albanian.  Unemployment  is
    very high in Albania and most jobs are  offered  because  of  a  family
    contact.

10.  The Appellant pleaded guilty to conspiring to supply a class A drug  on
    17  July  2015  and  was  sentenced  to  four  years  and  six  months'
    imprisonment. The Appellant's role was limited to transporting a packet
    of high quality cocaine from the South of England to West Yorkshire. He
    was asked to  transport  drugs  twice  and  was  caught  on  the  first
    occasion. The offence was triggered by his gambling habit  and  he  had
    completed money management and drug awareness courses in prison. He was
    remorseful and he wished to  resume  his  relationship  with  his  long
    standing partner who miscarried while he was in prison.

11.  The Respondent stated that  British  nationality  was  refused  on  the
    basis of the Appellant's previous convictions. However,  there  was  no
    Memorandum of Conviction or  PNC  list  and  none  were  drawn  to  the
    attention of the sentencing judge. The Respondent's letter of  26  July
    2017 did not rely on convictions other than the one conviction in 2015.

12.  The judge set out the legal test at  paragraph  22  acknowledging  that
    the Appellant had received a custodial sentence in excess of four years
    and therefore he had to show compelling circumstances  over  and  above
    his lawful residence for most of his  life,  his  social  and  cultural
    integration and very significant obstacles to his  integration  abroad.
    The judge was well aware of  the  factors  to  assess  as  set  out  in
    paragraphs 339A and section 117C. He did not commence his findings from
    the wrong starting point. The judge then reminded himself of the  legal
    principles distilled from relevant case law including  the  significant
    weight to be attached to the public interest and the definition of very
    compelling circumstances.

13.  The judge made findings on  the  following  matters  in  the  following
    order from paragraphs 25 to 29:

    (i)  offending behaviour;

    (ii) remorse, rehabilitation and risk of re-offending;

    (iii)    integration in the UK, including  his  relationship  with  his
         former partner;

    (iv) family background and lack of support in Albania;

    (v)  ability to re-integrate on return to Albania;

    (vi) the effect of deportation on his long standing partner who  wished
         to resume her relationship with him.

14.  I find that the judge considered all the relevant factors in  paragraph
    399A and section 117C and took into account other relevant factors over
    and above those referred to  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge's
    findings  at  paragraphs  25  to  29  are  sufficient  to  support  his
    conclusion that the Appellant's circumstances were very compelling such
    that they outweighed deportation.

15.  At paragraph 30, the judge summarised his findings and  concluded  that
    the Appellant was fully integrated in the UK and he was unlikely to re-
    offend. The judge found that the Appellant left Albania in 2001, he had
    little memory of it, he had no family there, he had a  limited  command
    of Albanian and little or  no  familiarity  with  Albanian  culture  or
    customs. These findings were sufficient to show that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to re-integration, notwithstanding that the judge
    did not use that specific phrase in his decision.

16.  The judge's findings were open to him on the  evidence  before  him.  I
    accept that a different  judge  may  well  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion. However, this was not a rationality  challenge.  The  judge
    applied the correct test to the facts as he found them.  There  was  no
    error of law in the judge's decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

17.  I find there is no error of law in the decision of 24 January 2018  and
    I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

