
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10170/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr wajid zaman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Wajid Zaman.  However, for the  purposes  of  this  decision  and
    reasons I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal where Mr Zaman was the appellant.  Mr Zaman is a  national  of
    Pakistan born on 1 April 1979 who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  his  application  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain,  that  decision  being  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on  29  March  2018.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 19 March 2019 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Dineen
    allowed Mr Zaman's appeal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission on the ground  that,  in
    short, the judge erred by placing reliance that he did on the views  of
    HMRC and in allowing the appeal.

Error of Law Discussion

 3.  It  was  Ms  Everett's  submission  that  the  judge's  reasons   were
    inadequate. Although she accepted before me that the judge's reasonings
    were not exclusively related to the actions of HMRC, she submitted that
    the judge placed significant weight on the lack of action taken by HMRC
    in assessing the seriousness of the allegations against the  appellant.
    Although she accepted that he was not wrong  to  place  weight  on  the
    actions of HMRC, she submitted that it was clear that a lack of  action
    by the HMRC did  not  mean  that  an  applicant  had  not  acted  in  a
    fraudulent way.  She stated that she could not put her point  any  more
    strongly.

 4. Mr Richardson for Mr Zaman accepted that the judicial review in  R  (on
    the application of Khan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC)  and
    the Court of Appeal in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ  673  confirmed  that
    the Secretary of State can reasonably conclude that someone  has  acted
    dishonestly but that it was wrong  for  them  to  be  deprived  of  any
    remedy.  In this case he submitted the appellant had used  that  remedy
    and was believed by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Richardson further submitted that the HMRC issue was  not  the  only
    issue considered by the judge who had correctly  directed  himself  and
    had set out  including  at  [35]  and  [36]  that  he  must  take  into
    consideration all the circumstances as a whole and found there  was  no
    material  misconduct.   He  submitted  that  it  was  clear  that  this
    conclusion did not solely consist of the consideration  that  the  HMRC
    had found the appellant not to be fraudulent.   Equally,  although  the
    actions of the HMRC were not  determinative,  it  was  Mr  Richardson's
    submission that the judge did not have to ignore the fact that HMRC had
    not taken such an action had not found the appellant to be  fraudulent.
    The judge noted that the appellant had approached the HMRC  voluntarily
    at [17] and had in mind the respondent's case including  that  that  it
    was  argued  that  the  appellant's  amendments  were  made  solely  to
    facilitate the appellant's immigration status.  It was Mr  Richardson's
    submission that the judge had rejected that argument.   The  judge  had
    taken into  consideration  all  of  the  evidence  including  that  the
    appellant had instructed a new accountant and that  the  appellant  had
    provided evidence in his bundle of attempts  to  contact  the  previous
    accountants for an explanation  which  had  elicited  no  response  and
    indicated that neither firm was still practicing.

Conclusions

 6. Ms Everett confirmed that this was not a rationality challenge;  rather
    it was submitted that the judge's reasoning was inadequate as the judge
    at  paragraphs  [27],  [28],[29],  [30]  and  [31]   had   taken   into
    consideration the actions of the HMRC and in those  circumstances  went
    on to find  that  the  'high  test  under  paragraph  322(5)'  was  not
    satisfied.

 7. However the judge found, at  [33],  that  there  was  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle of an  interview  of  the  appellant  and  that  the
    transcript did not suggest that there was any point  in  the  interview
    where the appellant appeared to lack credibility and no  points  as  to
    credibility were set out in the space provided.  No challenge has  been
    made to those findings.

 8. The judge went on to find, at [34], that the appellant  had  income  in
    the two periods relevant to the 2011 and 2013 applications  which  were
    well above what was required under the Immigration Rules and  therefore
    even if there had been a desire to deceive the  respondent,  which  the
    judge did not find to be the case, no material deception had  occurred.



 9.  The  judge  made  findings,  at  [35],  that   considering   all   the
    circumstances he was not satisfied that  there  was  any  intention  to
    deceive.  Although the judge did not specifically  set  out  the  steps
    given in the guidance in Khan, in  effect  that  was  the  approach  he
    followed.  I have reminded myself what was said in MD (Turkey)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that adequacy meant no more nor less than that. It
    was not a counsel of  perfection.  Still  less  should  it  provide  an
    opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see
    if they are wanting, perhaps even  surprising,  on  their  merits.  The
    purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable  the  losing
    party to know why she has lost and it is also to  enable  an  appellate
    court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision are so  that
    they can be examined in case there has been an error of approach.

10. Considered fairly and holistically there is no material  error  in  the
    judge's decisions which indicate that he  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible in the innocent explanation that he provided,  including  that
    he corrected the amounts given  once  he  realised  that  the  previous
    submissions had been incorrect.  The actions of HMRC were one factor in
    the  judge's  consideration.   The  judge  also  went  on  to  make  an
    alternative finding that even if there had been a desire to deceive  no
    material deception could have occurred given the level of actual income
    during the two relevant periods  in  2011  and  2013,  underlining  the
    judge's reasoning  that  he  believed  this  appellant.   Although  the
    decision might have benefited from a different structure,  the  reasons
    given were adequate.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award decision made in the First-tier Tribunal,  to  make
no award.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
