
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/10837/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 May 2017                           | On 31 May 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Afzaal Laal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by All Nations Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent, Mr Laal, to  whom  I  shall  refer  hereafter  as  "the
    appellant", as he was before the  judge,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  to  whom  I
    shall refer hereafter as "the respondent" as she was before the  judge,
    refusing his application for further leave to remain as a partner.

2.   It was concluded by the respondent that the appellant  failed  to  meet
    the suitability requirements  in  the  Immigration  Rules  because,  he
    having submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS), ETS had undertaken a check of his  test  and  confirmed  to  the
    respondent  there  was  significant  evidence  to  conclude  that   his
    certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.
     His scores from the test taken on 16 October 2012 at Stanford  College
    had been cancelled by ETS.

3.   The judge noted that it had been held  in  SM  and  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT
    00229 (IAC) that the Secretary of  State's  generic  evidence  combined
    with her evidence particular to the appellants in SM and Qadir sufficed
    to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  their  TOEIC
    certificates had been  procured  by  dishonesty.   However,  given  the
    frailties of that  evidence  and  in  light  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellants in that case, the legal burden of proving dishonesty had not
    been discharged.  This approach was  upheld  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  With regard to the burden  on
    the appellant, the judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his
    wife who both adopted their witness statements and the judge noted that
    the appellant within his witness statement had set out  fully  evidence
    as to his taking the test himself  and  how  the  test  was  conducted,
    including how long each section took.  He had also provided a number of
    documents in relation to his educational undertakings during  his  time
    in the United Kingdom including a document from Business School  London
    relating from May 2011 to October 2012 confirming  his  attendance  and
    also confirming that he had undertaken a number of modules within  that
    period, all of which he passed.  In addition he had provided a  Trinity
    College London Grade 2 examination in Spoken English certificate  dated
    19 October 2012.

4.   The judge went on to say  at  paragraph  34  that,  having  taken  into
    account all of the evidence available to him, he was satisfied that the
    appellant did have a sufficient level of the English language and  that
    he had undertaken courses in the past in  English.   He  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had shown on the balance of  probabilities  that  he
    himself did in fact undertake the  test  and  had  not  therefore  used
    deception  in  either  his  previous  application  or  in  the  current
    application which was the subject of the appeal before the  judge.   It
    was accepted that he met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    subject to the suitability requirement.  The appeal was allowed.

5.   In her grounds  of  appeal  the  respondent  referred  to  the  witness
    statements of Mr Millington and Miss Collins and ETS SELT  source  data
    which indicated that the appellant's test had been categorised  by  ETS
    as invalid.  The Millington and  Collins'  witness  statements  clearly
    provided that the test was  characterised  as  invalid  where  ETS  was
    certain there was evidence of proxy test-taking or  impersonation.   It
    was clear that the case had to have gone through a  computer  programme
    analysing speech and then two independent voice analysts,  and  if  all
    three were in agreement that a proxy had been used the  test  would  be
    characterised as invalid.  As a consequence it was  concluded  that  it
    was clear that the Secretary of State had reasonably concluded that the
    appellant had used  deception  in  the  application.   As  regards  the
    appellant's English qualifications  and  level  of  English  spoken  at
    interview, it was argued that there plainly  might  be  reasons  why  a
    person who was able to  speak  English  to  the  required  level  would
    nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate to undertake an ETS  test
    on their behalf or otherwise to cheat.

6.   At the hearing Mr Singh relied  on  the  grounds.   He  emphasised  the
    point that  there  could  not  be  an  explanation  for  the  appellant
    sufficient for him to discharge the burden by saying that he  had  good
    knowledge of English anyway, the fact that a person  had  good  English
    did not mean that they would not employ a  proxy  test-taker  in  their
    stead.  So even if he had good English, it was not enough to  discharge
    the burden.

7.   In her submissions Ms Shaw helpfully clarified that the position  under
    the Rules was that although there was reference in the decision  letter
    to the  appellant  not  demonstrating  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with his partner continuing outside the UK  as
    set out in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM, paragraphs EX.1.  and  EX.2.
    were not relevant in this case, as the  appellant  had  been  found  to
    satisfy the eligibility requirements and  therefore  it  was  simply  a
    question of whether or not the findings on suitability were sound.   Mr
    Singh agreed that this was the correct approach.

8.   In this regard Ms Shaw argued that the judge was entitled  to  find  as
    he had done.  His conclusions were not just based  on  the  appellant's
    good English, but he had heard live  evidence  in  English,  found  the
    appellant credible and had seen the detail in the witness statement  as
    to the circumstances in which he took the test.  The appellant had been
    doing a degree in English during the  period  in  which  the  test  was
    taken.  These matters taken  together  were  enough  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof.

9.   Mr Singh had no further points to make by way of reply.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  It must be right, as Mr Singh argued, that  the  simple  fact  that  an
    appellant is able to display proficiency in  English  at  the  relevant
    time as well as thereafter is not enough to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  There may be other reasons why a person who  is  proficient  in
    English might nevertheless choose to employ a proxy to take an  English
    test.

12.  However, I agree with Ms Shaw that this was by no means the sole  basis
    on which the appeal was allowed.  The judge clearly placed reliance  on
    the  appellant's  witness  statement.   He  referred  in  his   witness
    statement to sitting the test on 16 October 2012 at Stanford College in
    Norbury, London, described the circumstances in which he  travelled  to
    the tube station and then on to Norbury Park where the test centre was.
     He described the  amount  of  time  the  travel  took  him.   He  also
    described in some detail the set-up of the building where the test  was
    taken, the number of people who were in the waiting room, the amount of
    time he had to wait before he took the test and the  number  of  people
    taking the test with him and the duration of the test.  In my  view  it
    was open to the judge, bearing in mind the guidance in SM and Qadir and
    Shehzad, to conclude that the appellant had discharged  the  burden  on
    him  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case.   Clearly  the
    respondent had discharged her evidential burden, but  thereafter  there
    was nothing to discharge the legal burden on the respondent in light of
    the evidence put forward by the appellant upon which the  judge  placed
    weight.  Accordingly, I conclude that there is no error of law  in  the
    judge's decision and the decision allowing  the  appeal  in  this  case
    stands.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date 26 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified).


[pic]

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



