
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/10109/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On June 17, 2019                     |On July 01, 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  mr y b w
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr Quan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of China and he entered the United  Kingdom
    illegally in August 2007.  He  lodged  an  application  for  asylum  in
    February 2013 but this was refused by the respondent  on  September  2,
    2014.  Further submissions were lodged in 2015 and 2016 but these  were
    rejected without a right of appeal by the respondent.

 2. On April 21, 2017 the appellant lodged  further  submissions  on  human
    rights grounds and whilst these were refused by the respondent on April
    3, 2018 the appellant was given an in-country right of appeal.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision on April 27,  2018  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McGrade on November
    8, 2018.  In a decision promulgated on  December  12,  2018  the  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this  decision  and  on  March  22,  2019  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey granted  permission  to  appeal  finding  it  was
    arguable  a  Judge  may  have  erred  when  considering  the  issue  of
    continuous residence by finding the removal of the appellant's  partner
    and their eldest  child  to  Ireland  broke  the  continuous  residence
    requirement set out Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 5. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. The appellant, who was appearing in person, confirmed  that  his  legal
    representatives had prepared the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that
    his pregnant wife and eldest child had been forcibly removed by the  UK
    authorities in October 2012 but were allowed to return  to  the  United
    Kingdom ten days later.  He argued that if the UK authorities  had  not
    forcibly removed his wife and child then his eldest child  would  be  a
    qualifying child under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  He  reiterated
    that  his  eldest  son  had  many  friends  and  was  doing  very  well
    academically in school.  Neither his  eldest  child  nor  his  youngest
    child (who was not a qualifying child) knew  anything  about  China  as
    they had been born in the United Kingdom and if they were  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom they would have to start their friendships and
    everything else all over again.

 7. Mr Kandola, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  pointed  out  that
    neither the appellant, his wife nor any of his children  had  ever  had
    any leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  order  to
    succeed under  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  there  had  to  be
    continuous residence and there was nothing within this section  of  the
    Act that allowed for any exceptions to the requirement that  the  child
    be here for a continuous period.  Section  117D  defines  a  qualifying
    child as being someone who has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more.

 8. Mr Kandola argued that whilst paragraphs  276A-B  HC  395  allowed  for
    periods of up to six months or less to be disregarded this was  firstly
    in respect of  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and
    secondly the applicant at the time had leave to enter  or  remain.   He
    invited the Tribunal to find that Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  did
    not apply and that the findings made by the Judge were open to him when
    considering proportionality.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. This is an appeal which  centred  on  whether  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    finding the eldest child was not a qualifying child.

10. The relevant child had been born in the United Kingdom on May  8,  2009
    and there was a younger sibling born on June 3, 2013 but  this  younger
    child did not form part of any legal submissions that I was considering
    today on the issue of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

11. In order to  succeed  under  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    appellant had to demonstrate that the child had been here  continuously
    for seven years.  This does not require the child to be  here  lawfully
    for seven years but simply resident  for  seven  years.   There  is  no
    definition within Section 117D of  the  2002  Act  of  what  continuous
    residence means but in granting permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Storey  referred,  by  way  of  example,  to  the  definition  of
    continuous residence in paragraph 276A HC 395.

12. The respondent has  brought  out  guidance  in  calculating  continuous
    periods of residence in the UK but that guidance is for use  under  the
    Immigration Rules and is specific to certain  applications.   Paragraph
    276A HC 395 for instance allows absences of six months or  less  to  be
    disregarded as long as the applicant has existing  leave  to  enter  or
    remain upon their departure and return.

13. The appellant's wife and child did not  leave  the  United  Kingdom  by
    choice but there  is  no  suggestion  that  the  UK  authorities  acted
    unlawfully by requiring them to return to Ireland to pursue  an  asylum
    application.  The fact the child and wife were allowed back in within a
    short period of time does not alter the fact that there was a break  in
    continuous residence.

14. It cannot be argued that the short absence did not break the continuous
    residence because clearly it did.  If the appellant's  wife  and  child
    had been granted some form of leave before they left then the period of
    absence would not count but this was not the case in this appeal.

15. I therefore find that in the absence of any evidence  to  the  contrary
    there is nothing that allows me to find that the period  of  continuous
    residence had not been broken.  I therefore find  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to deal with this appeal  without  having  regard  to  Section
    117(6) of the 2002 Act.

16. The only other issue remained whether  the  Judge  had  considered  the
    appellant and his family case properly on Article 8 grounds  and  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge's findings as set out in paragraphs 17  to  27
    were a proper and fair assessment of the evidence  and  the  conclusion
    was open to the Judge.

17. There was therefore no error in law.

Notice of Decision

I do not find there has been an error in  law  and  I  uphold  the  original
decision.


Signed                              Date         27 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         27 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

