
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10251/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 April 2021                     |On 26 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             mrs Tanveer Akhtar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, M&K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  Her date of birth is 1 January
    1976.

 2. On 20 November 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal against the decision of First- Tier Tribunal Judge
    Watson to dismiss the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  on  29  April  2019  refusing  to  grant  the
    Appellant entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  Mr  Muhammad  Said  (the
    Sponsor) who is settled in the United Kingdom.   The matter came before
    me in order to determine whether the judge made an error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The  issue  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  whether  the
    Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  Sponsor
    and whether they intend to live together  as  husband  and  wife.   The
    couple were married in 1992.  They have  four  children.   The  Sponsor
    left Pakistan twenty years ago.  He was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain here in October 2014.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal for  a  number  of  reasons.  The  judge
    stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  "longstanding  contact  and
    financial support" throughout the period when  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor have been living separately.  The judge found that the evidence
    provided relating to telephone contact pertained to a six-month  period
    before the  date  of  the  application.  He  found  that  there  is  no
    indication of whether the telephone calls were made to the  Appellant's
    phone.

 5. The judge  took  into  account  WhatsApp  printouts  submitted  by  the
    Appellant.  The name on the printouts is "Miss Said Pak Pak".  However,
    the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  this  was  the
    Appellant's account.  The judge found that the evidence did  not  "show
    longstanding contact between the Appellant and the Sponsor ...".

 6. At paragraph 12 the judge noted that the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant (AB 250) indicated that the Sponsor had sent a  copy  of  his
    letter to the ECO to her in the WhatsApp chat. The judge stated:

         "12. ...  This  clearly  states  that  the  interviewee  wishes  to
             rearrange his interview and wishes to be interviewed in  Urdu.
             He states that he is on holiday in Pakistan and will return on
             24.04.19.  This is puzzling  as  the  sponsor  would  have  no
             reason to call his wife and attach a copy of his letter whilst
             he was in Pakistan if he were indeed staying with her  at  the
             time.  It is not consistent with the sponsor living  with  the
             appellant in March/April 2019 or with her being Miss Said  Pak
             Pak."

 7. The judge rejected Mr Ali's  submission  that  inconsistencies  in  the
    interviews (for example the Appellant and the Sponsor giving  different
    dates when they last saw each other and  the  dates  of  the  Sponsor's
    visits to Pakistan) are explained by  the  interview  not  having  been
    conducted in the Appellant's  first  language  which  is  Pahari.   The
    interview was conducted in Urdu.  The judge concluded that this did not
    explain any of the discrepancies because at no time  in  the  interview
    record was it suggested that the Appellant  could  not  understand  the
    language or that it was not conducted  in  her  chosen  language.   The
    Appellant indicated in the interview that she understood the questions.



 8. The judge considered evidence of financial  remittances  but  concluded
    that "this does not demonstrate a pattern of support of a wife  through
    the years".  The judge noted one remittance dated in 2017, one in  2018
    and several in 2019.

 9. The judge attached weight to the Sponsor having had legal  status  here
    since 2014.  The judge said that the Sponsor "has not been hampered  in
    supporting his wife since 2014, nor in contacting her".  The judge also
    attached weight to the Sponsor having returned to Pakistan only in June
    2015, February 2018 (for five weeks) and March 2019 (for six weeks).

10. The judge concluded, at paragraph 16, that the Appellant has not  shown
    that she is in a genuine and subsisting marriage with the Sponsor.  The
    judge said that  she  acknowledged  the  cases  relied  on  by  Mr  Ali
    representing the Appellant, namely Naz (subsisting marriage -  standard
    of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 0040 and Goudey (subsisting  marriage  -
    evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 0041 and that they  guide  her  that  there
    does not need to be particular evidence of devotion and that  telephone
    cards can be evidence of  contact  and  that  postdecision  visits  and
    evidence  are  capable  of  establishing  facts  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities.

11. The judge said that she had  considered  these  cases  and  whilst  she
    accepted that phonecards may not be kept and that it was  not  "at  all
    significant that the Appellant did not know the address of  an  English
    flat that she was to make her home in given that English is  a  strange
    language to her and she has never been there", she went on to find that
    "the lack of any form of evidence of contact between the Appellant  and
    the Sponsor prior to 2018 and the lack of remittances  (save  for  one)
    prior to 2018 is not supportive of a genuine relationship."  The judge,
    at paragraph 17, also  took  into  account  that  despite  two  of  the
    couple's children having been granted entry clearance in  2018  neither
    attended the hearing nor gave evidence in  support  of  their  parents'
    relationship.

The Grounds of Appeal

12. The first ground of appeal is that  the  judge  applied  the  incorrect
    standard of proof.  In support of  this  it  is  said  that  the  judge
    extended the "audit trail" by "expecting  evidence  from  the  couple's
    children".  The judge repeatedly searched for evidence of  longstanding
    contact  and  financial  support  throughout  the  years  of  marriage.
    However, this is the wrong test (see paragraph 12 of Goudey) There  was
    no evidence that the couple did not want to be together or  that  there
    had ever been any friction between them.  There  is  no  evidence  that
    they had engaged in a relationship with anyone else.

13. In GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 0046 the Tribunal said



         "An Immigration Judge, when assessing the subsistence of a marriage
         will plainly have to bear in mind the cultural context and the wide
         differences that exist between individual  lifestyles,  whether  by
         choice, or by circumstances or by economic necessity".

14. The judge failed to consider the explanations provided  by  the  couple
    for any "perceived inconsistencies".

15. Ground 2 is that the judge attached "no weight to  relevant  evidence".
    The judge was shown photographs of the couple together during visits to
    Pakistan.  The Sponsor did not have legal status in the UK  until  2014
    and there had had  visited  Pakistan  on  three  occasions  since.  The
    relevant test is not cohabitation, which in any event, the  absence  of
    was explained by the Sponsor having lived and worked in the UK.

16. Ground 3 is that there was a procedural irregularity because the  judge
    raised an issue that was not raised by the Respondent or at the hearing
    and therefore the Sponsor was not able  to  give  evidence  about  this
    issue.  The  issue  was  that  the  couple  "might  have  in  some  way
    fabricated the evidence of contact".  This  was  first  raised  by  the
    judge in her decision.

Submissions

17. I heard full submissions from Mr Ali and Mr Clarke. Mr  Ali  relied  on
    the grounds and his skeleton argument.  He said that grounds  1  and  2
    are inextricably linked.  The thrust of his oral submissions  was  that
    the decision of the judge  was  irrational.  It  was  contrary  to  the
    judgement in Goudey to dismiss the  appeal  for  want  of  evidence  of
    longstanding contact and support.

18. In response to ground 2, I asked Mr Ali what evidence the judge did not
    attach weight to or not take into account.  He said that this  was  not
    really the challenge. He said that  the  point  is  that  there  was  a
    substantial amount of evidence before the judge which was sufficient to
    discharge the burden of proof.

19. In respect of ground 3, I brought the decision of the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager (ECM) dated 12 November 2019 to Mr Ali's attention.  He  seemed
    not to be aware of. It is clear that fabrication of  communication  had
    been  raised.  (It  appears  from  this  decision  that  the  Appellant
    submitted Lyca mobile call records and WhatsApp chat records after  the
    decision of the ECO.  The ECM stated as follows: -

         "Finally further WhatsApp chat  records  have  been  provided,  the
         WhatsApp chat header gives the name Miss Said Pak  Pak,  I  do  not
         believe this to be the Appellant,  I  can  see  there  are  several
         photos on there (very poor quality scan, unable to make any  people
         out) however the majority of the record is missed  calls  with  the
         odd money transfer confirmation and emoji".)

20. Mr Ali withdraw ground 3.  However, he then submitted that it was clear
    that had the judge considered the photographic evidence she would  have
    concluded that the communication was  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor and therefore whose name  the  WhatsApp  shows  is  irrelevant.
    Thus, it appeared that despite having said what I recorded at paragraph
    18, there was a challenge on the basis that the judge did not take into
    account evidence.

21. Mr Ali raised an  issue  not  raised  in  the  grounds  in  respect  of
    paragraph 12 of the decision (and page 250 of the AB). He said that the
    point that was not raised at any time by  the  Respondent.   It  was  a
    matter that should properly have  been  raised  by  the  judge  at  the
    hearing so that the Sponsor could give evidence about it.

22. Mr Clarke submitted in respect of Goudey that the case before the First-
    tier Tribunal was not a  neutral  case.  He  relied  on  the  Surendran
    guidelines in respect of ground 3.[1] He said that the  ECO/ECM  raised
    significant credibility issues in the decisions and points  were  taken
    in respect of the WhatsApp communication. He relied on paragraph 21  of
    TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40.

23. This Appellant failed to engage with issues raised in the  decision  of
    the ECO and the ECM.  It  was  open  to  the  judge  to  draw  negative
    inferences.  The judge properly directed herself on  the  standard  and
    burden of proof and applied it.

24. Mr Ali repeated that there is no  requirement  for  evidence  of  long-
    standing contact about which case law is clear.  There was evidence  of
    photographs in the bundle of the couple shown together post 2014. It is
    unclear why the evidence did not dispel the doubts raised by  the  ECO.
    Moreover, he said  that  there  was  no  reason  why  this  couple  was
    interviewed which is not consistent with  policy.  The  interviews  are
    effectively  a  memory  test.   There  was  evidence  in  the   witness
    statements addressing the inconsistencies. He said  that  the  decision
    seemed harsh.

Conclusions

25. The problem with the grounds is that they fail to engage with the  fact
    ECO/ECM raised issues which were said to  cast  doubt  on  whether  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting. There were issues raised about
    inconsistencies in the interviews,  including  what  the  parties  said
    about visits made to Pakistan and the Sponsor's employment here.

26. It is not clear to me whether the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    interview the  parties  was  a  matter  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In any event, it is not a matter raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal before me. There is no evidence before me to  suggest  that  the
    decision  to  interview  the  parties  was  unlawful  and/or  that  the
    transcripts should not have been relied on by the judge.

27. The Appellant's reliance on  Goudey  is  misconceived.  In  Goudey  the
    couple had been married for a significantly  shorter  period  of  time.
    The evidence before the Tribunal in Goudey was not problematic  in  the
    way that it was in this case.  The point made by the Tribunal in Goudey
    was that evidence of phonecards  is  capable  of  being  corroborative.
    There is no error in the way  that  the  judge  dealt  with  the  phone
    records (see paragraph 10) or the  WhatsApp  printouts  (see  paragraph
    11).  There were in  this  case  "countervailing  factors"  capable  of
    arising  suspicion  as  found   by   the   judge,   for   example   the
    inconsistencies in the interviews.   The  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could not be described  as  "neutral".  The  judge  reasonably
    expected  to  see  evidence  in  support  of  contact   and   financial
    contributions before 2018, in the light of the  issues  raised  by  the
    ECO/ECM.

28. The burden of proof rests on the  Appellant.  The  judge  set  out  the
    applicable burden of proof at paragraph 3 of the decision.  There is no
    challenge to herself direction.  Considering the findings that are made
    and the overall conclusion there is no substance in the assertion  that
    the judge did not properly apply  the  standard  and  burden  of  proof
    having correctly directed herself.  She reached a conclusion which  was
    open to her on the evidence.

29. The Appellant's representatives were aware of the issues raised.  While
    it may be irrelevant whether the WhatsApp chat is in the  name  of  the
    Appellant or not because what  is  clearly  in  issue  is  whether  the
    parties communicated with  each  other,  there  was  in  this  case  no
    explanation for the name of  Said  Pak  Pak  showing  on  the  account,
    despite the issue having been raised by the Respondent. If the  account
    was not the Appellant's and she was using  someone  else's  account  to
    communicate to the Sponsor, this should have been her evidence.

30. The judge did not dismiss the appeal  because  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor had not lived together for  a  period  of  twenty  years.  This
    misrepresents the decision. The Appellant's reliance on what the  Upper
    Tribunal said at paragraph  14  in  GA  ("Subsisting"  marriage)  Ghana
    [2006] UKKAIT 0046 is misconceived.  The judge  was  entitled  to  take
    into account the lack of supporting evidence throughout the  period  of
    the marriage.

31. In respect of paragraph 12 of the decision, the Appellant is  not  able
    to rely on this as a ground of appeal. It was a new matter  raised  for
    the first time before me. Mr Ali did not seek permission to  amend  the
    grounds.  In any event, there is no  substance  in  the  argument.  The
    phone  logs  and  WhatsApp  chat  were  not  accepted   as   supporting
    communication between the Appellant and the Sponsor.  It  was  evidence
    that the Appellant relied  on.  The  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for
    analysing this evidence. It was incumbent on her to  do  so.  She  draw
    inferences from it.  The fact that the evidence showed that the Sponsor
    sent correspondence via WhatsApp to who he claimed to be the  Appellant
    at a time when he was in Pakistan purportedly with her,  was  a  matter
    that the Appellant's legal representatives were reasonably expected  to
    have  identified  and  prepared  the  case  accordingly.  There  is  no
    unfairness arising. Matters of credibility were clearly in issue.   The
    Appellant had the opportunity to advance her case.   Properly  applying
    the Surendran guidelines, there  is  no  error  of  law.  There  is  no
    procedural irregularity or unfairness identified by Mr Ali.     Mr  Ali
    did not seek to adduce evidence of what Sponsor would have said had the
    judge asked him about the matter at the hearing.

32. At ground 2 it is asserted that the judge did not attach any weight  to
    relevant supporting  evidence.   Most  of  this  ground  amounts  to  a
    disagreement  with  the  findings  of  the  judge.    In   respect   of
    photographic evidence in the Appellant's bundle, it was  not  incumbent
    on the judge to identify each and every piece of evidence  before  her.
    She had as recorded at paragraph 8,  that  there  was  a  copy  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  What weight to attach to the evidence was a matter
    for the judge.

33. The Appellant's application is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  is   maintained.



34. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 12 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1] In Surendran v SSHD (19197), it set out guidelines for judges (at that
time known as adjudicators) where the Home Office was unrepresented. These
were approved and annexed to the starred decision of MNM v SSHD [2000]
UKIAT 00005 (00/TH/02423) [2000] INLR 576.

