
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/10725/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                josephine [t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, of Counsel instructed by Messrs D J
Webb &   Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  J  Bennett  who,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 25 April 2017,  dismissed the appellant's appeal against
    a decision by the Secretary of State to refuse her leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Zambia  who  was  born  on  [  ]  1984.
    Between 1996 and 2001 she  lived  in  India  where  her  brother-in-law
    worked as a diplomat.  She then returned to Zambia to sit her A levels.
     In 2003 she  came  to  Britain  as  a  visitor  and  remained  without
    authority.  In July 2012 she made an application for leave to remain as
    the spouse of a settled person which was  refused  in  March  2013.   A
    further application on the basis of her private life was made in  March
    2014 which was refused in June 2014.  On 26 July 2015 she  applied  for
    leave to remain on  human rights grounds   based  on  her  relationship
    with a British partner.  The refusal of that application is the subject
    of this appeal.

3.   The appellant no longer appeals on the basis that  she  has  a  partner
    here as that relationship has broken down.  Her appeal was based on the
    interference with her private life here.  The judge heard evidence from
    the appellant which indicated that she had lived  with  relatives  here
    from time to time but after a period of study at  the  Open  University
    she had stopped studying.  Her mother had died in 2012 and she was  not
    in contact with other family members in Zambia and  she  did  not  know
    whether her mother had owned property in Zambia.  She stated  that  her
    mother had been a broadcaster and a journalist.  She  asserted  in  her
    statement that she had HIV and that the stigma of that would mean  that
    she would be unable to make relationships in Zambia.

4.   The judge stated in paragraph 27 that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    appellant's evidence that she had lived here since she was an 18  years
    old and that she spent five years in India before coming here  and  she
    did not know any relatives in Zambia. He  accepted  that  she  suffered
    from HIV.

5.   The judge had been provided with a report by Avert about HIV  and  AIDS
    in Zambia.  He had clearly considered that report in detail.  He stated
    that it was a British charity which did work in Sub-Saharan  Africa  in
    the fields of HIV and AIDS and that the report indicated that  in  2015
    out of a population of 16.2 million 1.2 million people lived  with  HIV
    in Zambia and that over 63% of the people  in  need  of  antiretroviral
    treatment  there  received  it.   Zambia  has  adopted   World   Health
    Organisation treatment guidelines and anyone testing positive  for  HIV
    should be given treatment regardless of their CD4 count. 63% of  adults
    age 25 and over taking antiretroviral treatment were reported  to  have
    achieved viral suppression.  The  report  said  that  in  2014  85%  of
    Zambians were reportedly taking treatment after a year.  He stated that
    it was simply therefore not the case that the appellant would be unable
    to obtain treatment in Zambia.  With regard to social attitudes to  HIV
    he noted that about 15% of the population tested for HIV  in  2014  and
    that there were a combination of reasons why people  were  not  testing
    for HIV which included the  fear  of  stigma,  rejection  by  a  sexual
    partner, fear of antiretroviral treatment and a belief that traditional
    medicine would keep them health if they became ill.  He noted that  the
    appellant had emphasised in her statement her concerns about the stigma
    of having HIV and he said that it was not unreasonable to conclude that
    attitudes to HIV had probably changed in Zambia over the years just  as
    they had changed in the West.  It was  of  note  that  the  appellant's
    statement details what she believed was the situation when she had last
    lived in Zambia.  The judge noted that in 2016 42% of all young  people
    between the ages of 15 and 24 were aware of  their  HIV  status  and  a
    government survey conducted  in  2013/2014  said  that  46%  of  female
    respondents and 37% of male respondents in  the  15  to  49  age  group
    reported having had an HIV test in the last twelve months  and  knowing
    their results.  The report had suggested that 39% of the population had
    a comprehensive knowledge of HIV and 42% of  young  women  and  47%  of
    young men having comprehensive knowledge of it.  He stated that  "While
    I do not doubt that ignorance and prejudice  continue  to  exist  about
    HIV, I am not satisfied that  this  is  as  extreme  as  the  appellant
    fears".

6.   He then went on in paragraphs 31 and 32 to state as follows:-

         "31. As the Appellant has no experience of living in Zambia  as  an
             adult and as she has nobody to turn to for support and advice,
             I accept that she  would  face  difficulties  in  establishing
             herself there.  I accept that she will probably  be  depressed
             at being separated from her friends and relations and the life
             which she has built here.  I also accept that her illness will
             add to her  problems  in  integrating  into  Zambia  and  that
             overall  she  will  be   face   significant   obstacles   when
             integrating there.


         32.  However, to succeed under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  she  must
             show that these obstacles are 'very significant'.  This  is  a
             high threshold because the word 'very'  is  not  otiose.   She
             will not be destitute because she  realistically  accepted  in
             her statement that friends and relatives here and abroad would
             rally round while she established herself.  These friends  and
             relatives may well be only willing and able to do this  for  a
             limited period but she has shown  herself  to  be  resourceful
             here.  I do not therefore accept that she will probably become
             destitute or that it is reasonably likely that she will do so.
              She has a diagnosis and knows what she must do to  keep   her
             illness under control.  In the light of Avert's report,  there
             is no reason to believe that she will probably  be  unable  to
             obtain medication and treatment which she needs or that it  is
             reasonably likely that she will be unable to obtain it.  I  am
             not satisfied that the obstacles which she will face amount to
             very significant obstacles".

7.    The  judge,  in  paragraphs  33  onwards,   considered  the  issue  of
    proportionality outside the confines  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    pointed out that Article 8 did not give the  appellant   the  right  to
    decide where she would live.  He referred to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control.  He noted that the appellant
    did not qualify for leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    said that she has not shown that there were very significant  obstacles
    to integrating into Zambia.  He said  "I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    obstacles she will face in integrating there coupled with the  strength
    of her private life  make  it  disproportionate  to  remove  her".   He
    referred to Sections 117B(4) and (5) which provided that little  weight
    should be given to private life which is established  when  a  person's
    presence here is unlawful or precarious.  He noted  the  appellant  had
    established her private life here while her status  was  precarious  or
    unlawful.  He said that she could maintain contact with her friends and
    relatives by modern means of communication just as she  does  with  her
    sisters in Australia and America.  He therefore dismissed  the  appeal.



8.   The grounds of appeal, having noted the basis of the appellant's  claim
    referred to a decision of Sales J in S referring to the phrase of "very
    significant obstacles" which stated that "integration" as  set  out  in
    Section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 339A was  a  broad  one  and  was  not
    confined to mere ability to find a job or sustain life by living in the
    other country.  He had said that it was not appropriate  to  treat  the
    statutory language as subject to some gloss  and  it  will  usually  be
    sufficient for a court or Tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms
    that Parliament had chosen to use.  The idea  of  "integration"  called
    for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual
    will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in  the
    society in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
    participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there and to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis.  It was
    therefore argued that the judge had erred in his  decision  that  there
    would not be very significant difficulties in the  appellant  returning
    to Zimbabwe.

9.   The grounds went on to argue that in the case  of  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 in relation to the
    concept of very significant obstacles to integration was  not  confined
    to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life by living  in  the
    other country but called for a broad evaluative judgment as the  person
    will be enough of an insider to operate on a day-to-day  basis  and  to
    form  relationships  in  that  society.   It  was  argued   that   very
    insignificant  obstacles  might  well   be   greater   obstacles   than
    significant ones, but expecting a person to be destitute is in no way a
    part of the test.  The grounds emphasise that the appellant  had  lived
    outside Zambia for the majority of her  life  since  aged  12,  that  a
    holistic judgment was required, moreover the grounds also  argued  that
    following the judgment in R  (Agyarko)  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  with
    respect to the assessment of weight to be given to the public  interest
    in the context of tolerated presence in the United Kingdom,  the  delay
    in enforcing immigration control would weaken the  public  interest  in
    maintaining such immigration control.  It  was  pointed  out  that  the
    Secretary of State had not acted on four refused applications over four
    recent years.  It was stated that that was against  the  background  of
    the fact that unlawful presence came to be while she was in  a  genuine
    relationship with a British partner for the vast majority of  her  time
    in Britain which would have continued but for domestic violence.

10.  Ms Asanovic referred to the grounds of appeal emphasising the  question
    of the issue of destitution.  She noted that the  judge  accepted  that
    there would be significant obstacles but stated that he had by  placing
    emphasis on the term  "destitute"  applied  the  wrong  test.   He  had
    applied in effect too high a threshold regarding the obstacles  to  the
    appellant exercising her private life in Zambia and similarly too  high
    a threshold when considering the access to medication  and  the  stigma
    against  someone  with  HIV.   She  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    overstayed but emphasised the judgment in Kamara to which reference was
    made in the grounds that a holistic approach should apply.  She  stated
    that the appellant had not experienced life in Zambia and would have no
    support there.  She added  that  the  appellant  had  had  a  tolerated
    presence here.  She referred to paragraphs 51 and 52 of the judgment in
    Agyarko.

11.  In the  reply  Ms  Pal  stated  that  the  judge  had  made  clear  and
    appropriate findings of fact and had clearly applied the correct  test.
    He was correct to emphasise the  high  threshold  of  very  significant
    obstacles.  She emphasised that the judge was correct to find that  the
    appellant had shown herself to be resourceful  here  and  that  he  had
    properly considered the Avert report.  It was not  the  case  that  the
    judge was suggesting that the test was one of destitution.  She  stated
    that he was correct  to  find  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant returning to Zambia.  Moreover there was  no
    evidence of undue delay  in  the  respondent  considering  her  various
    applications.

Discussion

12.  I consider that there is no material error in law in  the  decision  of
    the judge in the First-tier.  The reality is that he did  consider  the
    appellant's circumstances holistically, indeed he  considered  at  very
    considerable length her  assertions  that  she  would  have  particular
    difficulties because of her HIV status.  He clearly read  and  properly
    analysed the Avert report.  The statistics in that  report  showed  the
    large numbers of citizens of Zambia who suffer from HIV.  He  was  also
    correct to indicate that the report was more likely to show  an  up-to-
    date appreciation of the social factors for those  suffering  from  HIV
    than those which  the appellant remembered from her time in Zambia many
    years before.  The appellant  would  be  able,  he  found,  to  receive
    treatment for her HIV  status.   That  was  the  conclusion  which  was
    clearly open to him.  Moreover he had before him a young woman, clearly
    from a family that had been  relatively prosperous, who had studied for
    her A-levels in Zambia and had undertaken part of  an  Open  University
    course here.  The appellant had shown herself to be resourceful in this
    country.  She would have no  difficulties  with   language  in  Zambia.
    There is nothing to indicate that she would not be able  to  find  work
    there and would not be able to make social contacts there.  Moreover he
    was correct to show that she would  have  the  support  of  family  and
    friends when  she  returned,  at  least  initially.   It  is  clear,  I
    consider, that he did apply  the  correct  test  of  "very  significant
    obstacles".  He did not state that  the  appellant  would  need  to  be
    destitute for her to succeed.  He did weigh into account  all  relevant
    factors.  His comment that she would not  be  destitute  was  merely  a
    statement of fact.  It is not the test which he was applying nor indeed
    was it a gloss on the consideration of the  relevant  phrase  of  "very
    significant obstacles".

13.  He was correct to find that the appellant could not succeed  under  the
    Rules.  Moreover he did properly consider her application  outside  the
    Rules.  He  was  entitled  to  consider  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's removal - this was a woman who  had  overstayed  for  many,
    many years and  at least eight years had passed  before  she  made  any
    application for leave to remain.  Moreover, the reality  is  that  this
    was not a case where the Secretary of State sat on an  application  and
    made no decision thereon for a lengthy period of time.   The  Secretary
    of State properly responded to each application promptly within  a  few
    months.   The  Secretary  of  State,  when  refusing  the   appellant's
    applications, indicated that she should leave the country.  She did not
    do so.  I do not consider that the fact that after  each  occasion  she
    was not forcefully removed indicates a disregard by  the  Secretary  of
    State when considering the public interest in removal.  I therefore  do
    not consider that the fact that the appellant was not  removed  lessens
    the public interest in the removal of someone who came to Britain as an
    adult and must fully have been aware that  she  was  remaining  without
    authority.  I therefore find that there is no material error of law  in
    the determination of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss
    this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                     Date: 20 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
