
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10068/2019 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On the 23 July 2020                  |On 4 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                GURJIT SINGH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hussain ('the Judge') promulgated on 13 December  2019
       which dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 20 April 2020; the operative part of the grant  being  in
       the following terms:

           "2.    The grounds argue that the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
                consideration all the medical evidence, mistakenly  believed
                that an employment letter referred to the  Appellant  rather
                than his brother and failed to properly consider the medical
                evidence.


           3.     In the decision  it  appears  that  the  Judge  may  have
                mistakenly believed that a letter  written  by  an  employer
                referred to the Appellant when in fact it  referred  to  his
                brothers employment, thus leading the Judge to draw  adverse
                conclusions about the honesty of the  witness.  It  is  also
                arguable that the Judge failed to appreciate the  extent  of
                medical evidence that was placed before him."

    3. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic arrangements, made  to  enable  the
       Upper Tribunal to continue with its decision-making role,  directions
       were sent to the  parties  on  18  May  2020  advising  them  of  the
       provisional view that the question of whether the Judge had  made  an
       error of law material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  can  be
       made  on  the  papers  and  inviting  the  parties  to  make  written
       observations both in relation to that issue as well as in relation to
       whether a material error of law had been made.
    4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    6. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    7. The appellant's submissions, in addition to  making  further  comment
       upon the pleaded grounds, challenge the suitability of the  error  of
       law question being decided  on  the  papers  asserting,  in  summary,
       consideration of the issues on the papers alone in an appeal  against
       the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  ensure  that  the
       overriding objective of dealing with cases fairly and justly is  met,
       that the importance of the outcome of the human rights claim  to  the
       parties can constitute a reason to convene a hearing  to  decide  the
       relevant question,  that  if  the  issue  were  decided  against  the
       appellant his only potential recourse would be to seek permission  to
       appeal to the Court of Appeal at which point he would  need  to  show
       that his appeal  engaged  elevated  principles  of  the  second  tier
       appeals test, that the Presidential Guidance Note  imposes  a  hurdle
       which is in some way already higher than the one posed by the  second
       appeals test, that the importance  of  an  oral  hearing  to  a  fair
       outcome has long been acknowledged in the courts, that the Directions
       do not give any indication of why the Upper Tribunal  considers  that
       in this case the issue identified at paragraph 2(i)  can  fairly  and
       justly be dealt with on the papers nor indicate whether the  Tribunal
       has formed any preliminary view of the merits of the appeal and if so
       what that view is. At [26]  of  the  appellant's  submissions  it  is
       written:

           "26.   For all the above reasons, the appellant submits that his
                appeal requires a hearing and that it would not comply  with
                the overriding objective to decide the issues identified  in
                paragraph 2(i) of the  Directions  without  one.  The  above
                submissions  would  apply  with  equal  force  whether   the
                appellant  were  the  asylum  claimant  (as  here)  or   the
                Secretary of State. To the extent that  they  refer  to  the
                value of oral  advocacy  they  will  always  apply  to  both
                parties in the case. It follows that the appellant considers
                that an oral hearing is appropriate in this case  and  would
                go further: in the circumstances of this case, fairness  and
                justice require one. It is submitted that, in  view  of  the
                circumstances created by the Covid-19 pandemic, the  hearing
                should  be  conducted  remotely   via   video   conferencing
                facilities, as the issues identified in  paragraph  2(i)  of
                the Directions  will  not  require  the  appellant  to  give
                evidence."

    8. The Secretary of State has set out her view in  a  Rule  24  response
       dated 8 June 2020 in which submissions are made in  relation  to  the
       question of whether an error  of  law  has  been  made  and  at  [17]
       requesting an oral  hearing,  without  giving  reasons  why  this  is
       required.
    9. The use of different methods of disposing of cases is not  unique  to
       the Upper Tribunal. The impact of  Covid-19  has  required  temporary
       arrangements to be made across all jurisdictions to ensure access  to
       justice remains. The Upper Tribunal has  a  discretionary  power,  as
       noted above, to determine the merits of a case  on  the  papers.  The
       judge who issued the directions sent to the parties on  18  May  2020
       did  not  record  any  provisional  view  regarding  the  merits,  or
       otherwise, of the appellant's challenge as this was not  the  purpose
       of that document which was solely to  advising  the  parties  of  the
       position and give them the opportunity to comment upon it.
   10. The appellant's submission that consideration  on  the  papers  alone
       cannot ensure that the overriding objectives of  dealing  with  cases
       justly and fairly is met is a submission without arguable  merit.  It
       may be that some cases cannot be disposed of in this manner but  that
       is a fact specific consideration. It is  too  wide  a  submission  to
       claim that determining matters on the papers alone  will  breach  the
       overriding objective. Failed challenges to remote  hearings/decisions
       in other jurisdictions and the recent refusal in the High Court of an
       application for a stay on the Covid-19  practice  directions  pending
       the outcome of  a  pending  judicial  review  claim  demonstrate  the
       acceptance of the current arrangements at this time.
   11. The appellant's submission that the importance of the  outcome  of  a
       human rights claim can constitute a reason to convene  a  hearing  to
       decide the relevant questions may be correct if, on the  facts  of  a
       particular case, it is deemed inappropriate for there to be a  remote
       hearing. That is a fact specific assessment.
   12. The Covid-19 directions in the Upper Tribunal have no impact upon the
       second appeals test before the Court of Appeal. The directions do not
       impose a higher hurdle upon a prospective appellant as the directions
       relate to procedural aspects of how the Upper Tribunal is to  proceed
       in the circumstances of a particular case.  If when  considering  the
       exercise of discretion a judge of the Upper Tribunal gets  it  wrong,
       such that any subsequent determination on the papers is unfair,  that
       decision may be challengeable to the Court of Appeal  in  the  normal
       manner. The second appeal criteria have not been shown to  be  unfair
       or is it shown that the Upper Tribunal direction creates a barrier to
       a party being able to make an application for permission to appeal to
       that court if appropriate in all the circumstances.
   13. The appellant's submission that the importance of an oral hearing  to
       a fair outcome has been acknowledged by the courts is noted. Although
       a number of authorities are specifically referred to in the pleadings
       they appear to relate to the ability of an individual  to  give  oral
       evidence as part of the fact finding process and do not  specifically
       appear to relate to the question under consideration in this  appeal,
       which is whether the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error of
       law. Such question is ordinarily determined by submissions  by  legal
       representatives  without  oral  evidence  being  given.  Indeed   the
       appellant's submissions fail to establish that on the specific  facts
       of this case that there is any requirement for oral  evidence  to  be
       given.
   14. In terms of the ability of  the  advocates  to  make  submissions  in
       relation to the core issue; it is not made out that these need to  be
       delivered  in  an  oral  form.  The  appellant's  representative,  Mr
       Spurling of 10  King's  Bench  Walk,  is  an  experienced  specialist
       immigration practitioner  and  it  is  not  claimed  in  his  written
       submissions that he has been unable to set out in writing all that he
       would have said orally  on  the  appellant's  behalf.  Similarly  the
       author of the respondent's Rule 24, Mr Melvin, makes no such claim.
   15. I consider in  light  of  all  the  available  material  that  it  is
       appropriate in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case  to  exercise
       discretion to determine the issue of whether the Judge  has  made  an
       error of law material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  on  the
       papers. I find this is in accordance with the overriding  objectives.
       It has not been made out it will deny any party  the  opportunity  to
       have this matter considered in a fair and just manner at this stage.

Background

   16. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 25 April 1986. He entered
       the United Kingdom on 3 April 2011 lawfully with a student Visa valid
       to 26 March 2012 although his leave was curtailed on 26 January  2012
       due to his non-attendance at his college. On 17  December  2015,  the
       appellant applied for an EEA Residence  Card  as  confirmation  of  a
       right to reside in the United Kingdom under Community Law  which  was
       refused.  A  further  application  on  15  January  2018  also  under
       Community Law was refused too. On  6  December  2018,  the  appellant
       applied for Leave to Remain on the basis of private  life  which  was
       refused on 2 May 2019 which  is  the  decision  appealed  before  the
       Judge. The appellant's status in the  United  Kingdom  has  therefore
       always been precarious as it has been either temporary in  nature  or
       as a result of the appellant overstaying after is  lawful  leave  was
       curtailed.
   17. Having considered the written and oral evidence the  Judge  sets  out
       findings of fact from [32] of the decision under challenge. This is a
       human rights appeal in which the question is whether the  removal  of
       the appellant from the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section
       6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act  contrary
       to Human Rights Convention).
   18. The Judge did not find the appellant has established the existence of
       family life between relatives in the United Kingdom or that there are
       insurmountable obstacles  to  his  integration  into  India  for  the
       reasons given in the decision and  as  set  out  in  the  Reason  for
       Refusal letter;  leading  to  a  conclusion  the  appellant  had  not
       established an entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom under  the
       Immigration Rules.
   19. In relation to the position outside the Rules the Judge writes:

           "49.   Insofar as the appellant's claim outside the  Immigration
                Rules is concerned, it is now well established that where an
                applicant fails to make a case within the Immigration Rules,
                his circumstances would have to be  exceptional  to  justify
                the grant of  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  With
                judicial approval, the Secretary of  State's  definition  of
                "exceptional" is that the  refusal  leads  to  unjustifiably
                harsh consequences.  In  my  view,  whilst  the  appellant's
                desire to stay in this country is wholly understandable  and
                whilst the medical facilities in India may  not  be  of  the
                same quality as is available to  him  in  this  country,  it
                cannot be said that  the  standard  of  treatment  available
                whether  for  depression  or  epilepsy  is  such  that   the
                appellant would suffer from undue harshness.


           50.    In  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  appellant's
                removal, I have of course  taken  into  account  the  public
                interest considerations in Section 117B of the  Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In so doing, I note, and it
                is  a  point  accepted  by  the  appellant's  counsel,  that
                immigration control is in the public interest. I  note  also
                that the appellant probably speaks English although  I  have
                not been presented with any English language  qualifications
                nor heard the appellant give evidence but  infer  that  from
                the length of his residence here.  It  is  likely  that  the
                appellant's brother has the financial means to support  him.
                However,  balancing  the  public  interest  in   immigration
                control and the adverse impact on the appellant by  removal,
                the conclusion to which I have come is that the decision not
                to grant him Leave to Remain is  proportionate  in  all  the
                circumstances."





Grounds and submissions

   20. The appellant asserts the Judge has erred in  law  relying  on  three
       grounds.
   21. Ground 1 asserts the Judge's finding that it was not  accepted  there
       is dependency in the case between the appellant's relatives of such a
       degree as to amount to family life is vitiated as  a  result  of  the
       Judge failing to engage with the full extent of  the  evidence  about
       the appellant's needs and assistance given by his brother and sister-
       in-law in considering his  dependence  which  it  was  said  extended
       beyond emotional ties creating article 8 family life between them.
   22. Ground 2 asserts the Judge erred in  the  treatment  of  evidence  in
       claiming  the  only  medical   evidence   directly   supporting   the
       appellant's claim to  being  an  epileptic  was  a  letter  dated  19
       September 2018 from his GP in [36] when further medical evidence  was
       available in the appellant's bundle,  in  failing  to  take  adequate
       account of the description of the appellant's needs  in  the  witness
       statements  in  the  appellant's  brother,  his  cousin,  and   other
       statements  from  witnesses,  and  misdirected   himself   that   the
       employer's  letter  in  the  respondent's  bundle  referred  to   the
       appellant working when the letter does not relate  to  the  appellant
       but to his brother Amarjit Singh. In relation to the medical evidence
       it is asserted the Judge failed to draw clear conclusions  about  his
       medical condition, speculating about the extent  of  the  appellant's
       health before he left India [40] raised a question  not  put  to  the
       appellant at the hearing, making confusing  statement  at  [41],  and
       incorrectly stated at [44] that the appellant did not see  a  medical
       practitioner until July 2018 which is said to  be  incorrect  as  the
       appellant has received treatment for his  epilepsy  since  2012.  The
       grounds assert  proper  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  would
       establish that article 8 family life rights were engaged and  have  a
       material effect on  the  weight  of  the  interest  relevant  to  the
       balancing exercise.
   23. Ground 3 asserts a failure to give reasons for  material  credibility
       findings in failing to give  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       evidence of the appellant's brother about the  extent  to  which  the
       family in India will be able or willing to support the appellant. The
       grounds assert the Judge gave no reason for rejecting the evidence of
       the brother other than he did not believe it. The grounds assert  not
       believing the  evidence  is  a  conclusion  not  a  reason  for  that
       conclusion meaning the Judge failed to give  sufficient  reasons  for
       rejecting material evidence.
   24. The above grounds are set out in further detail  in  the  application
       for permission to appeal.
   25. The Secretary of State asserts no arguable error, stating at [4 - 15]
       of the Rule 24 response:

           "4.    It is submitted that  the  FtT,  considered  the  medical
                evidence provided at paragraphs 6, 10, 11, 12, 14,  17,  18,
                19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. The FtT  judge  made
                his findings on that  evidence  from  paragraph  32  of  the
                decision.


           5.     At paragraph 35 the Judge makes findings on  two  points,
                i) unexplained how the appellant could make such a  coherent
                statement to his solicitors  yet  is  unable  to  give  oral
                evidence as so unwell and, ii) unexplained  what  24-hour  a
                day care the appellant  needs  albeit  undisputed  that  the
                appellant suffers from epilepsy. The Judge gives his reasons
                for these findings, at p36, those  being  that  the  medical
                evidence (GP) only begins  in  September  2018  and  the  GP
                letter does not explain what helps the appellant  needs  and
                neither  does  it  state  24  hour  (round  the  clock)   is
                necessary. The Judge notes the significance of  the  failure
                of the sponsor's wife to give evidence in court  as  she  is
                one  giving  the  24-hour  care.  The  Judge  also  notes  a
                significant lack of evidence from the  "cousin  sister"  who
                cares for the appellant whilst both his brother and his wife
                are out working.


           6.     The Judge also finds, briefly at p37, that no explanation
                is given to  the  point  in  the  Refusal  letter  that  the
                appellant has been working since 2018.


           7.     That specifically rejects the point raised, only  at  the
                hearing, that there  is  family  life  going  beyond  normal
                emotional ties between adult siblings for  the  purposes  of
                article 8. (p38)


           8.     The Judge proceeds to consider and make findings on,  the
                private life of the appellant from p39 of the decision.  The
                judge firstly considers the medical evidence  (from  p40-43)
                of epilepsy and depression accepting that the appellant does
                suffer from epilepsy  but  going  on  to  find,  giving  his
                reasons, why the brother's evidence has been untruthful with
                respect the lack of family home in India and the  fact  that
                the appellant has 3 sisters and a brother who would be  able
                to collect any funds remitted to India. The Judge also finds
                that, having found that the appellant did  not  address  the
                point of employment in the RFRL, that there  was  no  reason
                why the appellant  could  not  collect  any  remitted  funds
                himself.


           9.     The Judge continues to address the issue  of  depression,
                from p44, observing that the evidence  from  the  GP  begins
                only in 2018 and noting that the appellant does  not  appear
                to be receiving any therapy for the depression and the  only
                reference to medication comes from the Expert report and not
                the list of medication supplied by the GP.


           10.    The Judge notes at p45, that the expert  did  not  engage
                with the claim that the appellant held down a job  nor  does
                the expert engage with the  cause  of  the  depression.  The
                Judge also finds the lack of explanation why the GP has  not
                been involved, given the claim that the  appellant  goes  to
                A&E checkups, with the diagnosis of Depression and PTSD.


           11.    It is submitted that the Judge has made clear findings on
                all the core aspects of this appeal. The Judge has addressed
                the family life aspect, rejecting that  for  reasons  given.
                The judges considered the  Private  life  aspect  being  the
                medical evidence of epilepsy and depression and  again  make
                findings on those aspects of the appeal.


           12.     It  is  also  clear  that  the  judge  has   found   the
                brother/sponsor to be  an  unreliable  witness  for  reasons
                given.


           13.    The medical evidence ground of appeal  has  no  merit  as
                this is no more than argument based on weight given  to  the
                medical evidence and not an interpretation of that evidence.


           14.     The  employment  evidence  is  set  down  in  the   RFRL
                (Stonebridge  contracting  solutions  since  September  2018
                Annex D of the HO bundle). It is a matter for the  appellant
                to address this claim which he has failed to do.


           15.    The judge had given  clear  reasons  for  rejecting  this
                latest attempt by the appellant to  remain  in  the  UK  and
                those reasons are ones that are sustainable in law."


Error of law

   26. The  letter  from  Stonebridge  Contracting  dated  16  October  2018
       appearing at Annex D of the respondent's bundle is  clearly  said  to
       relate to a Mr Amerjeet Singh, born on the  28  April  1975  who  has
       worked on a self-employed contract for  that  organisation  since  17
       September 2018 which, at the date of the letter, was  still  ongoing.
       The Judge at [37] writes:

           "37.   The appellant's claim that  he  requires  round-the-clock
                watch because of  his  epilepsy  is  inconsistent  with  the
                evidence referred to in the refusal letter of the  appellant
                working. It is significant that neither  the  appellant  nor
                his brother have commented on this point  explicitly  raised
                in the refusal letter."

   27. The respondent in the refusal letter wrote, noting  the  independence
       psychiatric review relied upon by the appellant:

           "While  the  assessment  is  informative,  it  is  not  from   a
           registered NHS consultant and with regard to the opinion of  the
           psychiatrist stating she does not believe you are  fit  to  fly,
           you have provided  evidence  to  show  that  you  are  currently
           working for Stonebridge  contracting  solutions  and  have  been
           doing so since 17 September 2018, it is stated in the letter you
           have provided from your employer that this contract is  ongoing,
           therefore it is accepted that you are of a reasonable  level  of
           mental and  physical  fitness  and  would  not  face  any  major
           obstacles in flying. You are over 18, of an employable  age  and
           the skills you have gained  in  the  UK  will  assist  you  with
           obtaining further employment in India where you can  enjoy  your
           full rights as a citizen."

   28. It is accepted that in believing the employers letter related to  the
       appellant the decision maker and Judge have made a mistake  of  fact.
       The question of whether the Judge's error in relation to  this  point
       is material depends upon the  consideration  of  the  decision  as  a
       whole.
   29. It is not made out that as a result of the  depression  and  epilepsy
       suffered by the appellant returning him  to  India  will  lead  to  a
       breach of article 3 ECHR on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the
       Judge and the recent decision of the Supreme Court in  AM  (Zimbabwe)
       [2020] UKSC 17.
   30. Whether family life recognised by  Article  8  exists  is  a  factual
       question. The Judge concluded that the appellant had not  established
       that the level of dependency between himself and adult family members
       in the United Kingdom was of such a degree as  to  enable  it  to  be
       found that family life recognised by article 8 existed. At  [38]  the
       Judge comes to that conclusions  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
       preceding paragraphs, [33 - 38], which are in the following terms:

           "33.   I first begin by considering the appellant's family  life
                claim. That claim is predicated on the assumption that since
                2011 when the appellant came here, he has been dependent  on
                his brother Mr Amarjit Singh as well as the  brother's  wife
                Barbara. It  is  asserted  that  the  degree  of  dependency
                between them is such as to go beyond normal  emotional  ties
                in relationships of the kind in this  case.  Therefore,  the
                family life the appellant enjoys with his  sibling  and  his
                siblings wife is such as to amount to family  life  for  the
                purposes of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


           34.     The  question  to  determine  is  the  nature  of   that
                dependency. Although the appellant did not adopt his written
                statement as his evidence in chief, he did not give any oral
                evidence at all because it was claimed by his expert that he
                was not fit do so. I have taken  into  account  his  written
                statement as well as the testimony of the brother.


           35.    The case raises a number of  interesting  questions.  The
                first of those is how it is that  if  the  appellant  is  so
                unwell as to be unfit to give evidence, yet he was  able  to
                make, what appears to be, a perfectly coherent statement for
                the Tribunal? That question was never answered.  Be that  as
                it may, the claim is that the appellant is  reliant  on  his
                brother and his wife for financial and emotional support. No
                further details is given in relation to either of those save
                for a claim by the appellant's brother  that  the  appellant
                requires round-the-clock  support  without  explaining  what
                that is. Given that it  is  undisputed  that  the  appellant
                suffers from epilepsy, I inferred that he could suffer a fit
                at any time which means to safeguard him, someone is  always
                around him. The evidence does not support that inference.


           36.    I say this because, firstly, the  only  medical  evidence
                directly supporting the appellant's claim to be an epileptic
                is a letter dated 19 September 2018 from his GP which merely
                states that the appellant has suffered from  seizures  since
                the age of 8 and was last seen  by  a  neurologist  for  his
                epilepsy in April 2018.  He  has  "written"  to  the  doctor
                explaining that he needs help from his sister in law and his
                brother on a  daily  basis.  The  doctors  letter  does  not
                elaborate on what that help is. Nor is any reference to  the
                appellant requiring him to  be  watched  around  the  clock.
                Indeed it is difficult  to  see  how  such  support  can  be
                provided  given  the  appellant's  brother's  admission   in
                evidence that until  July  2018  when  the  appellant  first
                reported his depression to  his  GP,  the  appellant  simply
                stayed at home whilst he and his wife were out  working.  It
                is not clear when  but  it  is  said  that  the  appellant's
                brother's wife is now at  home  and  kindly  provides  great
                assistance and help to  him  without  explaining  what  that
                assistance is. It is significant that the  only  person  who
                potentially is capable of being around the appellant  round-
                the-clock was the appellant's brother's wife who  chose  not
                to give evidence in court. Nor did the "cousin  sister"  who
                was claiming to  have  been  with  the  appellant  when  his
                brother and his wife were out working.


           37.    The appellant's claim that he requires a  round-the-clock
                watch because of  his  epilepsy  is  inconsistent  with  the
                evidence referred to in the refusal letter of the  appellant
                working. It is significant that neither  the  appellant  nor
                his brother have commented upon this point explicitly raised
                in the refusal letter."

   31. The Judge clearly took into account the evidence that was provided in
       support of the appellant's  claim  that  family  life  recognised  by
       article  8  existed  between  him  and  his   UK   based   relatives.
       Notwithstanding the error in relation to the assertion the  appellant
       was employed by the  construction  company  the  Judge  identifies  a
       number of concerns arising from the evidence that have not been shown
       to be irrational or not reasonably open to  the  Judge.  The  Judge's
       comment  that  the  claim  the  appellant  requires   round-the-clock
       supervision as a result of his epilepsy which could only be  provided
       by either the appellant's brother, the appellant's brother's wife  or
       his "cousin sister" was not supported  by  sufficient  evidence  from
       those individuals is one properly open to the Judge.
   32.  The  burden  of  establishing  an  assertion  the  nature   of   the
       relationship  is  sufficient  to  engage  article  8  lies  upon  the
       appellant to the civil standard, the balance  of  probabilities.  The
       Judge's finding that the appellant had not established the degree  of
       dependency was sufficient to establish family life exists is  clearly
       a finding within the range of those available to the  Judge  and  has
       not been shown to be infected by arguable material legal error.
   33. In relation to the assertion the Judge erred in  law  in  failing  to
       consider the medical evidence the references contained in the Rule 24
       reply to where such issues were considered by the Judge is  factually
       correct.
   34. The Judge refers to the letter from the GP dated  19  September  2018
       but the appellant claims there was further medical evidence  at  page
       77 of his appeal bundle referring to what are described as 'nocturnal
       seizures' on 13 November 2014 on 14 May 2012. What is not disputed by
       the Judge is that the appellant suffers from epilepsy.  At  [40]  the
       Judge finds:

           "40.   That claim is based firstly on  the  appellant's  medical
                condition of  suffering  from  epilepsy  and  secondly,  his
                depression.  That the appellant suffers from epilepsy is not
                questioned for a very good reason. That reason is  that  the
                appellant's bundle contains a plethora of evidence short  of
                a comprehensive medical report that suggests that he suffers
                from that condition. It  would  have  been  helpful  to  the
                appellant if there was  a  detailed  report  describing  the
                seizures and the effect on him on a  day-to-day  basis.  The
                unanswered question in this case is why,  if  the  appellant
                suffered from seizures such that he was incapable  within  6
                months of  arriving  here  to  continue  with  his  studies,
                coupled with depression to which I shall turn later, he  was
                sent to this country in the first place.  The  risk  of  not
                being able to continue studies and the difficulty of  living
                in an unfamiliar environment would have been obvious to  his
                family members. I remind  myself  that  at  that  time,  the
                appellant's father was still alive. Why then did  they  send
                him to this country unless, of course, it was intended  that
                after coming here he would continue to overstay.  The  other
                unanswered question is, why having his  leave  curtailed  in
                2012 and when his father was still alive, the appellant  was
                not returned to India  because  it  would  have  been  self-
                evident that he is not medically fit enough to continue?"

   35. At [42] the Judge writes:

           "42.   There is no medical report as indicated  earlier  as  the
                likely prognosis and therefore the inference I draw is  that
                the appellant will have to live with the epilepsy  the  rest
                of his life. In terms of medical treatment, the  appellant's
                doctors report provides  a  list  of  medications  that  the
                appellant receives including  for  epilepsy,  Tegretol.  The
                Secretary of State asserts that treatment  for  epilepsy  is
                available in India. The appellant has not  denied  this  nor
                provided any background material to show  that  the  medical
                treatment that the appellant receives in this country  would
                not be available in India."

   36. In relation to family connections  and  availability  of  support  in
       India, upon return, the Judge writes at [43]

           "43.   ... Insofar as emotional support is  concerned,  although
                his father passed away in 2013, the appellant still has  his
                mother, brother and 3 sisters. Whilst they  may  have  their
                own lives, I do not accept that they will not give emotional
                support that he  needs.  The  appellant's  brother  in  this
                country is keen to keep him here and  to  this  end,  in  my
                view, was untruthful when  he  claimed  that  the  appellant
                would not have a home to go to having previously  said  that
                his mother lives in their own home. He was also in  my  view
                not been  truthful  when  he  said  there  will  be  no  one
                available to collect the money that he is  willing  to  send
                for his brother to India. There is absolutely no reason  why
                between 3 sisters and a brother, there will not be  one  who
                will be able to collect any funds sent to him. Indeed  there
                is no reason why if the appellant was able to  hold  down  a
                job in this case, would not himself be able to  receive  the
                funds directly."

   37. Whilst the Judge's comments regarding the appellant's employment  are
       infected by the error referred to above it is not made out the  Judge
       has erred in his conclusions regarding the availability of support in
       India. The Judge had the benefit of considering all the  evidence  in
       the round and did not find that it was credible  that  the  appellant
       would be effectively abandoned by his family on return. Similarly  it
       is not made out that the Judge's finding that family members will  be
       in a position to collect remittances from the UK which could be  used
       to fund the appellant's lifestyle and provide for him  is  a  finding
       outside the range of those reasonably  available  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. Those findings are adequately reasoned.
   38. In relation to the appellant's assertion he suffers  from  depression
       Judge finds at [44 - 47]:

           "44.   The appellant has enlisted the assistance of a consultant
                expert psychiatrist who has written two reports.  The  first
                report is appended in the respondent's bundle and is dated 9
                November 2018. Based on what appears to be an interview with
                the appellant, the expert comes to the conclusion  that  the
                appellant suffers from severe  depressive  episode,  without
                psychotic symptoms. It is worthy of note that this appellant
                who suffers from such a serious  condition  did  not  see  a
                medical practitioner until July  2018.  No  explanation  was
                given for this. The appellant's brother was clearly  evasive
                in relation to the question of when it is that the appellant
                was first referred  for  medical  attention.  He  seemed  to
                oscillate between the appellant  being  seen  by  a  private
                medical practitioner and being referred to  the  GP  without
                being specific as to when. The letter from the GP  dated  19
                September 2018 says  that  the  appellant  reported  feeling
                depressed. There is no evidence in the appellant's bundle he
                has received any kind of therapy  for  that  condition.  The
                only reference to medication is in the experts report  where
                he notes  that  the  appellant  receives  an  antidepressant
                called Mirtazapine without citing the source for  that.  The
                GPs  list  of  medication  produced  at  page  17   of   the
                appellant's  bundle  does  not  show  any   medication   for
                depression.


           45.    I also find it worthy of note that this  expert  did  not
                engage with the Home Office's claim to the appellant on  the
                one hand was severely depressed and the other, held  down  a
                job. Nor does the expert explain the origin of the causes of
                the depression and a further diagnosis he makes of PTSD.  In
                the addendum report stated 16  October  2019  in  which  the
                expert report rules  the  appellant  to  be  unfit  to  give
                evidence,  he  notes  that  the  appellant's  condition  has
                deteriorated since he saw  him  in  2018  triggered  by  the
                refusal of his "asylum" application. Strangely in  my  view,
                the expert suggests that the appellant goes to the A&E for a
                full physical check up and assessment by the  mental  health
                rather than the appellant's GP which  would  be  the  normal
                point of call. Nor does the addendum report  explained  why,
                if the appellant's condition has so  severely  deteriorated,
                there is no medical report from those treating him.


           46.    Another point worthy of note  is  that  in  his  original
                report, the expert at Paragraph 13.1  asserted  that  whilst
                the appellant "appeared severely depressed"; no evidence  of
                thought disorder (disjointed thinking) was apparent. Yet the
                appellant's brother in paragraph 8 of his statement  claimed
                that the appellant had "cognitive issues caused as a  result
                of epilepsy". Having regard to the totality of the  evidence
                before me, the conclusion to  which  I  have  come  is  that
                whilst some weight is deservedly given to the expert  report
                which diagnoses the appellant as suffering from  depression,
                I do not accept that the appellant's condition is as  severe
                as is made out to be nor that he suffers from PTSD.


           47.    The symptoms described by the appellant and the diagnosis
                made are conditions common  in  this  country  as  in  other
                countries. No evidence has been adduced to show that medical
                treatment for such conditions is not available in India."

   39. The Judge was not required to set out or make findings  on  each  and
       every aspect of the evidence the tribunal was asked to consider. What
       is clear from reading the decision as a whole is that the  Judge  did
       take all the evidence, medical and otherwise, into account  and  made
       findings upon the same which are supported by adequate reasons  which
       have not been shown to be outside the range of those reasonably  open
       to the Judge on the evidence when considered as a whole.
   40. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge and
       it has not been established there is anything arguably irrational  in
       relation to the weight attributed by the  Judge.  The  assertion  the
       Judge failed to draw clear conclusions about the appellant's  medical
       condition in the appellants grounds has no arguable merit  as  it  is
       clear that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  suffers  from
       epilepsy and depression but not PTSD for which adequate  reasons  are
       given when considering the evidence as a whole. The Judge  notes  the
       evidence provided regarding the treatment the appellant has  received
       for his epilepsy but concludes that treatment for both  epilepsy  and
       depression is available in India.
   41. Article 8 ECHR does not give a person the right to choose where  they
       wish to live. The Judge clearly formed the view that this family unit
       wanted the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom even  though  he
       had no lawful right to do so.
   42. It has not been made out the Judge erred in  law  in  concluding  (a)
       that  adequate  medical  support,  assistants,  and   treatment   was
       available to meet the appellant's needs in India and (b)  that  there
       was a support network available to him from his family in  India  and
       financial support including by way of remittances from his brother in
       the United Kingdom.
   43. Whilst the grounds disagree with the Judge's conclusions they fail to
       establish arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal. The appellant's status in the United Kingdom  has  always
       been precarious  warranting  little  weight  being  attached  to  the
       private life he has developed. In the alternative,  even  if  as  the
       appellant asserts he had established family life with his brother and
       sister-in-law in  the  United  Kingdom  it  would  arguably  make  no
       difference. The  relationship  will  form  part  of  the  appellant's
       private life in any event which was properly considered by the Judge.
       The appellant seeks to challenge the 'steppingstones' set out by  the
       Judge in arriving at the finding the appeal was dismissed.  What  the
       appellant fails to do is to establish  that  the  Judge's  conclusion
       that the respondent's decision is  proportionate  falls  outside  the
       range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
   44. The appellant's desire  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  whilst
       understandable, is not sufficient. This appeal is dismissed.

Decision

   45. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   46. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 July 2020
