
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10339/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 6th March 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER- New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                RAJIT GURUNG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby- Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Manley, instructed by N C Brothers & Co
solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In a decision promulgated on 22nd May 2017, Mr Gurung's appeal  against
    a decision of the ECO to refuse him entry clearance  as  the  dependant
    son of Rambahadur Gurung, a former Gurkha soldier was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Birk. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birk  found  that
    there was family life such as to engage Article 8 and that the decision
    to refuse entry clearance was disproportionate.


 2. In particular, the judge found:


      a) Mr Gurung senior was credible and his account of the history  could
         be relied upon.


      b) He and his wife came to live in the UK in 2010;  Mr  Gurung  senior
         travelled to visit his son in 2012, 2014 and 2015. There have  been
         visits in other years by Rajit Gurung's mother


      c) Rajit Gurung was in education until 2016; the  separation  has  not
         been for longer than two years.


      d) Rent from tenants who lived in the family home, with Rajit  Gurung,
         was not permanent financial support for him.


      e) It is credible that money transfers to Rajit Gurung's brother  were
         for him and his brother; and there are more recent money  transfers
         to him.


      f) Rajit Gurung has not found employment to support himself.


      g) Although an adult, Rajit Gurung and his  parents  have  remained  a
         family unit despite  the  physical  separation;  he  remains  their
         responsibility.


 3. The ECO sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds that
    it was arguable the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  not  applied  the
    Kugathas test despite reminding itself of the test. It failed to  refer
    to emotional ties at all and had not considered elements of dependency;
    a 28-year-old man who has been living apart from his parents for  seven
    years with visits requires more to establish dependency.


 4. I received a Rule 24 response from N C brothers & CO; the ECO failed to
    comply with directions and provide  a  skeleton.  I  directed  that  an
    explanation for such failure be provided to me in writing by 4pm Monday
    5th March 2018. A full apology has been received.


 5. I heard oral submissions from both parties.


 6. The essential difference between the parties was that although findings
    had been made about the relationship between Mr Gurung and his parents,
    insufficient findings  had  been  made  to  establish  that  there  was
    dependency such as to engage Article 8. In  particular  Ms  Brockelsby-
    Weller relied upon the phrase in Kugathas  which  refers  to  emotional
    ties needing to be more than  the  normal  emotional  ties  that  exist
    between parents and children. There is no challenge to the findings  of
    fact made (which are briefly set out in para 2 above) and no  challenge
    to the finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge that Mr Gurung senior's
    account was credible and could be relied upon.


 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  did  not,  specifically,  refer   to
    "emotional  ties".  The  witness  statement  submitted  by  the  family
    together with the oral evidence  paint  a  detailed  and  comprehensive
    picture of a close family  relationship  with  Mr  Gurung  in  frequent
    contact with his parents in addition  to  visits.  The  judge  has  not
    referred to each element of the evidence; there is no requirement to do
    so.  The  judge's  finding  that  there  is  a  maintenance  of  family
    relationships,  a  close   family   unit,   that   he   remains   their
    responsibility when considered in the context of the findings  overall,
    point to a relationship that fully engages Article 8.


 8. Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and Ghising [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)  all
    point to a broad and encompassing assessment of the family relationship
    - not merely emotional ties.  The  absence  of  specific  reference  to
    emotional ties in this case in the decision does not, when the evidence
    (which was accepted) and the findings are read together, negate a clear
    inference that the emotional ties do transcend  those  which  could  be
    said to exist normally between parents and children. The  challenge  by
    the ECO is essentially a reasons challenge. The reasons  given  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge are sufficient to enable the losing party  to
    understand why she lost and provide an adequate  analysis  of  why  the
    decision was disproportionate.


 9. There is no error of law in the judge's decision.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


     Date 5th March 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
