
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10586/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2019                 |On 11 March 2019                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                Mr BRIAN [P]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel (Pro Bono)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Gibb on  27
         November 2018 against  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
         Article 8 ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham in a
         decision and reasons promulgated on 5 September 2018.

      2. The Appellant is a  national  of  the  United  States  of  America,
         married to Mr Benjamin [P] ("Mr  [P]"),  a  British  Citizen.   The
         Appellant had entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  14
         November 2014.  He had applied for leave to remain on human  rights
         grounds on 5 May 2015.  His appeal against the Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department's refusal was dismissed on 25 January  2016
         and the Appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 13 August 2016.
          The Appellant's subsequent human rights application was refused by
         the Respondent on 7 September 2017.

      3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  accepted  that  the
         Appellant's  marital  relationship  was  genuine  and   subsisting,
         however the Eligibility requirement of  Appendix  FM  was  not  met
         because the Appellant had no leave at the date of his  application.
         As to whether paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM applied, the  Secretary
         of State was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to the continuation of the couple's family  life  in  the
         United Kingdom or for the Appellant to return to the  USA  to  seek
         entry clearance to the United Kingdom from there.   There  were  no
         compelling reasons to grant the Article 8 ECHR application.

      4. Judge Graham considered that paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules was not satisfied.   The  judge  considered  that
         there would be ways around the 10 year travel ban  imposed  by  the
         USA on Mr [P] because Mr [P] had overstayed his  visa  there.   The
         judge considered that the evidence of  the  Appellant's  depression
         (which she accepted) might assist in  overturning  the  ban.   This
         would mean that family life could be  continued  in  the  USA.   It
         might also be possible for family life  to  be  lived  in  a  third
         country, e.g., Canada.  Or the Appellant could return  to  the  USA
         and  seek  entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge
         considered  that  temporary  separation  would  not  have   serious
         effects, in part because Mr [P] was able to  work  full  time.   Mr
         [P]'s earnings were sufficient to meet the  financial  requirements
         of Appendix FM.  The fact that the  Appellant  was  caring  for  Mr
         [P]'s father was not shown to be an exceptional circumstance, as he
         was living alone.

      5. The Appellant had previously not been  represented  so  Judge  Gibb
         examined the Article 8 ECHR decision with particular  care.   Judge
         Gibb considered that it  was  arguable  that  the  Article  8  ECHR
         proportionality  evaluation  had  not  been  conducted   adequately
         outside the Immigration Rules as there was no  balancing  exercise,
         the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  had  not  been   adequately
         conducted and there had been consideration of  irrelevant  factors,
         the "Canada" point.

      6. A rule 24 notice had been filed by  the  Respondent,  opposing  the
         appeal,  but  Ms  Holmes  reviewed  that  in  the  light   of   the
         comprehensive skeleton argument served by Mr Fripp who  had  agreed
         to appear for the Appellant pro bono.  Ms Holmes indicated that  it
         was now accepted that the arguable  errors  of  law  identified  by
         Judge Gibb existed and were material, of which the most significant
         was the inadequate consideration of paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
         of the Immigration Rules.  The reality was that the 10 year  travel
         ban was an insurmountable obstacle for the continuation  of  family
         life in the USA,  before  the  position  of  Mr  [P]'s  father  was
         considered.

      7. It was accordingly agreed by the consent of both parties  that  the
         decision and reasons had be set aside for material  error  of  law.
         It  was  further  agreed  that  the  appeal  could   be   redecided
         immediately by the Upper Tribunal, as there had been no credibility
         issues as such and no challenge to the essential findings of fact.

      8. The submissions took the form of a dialogue with the tribunal.   Mr
         Fripp had submitted a comprehensive skeleton argument in  which  he
         indicated that a summary rehearing was appropriate.

      9. It is not clear why the judge made any reference to Canada or  some
         other third country as a possible place  for  the  continuation  of
         family life, either on an interim basis or permanently.  There  was
         simply no evidence to show that this was possible  or  viable,  and
         there was no consideration of any of the somewhat obvious practical
         difficulties which such an upheaval  would  involve  for  a  couple
         currently dependant on the income of one partner.   This  no  doubt
         inadvertent reference had the effect of throwing other elements  of
         the judge's approach into doubt.

     10. As Judge Gibb identified when granting permission  to  appeal,  the
         test of "insurmountable obstacles" in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM
         of the Immigration Rules is one of fact.  The reality at  the  date
         of the appeal hearing was that Mr [P] was the subject of a 10  year
         travel ban to the USA.  There was no evidence that  it  had  arisen
         from  more  than  an   overstay   which   had   resulted   from   a
         misunderstanding by Mr [P] of the terms of his visa, not  from  any
         deliberate act.  The evidence before the tribunal was that  setting
         aside the ban might be possible, but that it would be  costly.   By
         necessary implication, the process would take time,  and  like  all
         litigation, a successful  outcome  could  not  be  guaranteed.   Ms
         Holmes  accepted  that  the  ban  amounted  to   very   significant
         difficulties to the continuation of family life in the USA,  before
         the question of the care of Mr [P]'s father arose.  Thus  paragraph
         EX.1 was met and the tribunal so finds.

     11. On its face the Appellant could return to the  USA  to  seek  entry
         clearance to the United Kingdom, but that  is  not  required  where
         paragraph EX.1 is met, because EX.1 indicates the United  Kingdom's
         margin of appreciation for Article 8 ECHR purposes,  and  indicates
         that a refusal in those circumstances would be disproportionate and
         thus a breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

     12. As the financial requirements of Appendix  FM  were  found  by  the
         judge to have been met, there is in any event no appreciable public
         interest in requiring the Appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
         merely to seek entry clearance, particularly as he has  made  every
         effort to  regularise  his  stay.   Perhaps  equally  if  not  more
         importantly, the  Appellant  has  been  diagnosed  with  depression
         (accepted by the judge) and the impact  of  an  unknown  period  of
         separation from his partner is a further reason not to expect  such
         a separation, as it would be disproportionate.

     13. Thus it was accepted that there could only be one outcome following
         the summary rehearing, i.e., that the appeal must be allowed.  This
         the tribunal stated at the hearing.




    DECISION

    The onwards appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    There were material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    and reasons, which is accordingly set aside.

    Following a summary rehearing, the original decision was remade.

    The original appeal is allowed.




    Signed Dated 5 March 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
