
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10924/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |On 6 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                Mohammed boye
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Morjaria of Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms I Vijiwala, Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 4  June  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his  application  for
    entry clearance as a child of a parent in the United Kingdom  dated  16
    April 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Gambia, born on 29 May 2003, who applied
    for entry clearance to join his mother  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer refused the claim under paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds on the basis  that  there
    was  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  mother   had   sole
    responsibility for him - the  evidence  of  money  transfers  were  not
    linked to the Appellant, there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  of  contact
    between the Appellant and his mother and a lack of evidence as to  when
    there was last face-to-face contact between them.   There  was  also  a
    lack of evidence of care arrangements in Gambia and no reason  why  the
    Appellant could not continue to live with his  aunt  there,  such  that
    there were no serious compelling family considerations to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the rules for a grant of leave to remain.

 3. An Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision and maintained  it  on
    19 December 2018 on the basis that there was insufficient  evidence  to
    address the reasons for the original refusal.  The  best  interests  of
    the Appellant as a child were considered,  as  was  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights but there were not found to be  any
    unjustifiably harsh consequences on either the Appellant or his  family
    members.

 4. Judge Beach dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  4  June
    2019 on the basis that it was not accepted that the Appellant's  mother
    had sole responsibility for him, but that his mother, father  and  aunt
    were involved in his upbringing and  that  the  Appellant  lived  in  a
    stable and secure circumstances in Gambia.  It  was  found  that  there
    would not be a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right
    to respect for private and family life contrary to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on eight grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to make credibility findings in relation  to
    the Appellant's mother or his  aunt.   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made inadequate findings on the issue of sole  responsibility,
    failing to take into account the evidence that the  Appellant's  mother
    was responsible for his education  and  permission  for  school  trips.
    Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal had not properly  considered  the
    affidavits in relation to financial support and responsibility for  the
    Appellant's education, and that the wrong standard of  proof  had  been
    applied.  Fourthly, that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider
    the written statement from the Appellant's aunt as to why she could  no
    longer look after the Appellant.  Fifthly, that there  was  a  lack  of
    reasons in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    in relation to the issue of whether the Appellant was  entitled  to  be
    registered as a British citizen  under  section  1(3)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981.  Sixthly, that the First-tier Tribunal had failed
    to appreciate that the Appellant's father had only been involved  since
    January 2019.  Seventhly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for the findings in relation to the best interests  of
    the Appellant and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
     Finally, that overall the First-tier Tribunal's decision was perverse.

 6. At the oral hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take  into  account  all  of  the
    circumstances and evidence in relation to the Appellant.   The  primary
    issue was whether the Appellant's mother had  sole  responsibility  and
    there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  of  the  Appellant's
    mother being financially responsible for him, being in contact with his
    school and reasons why the Appellant's aunt could no  longer  care  for
    him in Gambia.  This evidence was  not  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in its totality and instead the  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeal focused on the Appellant's father.  The best  interests  of  the
    Appellant were not taken into account.  It was submitted that the  best
    interests of the Appellant were to be looked after by his mother in the
    United Kingdom given the strong bond between mother and child and  that
    there was no one else to look after the Appellant in  Gambia  now  that
    his aunt was unable to do so.

 7. In relation to the Appellant's father, this issue only arose in  cross-
    examination before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence was that she was the  sole  parent  and  the  father  was  not
    involved, in fact there was no contact with him between 2003 and  early
    2019.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent it was submitted that the grounds of appeal
    amounted only to disagreement with the decision reached.  In  paragraph
    27 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal confirmed that all  of  the
    oral and documentary evidence was considered, and an appropriate  self-
    direction was given in accordance with TD (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  Express  consideration  was
    given within the  decision  to  the  financial  support  given  by  the
    Appellant's mother and the school receipts in paragraph  31;  the  oral
    evidence about  contact  between  mother  and  child  with  a  lack  of
    supporting documentary evidence also in paragraph 31; and reference  to
    the Appellant's mothers educational decisions about  the  Appellant  in
    paragraph 33.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal set out the witness evidence in paragraphs 9 to
    11 of the decision, which included that the Appellant  and  his  father
    have contact once a month  and  the  parents  have  occasional  contact
    having made a joint decision as to where the  Appellant  was  going  to
    live in 2003.  In paragraph 32,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    there was conflicting evidence in relation to  the  Appellant's  father
    and his relationship with him and that the Appellant's mother  had  not
    been entirely open about his role.  It was found  not  to  be  credible
    that she did not know the whereabouts of the Appellant's father  for  a
    period of 16 years and a clear finding was made  that  the  Appellant's
    father  remained  involved  in  his  life   and   had   not   abdicated
    responsibility for the Appellant.  By reference  back  to  TD  (Yemen),
    sole responsibility was a factual question  to  be  determined  and  in
    cases where both parents were involved, it would be rare for one parent
    to have sole responsibility.  Overall it was submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge appropriately considered all of the evidence.

10. The Appellant's claim that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    perverse does not reflect the very high threshold for  such  a  ground.
    The best interests of the Appellant were considered  in  paragraph  35,
    including that the Appellant has spent the  majority  of  his  life  in
    Gambia, was in education there, was in regular  contact  with  extended
    family in Gambia, was  living  a  stable  life  and  had  a  continuing
    relationship with his mother.  On the basis that the  Appellant  had  a
    strong relationship with his aunt, it was not considered likely that he
    would be evicted from her care just because  she  was  having  a  baby.
    Although there was no  express  reference  to  the  Appellant's  aunt's
    affidavit, the facts relied on therein were referred to and taken  into
    account in the decision.  Overall, there were no serious and compelling
    family circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules and  it  was  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    separately consider and dismiss the claim on Article 8 grounds.

Findings and reasons

 1. Although the Appellant has broken down the grounds of appeal into eight
    separate headings, as in  the  oral  submissions  on  his  behalf,  the
    grounds are in essence a challenge to the findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant's mother did not have  sole  responsibility
    for him and in doing so did not properly  take  into  account  all  the
    evidence before it.  The only separate ground is  in  relation  to  the
    lack of reasons  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  be
    registered as a British  citizen,  but  this  ground  was  not  pursued
    orally, save for Ms Morjaria confirming that no  such  application  for
    citizenship had been made by or on behalf of the  Appellant.   That  is
    the same factual situation as was before the First-tier Tribunal and is
    irrelevant to the issues in this human rights appeal.

 2. The remaining grounds of appeal are in essence, only disagreement  with
    the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal and do  not  identify  any
    errors of law, individually or cumulatively.  There is nothing  in  the
    decision to suggest that the wrong burden of proof or standard of proof
    has been applied, with the First-tier Tribunal  making  an  appropriate
    self-direction in paragraphs 3, 29 and 30, which is on the face of  the
    decision, properly applied in the findings made.

 3. Although there are no express credible  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's aunt, her evidence that the Appellant's  relationship  with
    her is expressly considered in paragraph 35 of the decision,  where  it
    is recorded that the Appellant has lived most of his childhood as  part
    of his aunt's family, but that there was  no  evidence  of  his  aunt's
    pregnancy or of her living  arrangements  in  Gambia  (other  than  the
    Appellant's mother's statement as to the size of the accommodation)  or
    why the arrival of a new baby would mean that the  Appellant  could  no
    longer be cared for.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  given  the
    strong relationship between the Appellant and his  aunt,  it  would  be
    unlikely that he would be evicted  from  the  property.   It  is  clear
    therefore that the evidence of the Appellant's aunt was not accepted in
    full.

 4. In relation to the Appellant's mother, although not expressly stated as
    an issue of credibility, the First-tier Tribunal  made  findings  about
    the lack  of  evidence  from  her  as  to  her  relationship  with  the
    Appellant, in particular the lack of  detail  about  contact  with  the
    school,  financial  support,  the  lack  of  what's  app  records   and
    specifically the contradictory evidence in relation to the  Appellant's
    father.  These matters do not all go to the issue of  credibility,  but
    are relevant to whether the Appellant has established on the balance of
    probabilities that his mother has sole  responsibility  for  him.   The
    First-tier Tribunal's clear findings are  that  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to establish this, such that the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The evidence of the Appellant's mother's financial support for him  and
    involvement in his education, is expressly referred to in paragraphs 31
    and 33 of the decision, as is the lack of detail about  involvement  in
    any other aspects of the Appellant's life and lack of  specific  detail
    about involvement with the school.  Reasons are clearly given as to why
    these matters alone do not establish that the  Appellant's  mother  has
    sole responsibility for him.

 6. In relation to the Appellant's father, the  First-tier  Tribunal  finds
    that there is contradictory evidence  about  his  whereabouts  and  his
    involvement with and contact with both the Appellant  and  his  mother.
    There was no failure to appreciate that the claim that he had only been
    involved since January 2019, to the contrary, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    expressly rejected this part of the Appellant's mother's evidence which
    on the whole was  not  found  to  be  consistent  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's father.  The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for finding that
    the evidence does not show that the Appellant's  father  had  abdicated
    responsibility for him are expressly  set  out  with  adequate  reasons
    within the decision.

 7. The Appellant's best interests are assessed  in  paragraph  35  of  the
    decision, which balances the interests of the Appellant to be with  his
    mother and half-sister in the United Kingdom but also his interests  in
    continuing his settled and stable life in Gambia, where  he  has  spent
    the majority of his life, where he is in education  and  where  he  has
    contact with extended family.  The First-tier Tribunal did not, and  on
    the evidence could not, find that it was solely in the Appellant's best
    interests to relocate to the United Kingdom with his mother.  There was
    no failure to give adequate  reasons  for  these  findings,  which  are
    contained in paragraph 35 of the decision and were open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the evidence.

 8. Article 8 of the European Convention on Human rights is expressly dealt
    with in paragraph 36 of the decision, which reiterates earlier findings
    in relation to best interests and whether there are any very compelling
    family  or  other  considerations  which  make  the  exclusion  of  the
    Appellant  from  the  United   Kingdom   undesirable;   together   with
    consideration of the submission  that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    registration as a British citizen.  Aside from the latter  point  which
    is immaterial given that no such application had been made, in  reality
    any assessment  under  Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    requires a consideration only of the factors already taken into account
    within the context of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  In these
    circumstances, the earlier findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    relevant and together with  the  reasons  given  in  paragraph  36  are
    adequate and rational reasons for dismissing the appeal on human rights
    grounds, which were open to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The appellant has not established that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is perverse.  To the contrary, adequate reasons  are  provided
    to explain why the appeal was dismissed, on the basis of findings which
    were open to the First-tier Tribunal on the limited evidence  available
    to it in support of the appeal.  For these reasons there is no material
    error of law on any of the grounds identified by the Appellant and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         31st December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

