
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 28 September 2018                  |on 03 October 2018                  |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              MAIMOONA KHURSHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Pakistan
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, Work Permit Services Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The  respondent's  decision  dated  24  March  2016,  refusing  the
         appellant's application for entry clearance as a spouse.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Clough, promulgated on 13 February 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission dated 23 February 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Page, dated 26 April 2018.

 2. Mr Govan confirmed that the  respondent's  decision  accepts  that  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, apart from the requirement for a
    "genuine and subsisting relationship",  were  met.   He  accepted  that
    paragraphs 10 and 11 of the FtT's decision are to the effect that  such
    a relationship was established,  and  that  the  decision  fell  to  be
    reversed.

 3. The appeal was on human rights grounds only, but the immigration  rules
    in respect of family life were the starting point, and that part of the
    rules is designed to comply with article 8.  On her findings about  the
    relationship,  the  judge  had  no  reason  to  look  for   exceptional
    circumstances beyond the terms of the rules.

 4. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.

 5. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            28 September 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




