
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10979/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 4th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                    OOOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood of Counsel instructed by Coram
                    Children's Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10 July  1994.   He  came
    to this country as a Tier 4 Student Dependant along  with  his  father,
    stepmother and stepbrother in 2008 with leave until  31  January  2010.
    An extension was granted until 28  June  2012.   An  application  as  a
    dependant was refused on 15 July 2013.

2.   The appeal herein stems from the  decision  made  on  2  November  2015
    refusing the appellant's human rights application for leave  to  remain
    based on his private life and exceptional circumstances.  At  the  date
    of the application the appellant had been 20 years old and had lived in
    the UK for approximately seven years and he did  not  accordingly  fall
    within the residential requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  The Secretary
    of State considered whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    showing "very significant obstacles" to his  integration  into  Nigeria
    under 276ADE(1)(vi).  It was not accepted  that  there  would  be  such
    obstacles to his integration into Nigeria  because  he  had  spent  the
    majority of his life living there.  He had not lost all family,  social
    or cultural ties in Nigeria.  In relation to exceptional  circumstances
    the Secretary of State  considered  the  appellant's  disabilities  and
    learning  difficulties  but  considered  that  there  were   sufficient
    facilities in Nigeria to cater for the disabled and those with learning
    difficulties and the appellant would not "suffer any  greater  hardship
    than other people in Nigeria who are in a similar position".

3.   The appellant did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal.  He  lacks
    capacity and a solicitor appointed by the Court of Protection acted  on
    his behalf.  Mr Haywood appeared for the appellant  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as he appeared before me.  The appellant's case was taken
    from statements provided by his litigation friend and  an  employee  at
    his day centre.  The appellant had been living in  a  care  home  since
    March 2017 when he made  an  allegation  against  his  stepmother.  His
    litigation friend and the employee at the day centre confirmed that the
    appellant could express himself quite well and make his feelings  known
    and he had indicated that "he wants no contact with his stepmother  and
    stepbrother since he moved out of their house".   When  the  stepmother
    tried to visit him he refused to see her or his stepbrother.  The judge
    stated in paragraph 13 of his determination that there was  "some  kind
    of current family breakdown".  The judge accepted the  summary  of  the
    appellant's circumstances and  disabilities  in  paragraph  15  of  his
    decision.  The appellant required constant supervision  and  assistance
    with daily living needs and  had  little  concept  of  danger  and  was
    unlikely to be able to access help.  He could  not  live  independently
    and was estranged from his immediate family.  There  was  very  limited
    education  provision  for  the  disabled  who  were   stigmatised   and
    ostracised.  His physical  difficulties  had  arisen  as  a  result  of
    contracting meningoesephalitis at the age of 2 as well as  symptoms  of
    cerebral palsy, resulting in deformity of his feet and weakness in  his
    legs.  It was  submitted  by  Mr  Haywood  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Nigeria.   He
    would have no prospect of being able to  integrate  there.   The  judge
    concluded his determination as follows:

         "18. The burden is on the appellant to show that his  human  rights
             are engaged, and it is for the SSHD to show that  the  removal
             is a proportionate decision.  What is the appellant's  private
             life in the context of this case?  He came here as a dependant
             upon his family, and in normal circumstances that would be the
             starting and end point for  a  dependant  child  -  namely  to
             remain with his family.  The private life that is advanced  in
             this case is contingent upon the help that he is now receiving
             from a wide range of state services.  Does the fact  that  the
             appellant is  now  apparently  utterly  dependent  upon  these
             services provide a legitimate claim for  saying  that  he  has
             established a private life because of being so dependent.


         19.  The essential conclusion to be reached  from  the  appellant's
             evidence is that he  faces  no  prospects  of  being  able  to
             integrate into the UK, let alone anywhere else in  the  world.
             He is in a home, and it appears from  the  evidence  submitted
             that  he  has  no  prospect  of  independent  living.   He  is
             therefore totally dependent upon state care.  In  my  view  it
             follows, therefore, that  to  talk  in  terms  of  significant
             obstacles to reintegration is inapplicable in this case.  This
             appellant is  not  capable  of  integrating  anywhere  -  and,
             therefore, to say that in some way he cannot  be  returned  to
             Nigeria because he cannot be integrated, it [sic]  to  confuse
             the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  is  capable  of   any
             independent life at all.


         20.  In my view, the circumstances  surrounding  the  breakdown  in
             relationships between the appellant and his  immediate  family
             are not satisfactorily explained, nor have they been  properly
             probed  during  the  appellant's  treatment.   There  is  some
             anxiety in my part as to the conduct of the appellant's  step-
             mother in relation to her immigration history where she  seems
             to have used first this appellant to  launch  an  appeal,  and
             then her other son to launch another  appeal.   It  is  plain,
             from previous Tribunal findings, that her motives are suspect.


         21.  What is plain is that this  appellant's  step-mother  who  has
             apparently cared for him since he was about 2  and  his  step-
             brother, if returned to Nigeria, would be returned as a family
             unit.  In other words, were the appellant to  be  returned  to
             Nigeria, it would be in the context of  his  immediate  family
             who,  subjective  to  administrative  issues,  presumably   be
             removed and/or returned at the same time.  That would put  him
             in the position that he was in before he came to the UK.


         22.  Although  Mr  Haywood  referred  to  Article  3,  it  was  not
             developed and (in my view) it is inapplicable  in  this  case.
             Article   3   has   been   previously   considered   in    two
             determinations, and in the determination of  2014  it  related
             specifically to this appellant, and  an  appeal  against  that
             decision was refused.  I therefore take as  a  starting  point
             that the Tribunal has already rejected this appellant's  claim
             that in some way his return to Nigeria involves  a  breach  of
             his Article 3 rights.


         23.  I am therefore not satisfied that paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  is
             applicable to the appellant in this case because either  I  do
             not consider that integration is the correct test, or  because
             also I do not consider  that  he  has  demonstrated  that  the
             significant obstacles test is one that is applicable to him.


         24.  In my view, the right way to approach this case  is  to  carry
             out a Razgar-type assessment.  The first question  is  whether
             the appellant has established a private life in the UK.   From
             what I have set out above, that is debatable.  However, I will
             assume that he has established a private  life  based  on  the
             current care he is receiving and  that  his  proposed  removal
             does engage it.  The  real  issue  in  this  case,  therefore,
             relates to the  fifth  limb  of  Razgar  as  to  whether  that
             decision is proportionate.  Again, although not referred to in
             his skeleton argument, it  is  important  to  have  regard  to
             section 117B, which provides guidance as  to  the  appropriate
             weight to be given to private  life  in  these  circumstances.
             The fact is that, on the appellant's case, he  has  claimed  a
             right to remain in the UK which will be at the expense of  the
             state.  Section 117B expressly provides that it is not in  the
             public interest to allow a person to remain in  the  UK  where
             they are a burden on the tax payers.  As has  been  previously
             observed by another Judge, there is a distinct feeling in this
             case that this family are seeking to exploit public resources.
              Nevertheless, without ascribing any impure motive to the step-
             mother,  the  question  is  whether  under  a  proportionality
             assessment, considering the interests of  immigration  control
             and  the  fact  that  there  is  no  automatic  right  to  NHS
             care/state support, the issue, in my view, resolved in  favour
             of the SSHD.


         25.  It follows, from my decision, that clearly the  appellant  and
             his step-mother and step-brother will have  to  consider  some
             kind of reconciliation, because in due  course  they  will  be
             returned to Nigeria as a family unit.   It  follows,  on  that
             basis, that there is nothing to distinguish the conclusions  I
             have reached in this appeal from that which were reached  back
             in 2014 - when the Tribunal on that occasion concluded that it
             would not be disproportionate for the  family  as  a  unit  to
             return to Nigeria.  I find that to  be  powerful  evidence  to
             support  my  conclusion  that,  were  the  appellant  and  his
             immediate family  returned  to  Nigeria,  he  would  have  the
             necessary protection and support from his family, which  would
             mean that he would not be rendered destitute".


4.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal of the appellant.

5.   The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in  his  consideration  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).  The First-tier Judge  observed  that  whether  or  not  an
    applicant  satisfied  the  Rules  was  a  weighty  consideration   when
    considering whether a decision to remove  was  proportionate.   As  the
    First-tier Judge put it:

         "It was an arguable error of law therefore for  the  judge  not  to
         consider whether the appellant satisfied  paragraph  276ADE  and/or
         apparently to find that he did but to disregard the same.  Further,
         the respondent applied  paragraph  276ADE  to  the  appellant  when
         considering his application  for  leave.   Therefore,  the  judge's
         failure to do the same was arguably a  material  unfairness  giving
         rise to an error of law".


6.   There was no response filed by the Secretary of State.

7.   Mr Haywood relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The analysis of the evidence appeared to have been  accepted
    by the First-tier Judge in paragraph  15  of  his  decision.   The  day
    centre manager had indicated  that  the  appellant  needed  support  to
    mobilise and was at risk of falling and had communication difficulties.
     His speech was difficult to understand.  He had  refused  to  see  his
    mother when she had  attempted  to  visit.   There  had  been  a  local
    authority assessment concluding that there was a duty  to  support  the
    appellant under the Care Act 2014 to avoid breaching his  human  rights
    and his relationship with his family had broken down and the  appellant
    was adamant that he did not want contact with them.  There  was  little
    support in Nigeria to individuals with disabilities and  most  families
    could not provide for the daily needs of disabled children and  it  was
    "almost impossible" to attend to  the  special  educational  needs  for
    pupils with learning disabilities.  Paragraph 276ADE  was,  Mr  Haywood
    submitted, the Secretary of State's interpretation of Article 8 private
    life.

8.    The  private  life  claim  could  only  succeed   where   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles.  This was how  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    framed the Rule.  Mr Haywood referred to Secretary of  State  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at paragraph 14:

         "... It is not appropriate  to  treat  the  statutory  language  as
         subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court
         or Tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
         has chosen to use.  The idea of 'integration'  calls  for  a  broad
         evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be
         enough of an insider in terms of  understanding  how  life  in  the
         society in that other country is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life".

9.   The appellant could not live independently and he  did  not  intend  to
    have any contact with his  family.   His  case  was  supported  by  the
    independent witnesses.  The judge had not  been  entitled  to  disapply
    paragraph 276.  He had to allow the appeal on the evidence before  him.
    Counsel referred to Pretty  v  United  Kingdom  [2002]  35  EHRR  1  at
    paragraph 61:

         "As the court had previous  occasion  to  remark,  the  concept  of
         'private life' is  a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition.  It covers the physical and psychological integrity  of
         a person.  It can sometimes  embrace  aspects  of  an  individual's
         physical and social  identity.   Elements  such  as,  for  example,
         gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
         fall within the personal sphere protected by Article 8.  Article  8
         also protects a right to personal development,  and  the  right  to
         establish and develop relationships with other human beings and the
         outside world.  There are no previous cases  established  any  such
         right of self-determination as being contained in Article 8 of  the
         Convention,  the  court  considers  that  the  notion  of  personal
         autonomy is an important principle underlining  the  interpretation
         of its guarantees".

10.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with
    the  determination.   The  judge   had   referred   to   the   previous
    determination on  12  May  2014  by  First-tier  Judge  Abebrese.   The
    Tribunal had found that:

         "The medical facilities which are needed for the  second  appellant
         can be found in Nigeria even though cost  may  be  an  issue.   The
         Tribunal also make a finding that it would be possible to obtain  a
         wheelchair and this would of course have cost consequences also".


    The judge was clearly referring  to  the  earlier  determination.   The
    judge also had in mind Section 117B and  the  issue  of  the  appellant
    being a burden to taxpayers.  The judge had properly  directed  himself
    when undertaking the proportionality assessment.  There was no material
    error of law in the judge's approach.

11.  In reply, Mr Haywood submitted that the decision of Judge Abebrese  was
    in 2014 before the family  rift  and  the  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence was vague. There was no lawful  basis  to  disapply  paragraph
    276ADE.  The appellant would not be returning to or  with  his  family.
    It appeared from paragraph 12 of the decision that  the  appellant  had
    been living in a care home since March 2017 when the allegation against
    his stepmother had been made.

12.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the points made.  I remind myself that I can  only
    interfere  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.

13.  The principal point taken by Mr Haywood is in relation to the  approach
    of the First-tier Judge to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

14.  In my view the first point to note is that  this  appeal  is  on  human
    rights grounds.  It is not an appeal under the Rules.   The  judge  was
    right to approach the case by carrying out a Razgar-type assessment  as
    he did.  In carrying out this assessment he was required by statute  to
    take into account the public interest considerations set out in Section
    117B as he did.  Sub-Section (3) is as follows:

         "It is in the public interest and in particular in the interests of
         the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
         to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   are   financially
         independent, because such persons -


         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society".


     It is perhaps not without significance in this  appeal  that  that  the
    ability to integrate into society features in  both  in  this  and  the
    preceding sub-section. On the judge's findings  the  appellant  has  no
    such ability. In a case such as this I do not find that the judge erred
    in his approach to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as counsel submitted. He did
    not re-write the rule but gave it  a  sensible  interpretation  in  the
    context of the facts as he found them. In any event, as  I  have  said,
    this is not an appeal under the rules.

15.  There is of course, apart from the question of financial  independence,
    issues of immigration control which the judge explored in paragraph  20
    and elsewhere.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the  judge  correctly  applied
    the findings and conclusions in the  previous  determination  by  Judge
    Abebrese.  Mr Haywood submitted that the family breakdown had  occurred
    since that time but the judge was not satisfied as he says in paragraph
    20 that the circumstances surrounding the  breakdown  in  relationships
    had been satisfactorily explained.  This was a  question  of  fact  for
    him.  He rejected the Article 3  case  which  had  not  been  developed
    before him and had already been previously considered.  The  judge  for
    the reasons he gave was correct to limit his  approach  to  the  issues
    under Article 8 and he conducted in my view  a  proper  proportionality
    exercise.  I do not find that the judge left out of account any salient
    evidence.  The points taken  in  relation  to  276ADE(1)(vi)  raise  no
    material error of law.  This appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity Direction

It is appropriate in this case to make an anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  HIS  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 26 September 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
