
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/10829/2015

                                                   HU/10835/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2017                       |  On 15 November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DINGEMANS
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         hina khan (First Appellant)
                          j r b (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a transcript of the extempore judgment given  on  7th  November
    2017.  This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Woodcraft given on 25 April 2017.  As the oral submissions before
    us from Mr Waheed on behalf of the appellants and Mr Avery on behalf of
    the Secretary of State developed, and I should record that we are  very
    grateful to both of them for the helpfulness of their  submissions,  it
    became clear that the appeal was irresistible.

 2. There are a number of grounds of appeal which it is  not  necessary  to
    deal with because of this reason.  It became  clear  that  one  of  the
    appellants is a child and British citizen having  acquired  citizenship
    in the United Kingdom.  It is apparent from the judgment of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph  21  that  the  first  appellant  and
    sponsor have two children, one of whom is a Pakistani citizen  and  the
    other is a British citizen, having been born  in  this  country  on  19
    December 2012.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to say the family
    could return as a unit if they so wished:-

         "Whilst M has not had any experience of life in Pakistan,  and  J's
         experience is very limited (she arrived when she was 6 months  old)
         the focus of both children will be on their  parents  who  will  be
         able to assist them  to  readjust  to  life  in  Pakistan.   Whilst
         therefore the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with both her children, it  is  reasonable  to  expect
         them to return to Pakistan with her".

 3. That was a reasonable and straightforward formulation on the  old  law,
    but  there  have   been   material   developments   in   the   relevant
    jurisprudence.  Those development include the case of MA  (Pakistan)  &
    Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093,  in  particular
    at paragraph 35, and a more recent decision of SF, OSF  and  XF  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKUT  120,  following
    the judgment of the CJEU in Zambrano  v  Office  National  de  l'Emploi
    (Case C-34/09) [2012] QB 265.

 4. In the light of those decisions it  is  apparent  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not ask the right legal question.   Further  in  the
    light of those decisions the Home Office decision maker must not take a
    decision in relation to the  parent  or  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen child where the effect of the decision would be to  force  that
    British child to leave the EU regardless of  the  age  of  that  child.
    This reflects the approach of the CJEU in Zambrano.  As we  have  said,
    it became common ground that that ground of appeal, and we say  nothing
    more about the other grounds of appeal, meant that the appeals  of  the
    two appellants in this case would succeed.

Notice of Decision

 5. There was then some short discussion about disposal, but in the end  it
    is clear that given that there is no other issue involving  the  second
    appellant's parents, one of  whom  is  a  British  citizen,  the  right
    disposal is to follow what occurred in SF, which is  therefore  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appeals of the two appellants  and  leave  the  period  of
    leave is to be determined by the Secretary of State.

 6. We are very grateful for all the submissions and that is  our  judgment
    in this case.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Dingemans
