
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10687/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2019                       |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on 24 April 2019
    at which I decided that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    promulgated on 12 February 2019 was to be set aside for error of law
    and that the decision was to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal. It is
    convenient to quote in full the error of law decision as follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a  citizen  of  Morocco  born  in  1966.   He
             appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision dated 2
             May 2018, being a  decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  on
             Article 8 grounds.  The application was made ostensibly on the
             basis of the appellant's relationship as a partner. His appeal
             came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain at a hearing  on
             4 January 2019 who dismissed it.

         2.   The grounds of appeal in relation to Judge Hussain's decision,
             to  summarise,  argue  that  he  should  have  considered  the
             circumstances of the appellant's wife's two children  who,  at
             the date  of  the  decision,  were  9  and  15  years  of  age
             respectively, or thereabouts.

         3.   At the start of the hearing I canvassed with the  parties  the
             extent to which there was material  before  Judge  Hussain  in
             relation to those children such as to mean that  he  ought  to
             have made an assessment of their  circumstances  in  terms  of
             Article 8.

         4.   It was very fairly accepted by Mr Bramble that there was  such
             material before Judge Hussain and that he had materially erred
             in law in failing to consider Article  8  in  the  context  of
             those  children,  in  particular  in  terms  of   their   best
             interests.  Amongst other things, that material was  what  was
             said in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal about
             the extent to which the appellant has family  life,  not  only
             with his wife but with his stepchildren.

         5.    Having  considered  Judge  Hussain's  manuscript  record   of
             proceedings I indicated to the  parties  that  submissions  do
             appear to have been  made  on  the  point,  albeit  relatively
             briefly, as far as I can tell. Those submissions were  to  the
             effect that there are two young children under the age  of  18
             to consider; both British citizens.  To reinforce her argument
             Ms Popal referred me  to  the  witness  statements  that  were
             before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  extent  of
             the appellant's relationship with the children.

         6.   In the light of the material that was evidently  before  Judge
             Hussain, the submissions made to him, and considering what was
             accepted on behalf of the respondent in terms of there  having
             been an error of law in Judge Hussain's decision  such  as  to
             require the decision to be set aside, I am satisfied  that  he
             did materially err in law in his decision.  That decision  did
             plainly need to give consideration to the circumstances of the
             affected children in this case.  Thus,  I  am  satisfied  that
             there is an error of law in Judge Hussain's decision  such  as
             to require it to be set aside.

         7.   I canvassed with the parties the issue of whether  the  appeal
             was more  appropriately  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal or retained in the Upper Tribunal for a re-making  of
             the decision.  Having heard submissions from  the  parties  it
             seems to me that the appropriate course is for the  matter  to
             be retained in the Upper Tribunal.

         8.   In coming to that view I take into account the extent to which
             any appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  will  have  to
             consider what findings of fact are to stand.   Furthermore,  I
             have regard to the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  at
             paragraph 7.2.

         9.   At the next hearing submissions will need to be made  by  both
             parties as to what findings of  fact  can  be  preserved.   Mr
             Bramble argued that actually there was  no  challenge  in  the
             grounds of appeal to Judge Hussain's decision on the financial
             aspects of the Rules.  That is true.  It is also seems  to  me
             to be the case, although I do  not  express  a  definite  view
             about this, that the financial requirements needed to  be  met
             at the date of the application, although I am willing to  hear
             further submissions from the parties in due course about that.

         10.  Even if the findings of  Judge  Hussain  in  relation  to  the
             financial requirements are to stand as preserved findings,  it
             may well be that the  appellant  would  be  entitled  to  make
             submissions on the extent to which the appellant would now, if
             an application were  presently  made,  be  able  to  meet  the
             financial  requirements  of  the  Rules.    Provisionally,   I
             consider that that is a matter that  may  be  relevant  to  an
             assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.

         11.  Accordingly, at the next date of hearing submissions are to be
             made by the parties as to what findings  of  fact  are  to  be
             preserved.

         12.  The appellant must file and serve a skeleton argument no later
             than seven days before the next date of hearing, dealing  with
             all issues and all arguments relied on. If the appellant seeks
             to argue that the financial requirements of the Rules were met
             at the date of the respondent's decision or  at  the  date  of
             hearing  before  Judge  Hussain,  or  could  be  met   on   an
             application made now, the skeleton argument must set  out  the
             appellant's arguments on that issue.

         13.  I want to make it clear  to  the  appellant's  representatives
             that the skeleton  argument  must  be  drafted  with  specific
             reference to what the financial requirements of the Rules  are
             and with reference to the evidence that is relied on  in  that
             respect.

         14.  It is clear from Judge Hussain's decision that  the  issue  of
             the financial requirements  of  the  Rules  was  not  properly
             addressed on behalf of the appellant. That situation must  not
             be repeated at the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

                                   DIRECTIONS

             The parties, in particular the appellant,  are  to  note  that
             paragraphs 11-14 above take effect as directions which must be
             complied with, in  particular  in  terms  of  the  filing  and
             service of a skeleton argument within the  timeframe  set  out
             above."

 2. For this, the resumed hearing, there was an updated and consolidated
    bundle served on behalf of the appellant, as well as a skeleton
    argument.  I was further provided with an extract from Home Office
    guidance to caseworkers dated 19 December 2018 on the issue of the
    reasonableness of expecting a child to leave the UK.

 3. In the light of submissions made to me on behalf of the appellant, I
    gave a direction pursuant to rule 37(2) of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to explore in more detail certain
    matters concerning the evidence to be given, brought to my attention by
    Ms Popal. Having heard submissions, I decided that no further direction
    under rule 37(2) was necessary. Both parties expressed themselves as
    being content with my approach to the issues arising in this context.
    I then heard oral evidence which is summarised below.

The oral evidence

 4. LB, the appellant's wife, adopted her witness statement dated 9 July
    2019. In cross-examination she identified the schools that her
    daughter, A, and her son, J, go to, and the school years which they are
    in.  She gave evidence about what J hopes to do in the future.

 5. She said that neither of the children have contact with their
    biological father.  So far as A's relationship with the appellant is
    concerned, since they met in 2015 the appellant has become more or less
    her biological father whom she does not know much about. She has become
    brighter and more confident at school.  Prior to meeting the appellant,
    her daughter was not involved in any activities at school and now she
    is involved in swimming and basketball.  The appellant has taught her
    how to be a parent.  She was a single, working mother and he taught her
    the other side of life.

 6. A refers to the appellant as 'papa' and she is very happy and
    confident.  She receives feedback from the school that she never
    received before.  The appellant does the school runs, parents' meetings
    and he attends school activities.  As a single mother she was not able
    to do those things.  She is employed as a theatre nurse.

 7. Anything that happened now in relation to the appellant would totally
    break her.  She has a friend and father to the children that she never
    had before.

 8. If he had to return to Morocco to make an application to come back it
    would break her daughter.  She is settled now.  It would reverse the
    (good things) that had happened.  It would affect them greatly even if
    it was not a permanent separation.

 9. As regards her son J's relationship with the appellant, as a teenager
    he was a bit rebellious.  He is now developing into a responsible young
    man.  She had bought him a phone and an Xbox, thinking that she was
    being a good mother.  However, after school that was all he did.  She
    was unable to pay much attention to him.  He had written a letter to
    the appellant to thank him for being his father.

10. The appellant had trained him to become a competitive swimmer.  He is
    very into sport in terms of running, swimming and cycling.  The
    appellant told him that he should not always be on the phone and he has
    encouraged him to study.  When J goes shopping he is given a budget by
    the appellant, which she never did.  J is also now decorating the
    house, stripping wallpaper and helping around the house; things he has
    never done before.  The appellant has trained him to be a responsible
    young person and to have a structure in his life.  J feels that he has
    a person to mentor him.  He feels happy.  She could not ask for more.

11. A has attended all parents' meetings and has helped J to be better than
    before.  He is a great role model for him.

12. If the appellant had to go to Morocco and apply to re-enter the UK, J
    would probably lapse into how he was before.  It would be emotionally
    disturbing for him.

13. So far as she is concerned, for the first time she has normality in her
    life.  If the appellant had to leave it would have a great impact on
    her, physically and emotionally.  He has helped her in her work in that
    she does not have to worry about what would happen at home.  She has
    peace of mind.  She has developed her confidence.  If he had to leave
    it would definitely break her down.  It would also affect her job.

14. There was no re-examination.  In answer to my questions she said that
    her first marriage was not a happy one.  It was definitely not a
    marriage in which the children could be happy.

15. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 19 November 2019 in
    examination-in-chief.  In cross-examination he gave details of A and
    J's schooling in terms of where they went to school and at what stages
    of their education they are.  That evidence was consistent with that of
    his wife.

16. If he had to go to Morocco and apply for entry clearance, it would be
    very hard on A and J.  He prepares their food and helps remind them
    about their homework and going to bed (on time).  His wife is always
    working to pay the bills and they need an adult in the house. There was
    no re-examination.

    Submissions

17. Mr Bramble referred to the Home Office guidance on the issue of the
    reasonableness of expecting a child to leave the UK.  It was submitted
    that the focus in this case was, quite rightly, on the children.

18. As at the date of application, the appellant could not meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and therefore the matter was to
    be determined with reference to Article 8 outside the Rules.  Weight
    was to be attached to all the circumstances.  It was not disputed on
    behalf of the respondent that the appellant could now meet the
    financial circumstances of the Rules.

19. Mr Bramble pointed out that the situation in terms of the evidence now,
    was that there was a rather more information in relation to the
    appellant's daughter, for example in terms of the letter from her and
    from the school. She had also changed her name by deed poll to that of
    the appellant.

20. On behalf of the respondent the decision letter dated 2 May 2018 was
    relied on.  As at the date of the application the appellant could not
    satisfy the financial requirements of the Rules contained in Appendix
    FM-SE.  Furthermore, in terms of whether there would be very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration on return to
    Morocco in terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), that requirement of the
    Rules could not be met either.  Therefore, consideration needs to be
    given to Article 8 outside the Rules.

21. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the appellant has
    family life with his wife and her children.  S.55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act") needed to be
    considered, as did s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

22. It was accepted that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with the children.  The evidence from the
    appellant's wife expanded on the information previously before the
    Tribunal.

23. It was accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect the children
    to leave the UK. In terms of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 as set out at [18] and [19], one has to
    look at the appellant's circumstances in a 'real world' context.

24. As regards the public interest, and s.117B of the 2002 Act, the
    appellant's immigration status has been precarious at all times and
    therefore his private life ought to be afforded less weight.  It would
    be possible for the appellant in the short term to return to Morocco
    and apply to enter the UK.

25. Mr Bramble referred to JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC), accepting that the appellant's case was on all
    fours with that case.

26. In her submissions, Ms Popal referred to the appellant having entered
    on a spouse visa and not as a visitor, as set out in the FtJ's decision
    at [10] - [12].  The matter was conceded before the FtJ, as can be seen
    from [12].

27. Given that it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that the
    financial requirements of the Rules as of now would be met, it would
    not be fair to separate the appellant from his wife and her children
    simply for an application for entry clearance to be made.

28. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant that there was no evidence
    put before the Tribunal in terms of how long it would take for a visa
    from Morocco to be issued, although it was submitted that the Home
    Office website reveals that it could take up to six months.

29. The appellant's situation was different from that in KO and JG, as well
    as of the appellant in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40.  Although his immigration status was
    precarious, he had never been in the UK unlawfully.  The application
    for leave to remain was made in time.  Given that there was no unlawful
    stay in the UK, the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control
    falls away.  There was therefore less of a public interest in his
    removal.  His removal would interfere with his family life (and those
    of his wife and the children).

30. Relying on MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it was submitted that the maintenance of
    effective immigration control was not a strong and powerful reason in
    this appellant's case requiring him to leave and make an application
    for entry clearance that would succeed.

    Assessment

31. Although Mr Bramble relied in his submissions on the respondent's
    decision dated 2 May 2018 refusing the application for leave to remain,
    part of that decision includes the conclusion that because the
    appellant entered as a visitor he did not meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM, paragraph E-LTRP.2.1, the eligibility immigration status
    requirements.  However, that was an issue that was conceded before the
    FtJ, as can be seen from [12] of the FtJ's decision.  Ms Popal
    explained why that concession was made, in summary because the
    appellant had a fianc� visa which benefited from transitional
    provisions allowing an in-country application for settlement.  There
    has been no application on behalf of the respondent to withdraw the
    concession made at the hearing before the FtJ and it was not submitted
    that the FtJ was in the circumstances wrong to conclude as he did,
    namely that the appellant did in fact meet the eligibility requirements
    of the Rules.

32. It is accepted on behalf of the respondent, and indeed the evidence
    before me is incontrovertible in this respect, that the appellant does
    have family life with his wife and with her two children.  Mr Bramble
    very properly sought to test LB's evidence that the appellant is
    closely involved in the children's education, welfare and upbringing.
    It was very soon apparent that the appellant was clearly very familiar
    with the children's circumstances in terms of their schooling, the
    stage of their education, and their upbringing.  I accept the evidence
    of both the appellant and LB as credible.

33. S.117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

"117B    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

...

(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where -

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom."

34. That this appeal requires consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules
    is incontrovertible.  At the time of application the appellant failed
    to produce evidence which established that he met the financial
    requirements of the Rules.  That was the clear conclusion of the FtJ.
    In my error of law decision dated 3 June 2019 I made it abundantly
    clear that if it was to be argued on behalf of the appellant that at
    the time of the application for leave to remain he met the financial
    requirement of the Rules, there needed to be a skeleton argument
    drafted with specific reference to the evidence showing that at the
    time of application those Rules were met, and with specific reference
    to the particular requirements of the Rules for specified evidence.
    Those directions were not complied with.  All that is asserted on
    behalf of the appellant in this respect is to be found at [29] of the
    skeleton argument, which simply states that all the relevant specified
    evidence has now been disclosed and that the appellant did meet the
    Rules in this respect at the time of application.  It is not explained
    why or how that conclusion is justified.

35. The burden of proof is on the appellant to establish that he meets the
    requirements of the Rules, and indeed met them at the time of the
    application.  He has not done that in terms of the financial
    requirements.

36. Having said that, Mr Bramble not only conceded that there was family
    life between the appellant and his wife and her children, but that the
    financial requirements of the Rules are now met, or at least would be
    if an application were made now.

37. Therefore, the issue boils down to one of proportionality.  It was
    conceded on behalf of the respondent that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the children to leave the UK.  That concession seems to me to
    carry over to any such requirement for them to leave even where the
    appellant would be away only temporarily for the purposes of making an
    application for entry clearance.  That must inevitably be the case
    since it could hardly be said to be proportionate for children of the
    ages of 9 and 15 in full-time education, being British citizens, to
    leave the UK for a temporary period.  The disruption that that would
    cause goes without saying.  That is quite apart from the fact that they
    would be separated from their mother if she had to remain in order to
    continue her employment.

38. Furthermore, as I have indicated, it was accepted on behalf of the
    respondent that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the UK.  In JG a similar situation arose and in that case it was
    concluded that the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules must
    succeed because the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

39. Quite apart from that, it does otherwise seem to me that requiring the
    appellant to leave the UK to make an application for entry clearance in
    circumstances where the application would be successful and in
    circumstances where his status in the UK has never been unlawful, would
    also be a disproportionate interference with his family life weighed
    against the public interest in maintaining effective immigration
    control.

40. The answer to the appeal is in any event provided by the clear words of
    s.117B(6).  The public interest does not require the appellant's
    removal because he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with qualifying children and it would not be reasonable to expect the
    children to leave the UK.

41. In those circumstances, the appeal falls to be allowed under Article 8
    of the ECHR.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            Date: 14/08/19


