
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10003/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2020                |On 08th December 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 Olajide [O]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Directions were  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  12  August  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, without a hearing.

 2. In written submissions filed on 24 August 2020, the Appellant  objected
    to the provisional view that the error of law issues can be  determined
    without a hearing and submitted that an oral hearing is required.   The
    reasons given for this are that an oral hearing is important to  enable
    the Judge to hear oral arguments in the case and reference is  made  to
    case law that procedural fairness can require  an  oral  hearing.   The
    Appellant has not however referred to any of the circumstances of  this
    appeal as to why an oral hearing is required as a matter  of  fairness,
    nor have any  particular  matters  been  highlighted  upon  which  oral
    argument would be helpful or necessary.  In any  event,  the  Appellant
    did,  in  accordance  with  the  directions,  make   detailed   written
    submissions as to the substance of the appeal.

 3. The Respondent filed written submissions on 26 August  2020  deal  with
    substantive matters raised in the appeal and there was no objection  to
    the consideration of the error of law matters without a hearing.

 4. Having regard to the Pilot Practice  Direction  issued  by  the  Senior
    President of the Tribunals on 19 March 2020 and the decision of Fordham
    J in The Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants v President of the
    Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2020]  EWHC  3103
    (Admin), including the benefits of an oral hearing and requirements  of
    procedural fairness, I have decided that this is a case in which it  is
    suitable for the issues of whether the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    materially erred in law and if so, whether the decision should  be  set
    aside, to be determined on the papers  on  the  basis  of  the  written
    submissions made.  This is in light of the unprecedented  circumstances
    surrounding Covid-19 and the need to take precautions  to  prevent  the
    spread of the disease; is in accordance with the  overriding  objective
    for the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly  and  justly  in  rule
    2(1), (2) and (4) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and in circumstances where on the facts; the grounds of  appeal  relied
    upon, expanded in the written submissions on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    and  responded  to  in  writing  by  the  Respondent  are   clear   and
    comprehensive.  This decision has therefore been made under rule 34  to
    avoid any further delay to the determination of the issues.

 5. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Howard promulgated on 29 November  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
    claim dated 23 May 2019 was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 27 April 1971, who last
    entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a visitor valid from
    21 October 2009 to 21 October 2011.   On  30  April  2012  he  made  an
    application for an EEA Residence card which was refused on 29 September
    2012, following which the Appellant was appeal rights  exhausted  on  1
    August 2013.  On 9 October 2015, the Appellant made an application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of private  and  family  life,  which  was
    refused on 26 January 2016 with an out of country right of appeal.

 7. The Appellant's most recent application for leave to remain was made on
    28 November 2018, the refusal of which on 23 May 2019 is the subject of
    this appeal.  That application was on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    marriage to a British citizen and that there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to their family life continuing in Nigeria, due to his wife's
    medical conditions, employment and homeownership in the United Kingdom.

 8. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that whilst it  was
    accepted that the Appellant was in a  genuine  subsisting  relationship
    with his wife, it was not accepted that there would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in  Nigeria.   In  particular,  the
    Appellant's wife's ties in the United Kingdom and relocation to Nigeria
    may involve a degree of hardship or  inconvenience  but  would  not  be
    insurmountable.  The Appellant and his wife would be  able  to  support
    themselves in Nigeria and obtain employment there and medical treatment
    is available to the Appellant's wife.  The Appellant did not  meet  any
    of the requirements for a grant of leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    private life under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  there
    were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain
    on any other basis.

 9. Judge Howard dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29
    November 2019 on all grounds.  There was no dispute that the  Appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and the main
    issue in the appeal was whether the Appellant would face insurmountable
    obstacles to his family life continuing outside of the  United  Kingdom
    for the purposes of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The key findings on this for the purposes of the onward  appeal
    are as follows:

         "16. [The Appellant's wife] has significant health issues.  She set
         these out in  her  witness  statement  ...   The  medical  evidence
         submitted speaks of some of these as well  as  a  number  of  other
         minor ailments.  That evidence in the main takes the  form  of  her
         medical records.  There has been no attempt by her  representatives
         to summarise it or extract the more  pertinent  material.   I  have
         considered it all, but  my  understanding  of  the  more  technical
         medical language is limited and I interpret it as a layman.

         17.  It is the respondent's case that notwithstanding state of  her
         health there is medical treatment and support available in  Nigeria
         which will not be comparable to that she receives in  the  UK,  but
         this quantitative difference does not amount to  an  insurmountable
         obstacle to her husband returning to Nigeria as she  has  a  choice
         whether to join him and if she chooses to join him to avail herself
         of the services available there.

         18.  The nature and requirements of the more significant conditions
         not being in dispute I  first  consider  what  it  is  that  I  can
         reasonably find is available by way  of  health  care  in  Nigeria.
         There  is  material  available  to  both  the  appellant  and   the
         respondent much of it is contained within the  appellant's  bundle.
         The most recent report submitted by the appellant is dated 7  March
         2019.  That report speaks to a deteriorating quality of health care
         in Nigeria.  However, careful consideration of that report makes it
         clear  that  it  is  the  poor   and   the   vulnerable   who   are
         disproportionately affected by the paucity of services in Nigeria.

         19.  Given [the Appellants wife's]  assertion  that  she  earns  in
         excess of �72,000 a year it cannot be said that the  appellant  and
         his partner are poor or vulnerable.  I also note that she is an  IT
         Training Consultant and skills such as these will  be  as  valuable
         Nigeria as they are in the UK.

         20.  The evidence before me does not support  the  conclusion  that
         the obstacles that would be faced by  [the  Appellant's  wife]  and
         thus  the  appellant  on  return  to  Nigeria  are  in  any   sense
         insurmountable.  The facilities exist  in  Nigeria,  that  much  is
         clear and there are the resources to access them.

         21.  The appellant also cites the general levels of criminality  in
         Nigeria and the absence of family members.  However given his  age,
         his good health and the fact that he has worked in Nigeria  in  the
         past are all indicators, together with the resources available from
         his partner that he will in no sense be vulnerable or destitute  in
         Nigeria."

10. The First-tier Tribunal goes on  to  undertake  a  separate  assessment
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, taking into
    account the Appellant's circumstances and the factors in  section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when assessing  the
    proportionality of the Respondent's decision, and  found  overall  that
    the Appellant's removal would not be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with his right to respect for private and family life.

The appeal

11. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  failing  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the medical reports relied upon by  the  Appellant  in
    relation to his wife, specifically no express consideration  was  given
    to the reports dated 12 July and 19 August 2019, the  latter  of  which
    advised the Appellant's wife not to leave the country as it  would  not
    be in her best medical interests or welfare to do  so.   The  Appellant
    asserts that the First-tier Tribunal's reference in paragraph 16 of the
    decision  to  limited  understanding  of  technical  medical  language,
    interpreted as a layman, suggest that inadequate consideration has been
    placed on the medical evidence.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal
    has failed to give adequate consideration to the  written  evidence  of
    the Appellant's wife outlining her current medical treatment.

12. With the grounds of appeal, the Appellant submitted a further  copy  of
    the two medical reports highlighted,  as  well  as  a  further  written
    statement from the Appellant's wife responding to the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but without  being  incorporated  within  or  even
    referred to as part of the grounds of appeal.  It is not clear on  what
    basis this statement was attached to the grounds of appeal, there is no
    application to adduce the statement as further evidence at  this  stage
    and in the circumstances I have not read this as forming  any  part  of
    the grounds of appeal.  In any event, the contents  of  this  statement
    largely amount to  disagreement  with  the  decision  under  challenge,
    questioning the findings paragraph by paragraph and suggesting that the
    findings made were contrary to the evidence before the Tribunal.

13. The written submissions made on behalf of the Appellant  on  24  August
    2020 continue to rely on the grounds of appeal as  originally  drafted,
    with some additional submissions and response to a matter raised in the
    grant of permission that it was not entirely clear  that  the  specific
    medical documents highlighted were before the  First  Tribunal  at  the
    date of hearing.  It is submitted that the first letter was sent to the
    First-tier Tribunal with the second bundle of  evidence  on  17  August
    2019 and the second letter was handed into the Tribunal on the  day  of
    the hearing.  Attached to the written submissions are a letter from the
    Appellant's solicitors and written statements from  the  Appellant  and
    his wife  confirming  the  same.   The  reliance  on  these  additional
    materials was not accompanied by an application under  rule  15(2A)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, but  in  any  event
    are not necessary as I am satisfied that these documents were available
    to the First-tier Tribunal at the date of hearing,  being  included  on
    the file and with an appropriate date stamp showing receipt.

14. The written submissions on behalf of the Respondent opposed the  appeal
    on both grounds.  In relation to the first ground it is submitted  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  stated  in  paragraph  16  of  the
    decision that all of the  medical  evidence  has  been  considered  and
    specific reference is made to the conditions which are covered  in  the
    letters dated 12 July and  19  August  2019.   The  first  letter  only
    confirms that the Appellant's wife is due to have a scan.   The  second
    letter is an opinion that it would not be in the Appellants wife's best
    interest to move to Nigeria because she would need physiotherapy  after
    surgery, however  there  is  no  consideration  at  all  whether  post-
    operative physiotherapy is available or not in Nigeria.

15. The Respondent submits that the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    stated that he is not a medical expert, does not give any indication of
    an inadequate consideration of medical evidence and the  burden  is  on
    the Appellant to provide coherent evidence for the Tribunal to assess.

16. In any event the Respondent submits  that  the  matters  in  the  first
    ground of challenge could have had no material outcome  on  the  appeal
    because the Appellant has not  challenged  the  findings  that  medical
    treatment is available  and  accessible  to  the  Appellant's  wife  in
    Nigeria given the availability of healthcare  and  financial  resources
    available and there is  no  challenge  to  the  overall  finding  under
    Article 8 that the decision would  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with the right to respect for private and family life.

17. In relation to the second ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that
    the Appellant has not identified which specific parts  of  the  written
    statement are said not to have been considered and the  decision  makes
    express reference to all of the evidence having been  considered,  with
    express identification of the Appellant's wife's medical conditions and
    treatment.  In any event, it is trite that the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    not required to refer to the detail of each and every piece of evidence
    in the decision.  The Respondent  reiterates  that  there  are  overall
    clear unchallenged findings as to the availability of medical treatment
    in Nigeria such that the Appellant could not establish that there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in any event.

Findings and reasons

 1.  The  first  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    consideration of the medical evidence in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    wife and specifically whether two letters were taken into account.  The
    First-tier Tribunal's decision expressly sets out at paragraph 11  that
    all of the material submitted by the Appellant in support of the appeal
    has been considered and  in  paragraph  16  there  is  further  express
    confirmation that all of the  medical  evidence  has  been  considered.
    There is nothing in the statement of the Judge in paragraph 16 that his
    understanding of the medical records is that of  a  layman  to  suggest
    that he has not, contrary to the express  statement  to  the  opposite,
    taken that evidence into account.  Nor does that statement in  any  way
    imply that the Judge has not understood the evidence  that  was  before
    him for the purposes of making findings on this appeal.  Where there is
    no dispute as to the Appellant's medical conditions,  which  have  been
    listed in the decision (albeit not replicated by me  in  the  quotation
    above as there is no need for all of  the  Appellant's  wife's  medical
    conditions to be repeated  in  this  decision),  it  is  impossible  to
    conclude that these have not been taken into account.

 2. The medical evidence relating to the Appellant's wife that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was relatively  extensive,  in  excess  of  150
    pages,  comprising  of  GP  printouts,  appointment  letters,  referral
    documentation and a  limited  number  giving  an  opinion  on  specific
    conditions.  There was no comprehensive  medical  report  covering  all
    matters or providing an  overview,  or  a  composite  list  of  current
    treatment or treatment required in the foreseeable future.  As above  I
    am satisfied that the two specific letters, dated 12 July and 19 August
    2019 formed part of  this  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The first letter confirms that  the  Appellant's  wife  awaits  a  scan
    before deciding what treatment would be appropriate  for  fibroids  and
    the second letter again confirms investigative tests, including a scan,
    are to be undertaken with a view to keyhole surgery being offered.  The
    author of that letter, a Consultant Gynaecologist concluded as follows:

         "I found her to have co-morbidities and  do  not  advise  that  her
         leaving the country to join her husband [Olajide] (if not permitted
         to reside in the UK) would be in her best medical interest  or  her
         welfare.  This is because following surgery, physiotherapy is  also
         required as well as family support is essential to cope with day-to-
         day  recovery  plan.   Further  systematic   medical   review   has
         highlighted other co-morbidities that  are  being  investigated  by
         other medical specialities, which are not under my jurisdiction.

         From a medical point of  view,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that
         relocating to another country at  such  a  critical  stage  medical
         evaluation would not be advisable.  This decision has the potential
         of resulting in having an unnecessary pressure effect on a person's
         physical and mental well-being."

 4. The first letter contains nothing significant of substance in  relation
    to the Appellant's wife's health and it is  of  note  that  the  second
    letter deals with  only  one  condition  without  identifying  the  co-
    morbidities relied upon the final conclusion; lacks detail as  to  what
    physiotherapy is required or for how long after surgery;  lacks  detail
    as to the recovery period from  surgery  or  whether  such  surgery  is
    expected to resolve the condition; fails to  consider  at  all  whether
    such treatment would be available to the Appellant's  wife  in  Nigeria
    and  does  not  specify  any  specific  adverse  consequences  to   the
    Appellant's wife's mental physical health of  such  treatment  was  not
    available.  In  these  circumstances,  there  is  a  lack  of  adequate
    reasoning  for  the  conclusion  and  as  such  it  inevitably  carries
    significantly less weight.

 5. Even if, contrary to my  primary  finding  that  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that the First-tier Tribunal did not fully  take  into  account
    all of the medical evidence, including  these  two  letters,  there  is
    nothing in the substance of those documents  which  could  add  to  the
    findings  made  expressly  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as   to   the
    Appellant's medical conditions (the specific condition covered in  this
    correspondence being expressly referred to and  accepted  in  paragraph
    16) and that medical treatment may be required for it   The  First-tier
    Tribunal notes that there is no dispute as to this.  The  lack  of  any
    express reference to this particular correspondence is therefore wholly
    immaterial.

 6. Further, even if, contrary to these findings, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had not expressly considered this  particular  evidence,  it  would  be
    wholly immaterial to the outcome of the appeal in  circumstances  where
    there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that physiotherapy
    was not available or accessible to the Appellant's wife in Nigeria  and
    in the absence of any challenge to the findings in paragraphs 17 to  19
    of the decision that healthcare would be available to  the  Appellant's
    wife in Nigeria.  In circumstances where healthcare is available, there
    can be no suggestion that the  Appellant's  wife's  health  conditions,
    individually, or cumulatively with the other matters relied upon  (upon
    which clear findings were also  made  which  are  unchallenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal) could meet  the  high  threshold  of  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside of the United Kingdom.

 7. For these reasons there is no error of  law  on  the  first  ground  of
    appeal, first it is not made out and secondly, in any event,  it  could
    not be material to the outcome of the appeal.

 8.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the Appellant's wife's written statement.  That statement
    expresses her opinion that there would be insurmountable  obstacles  to
    her relocating with the Appellant to Nigeria,  with  specific  reliance
    placed on her undergoing medical assessment  and  investigation  for  a
    number of issues, which are listed in the statement.  She  states  that
    the health service in Nigeria is poor and less than desirable, with low
    standards a lack of proper equipment and often fake drugs such that she
    would  feel  in  danger  accessing  the  health  system   there.    The
    Appellant's wife also suffered skin damage on visits to Nigeria in 1995
    and 2011 albeit there is  no  evidence  available  about  this.   Other
    matters are also raised  in  relation  to  the  economic  and  security
    situation in Nigeria and the Appellant's wife's family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. The Appellant has not identified any part of his  this  evidence  which
    has not been  taken  into  account  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor
    importantly are any matters identified which could have  even  arguably
    had a material outcome on this appeal.  The second ground of  challenge
    to a significant extent overlaps with the first  ground  of  challenge,
    given the focus of the evidence was again  on  the  Appellant's  wife's
    medical conditions.  It adds nothing of substance and amounts only to a
    bare assertion of an error by the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is  not
    made out.  There is simply no basis in the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to even suggest that this evidence has not  been  fully  taken
    into account and as such there is no error of law on this second ground
    either.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed    G  Jackson                            Date          30th  November
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

