
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/10613/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 July 2021                     |On 22 July 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                           MOHAMMED JAHANGIR ALAM

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant:     Mr C Timson of Counsel, instructed by

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer




This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh with date of  birth  given
   as 10.4.83, has appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 18.3.20  (Judge  Mark
   Davies), dismissing his human rights appeal against the decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 28.5.19, to  refuse  his  application  made  on
   20.2.19 for entry clearance to the UK.

2. Permission was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  9.6.20.  However,
   when the application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Rintoul granted permission on all grounds  1.3.21,  considering  it
   arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  ought  to  have   first
   considered the Immigration Rules and arguable that the  judge  misapplied
   section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Judge Rintoul also noted  from  [16]  of
   the grounds that points were not put to the appellant's  wife,  and  that
   the judge was inconsistent as to whether article 8 was engaged or not.

3. The respondent's Rule 24 Reply, dated  23.3.21,  rejects  the  suggestion
   that the judge failed to address the Immigration Rules. It  is  submitted
   that as the application was refused under  the  discretionary  ground  of
   paragraph 320(11), it was proper for the judge to consider the matter  in
   the "wider context". It is submitted that given the appellant's very poor
   immigration history neither he nor his wife could have had any  realistic
   expectation of being granted entry clearance.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. 320(11) provides a discretionary ground of refusal ("should  normally  be
   refused") where the applicant has previously contrived in  a  significant
   way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by one (or more) of the four
   behaviours there set out, with other  aggravating  factors.  The  refusal
   decision relied on the appellant's previous  overstaying,  aggravated  by
   working illegally using an assumed identity, failing to report  resulting
   in  being  reported  as  an  absconder,  previously  using  deception  in
   applications, and being removed at public expense.

6. As the appellant submits, in order to determine whether refusal of  entry
   clearance was proportionate, the Tribunal should  have  first  considered
   whether continued reliance on  paragraph  320(11)  was  appropriate.  The
   extent to which the Rules are met  or  not  is  highly  relevant  to  any
   article 8 ECHR proportionality balancing exercise. Although at  [28]  the
   judge noted Mr Karnik's submission  that  the  Tribunal  should  consider
   whether  the  respondent  was  justified  in  refusing  the   appellant's
   application on conduct going back to 2012, no such assessment was made. I
   am satisfied that this was an error of law.

7. In relation to the second ground, it is submitted that  the  judge  erred
   in considering whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant's son to
   relocate to Bangladesh. At [30] the judge recognised the submission  that
   there was a qualifying  child.  At  [32]  he  noted  the  best  interests
   considerations. However,  at  [38]  the  judge  considered  it  "entirely
   reasonable" that the appellant's child should  join  him  in  Bangladesh.
   Further reasons were given at [45] and [46]. It follows that s117B(6) was
   addressed, even though this is an entry clearance case. However, I  agree
   that the judge appeared to link the appellant's  immigration  history  to
   the issue of reasonableness in relation to the qualifying child, so as to
   be an error of law. I am also satisfied that the reasoning  provided  for
   considering it reasonable  for  the  child  to  join  the  appellant  was
   inadequate. For example, there was no  consideration  of  the  rights  of
   citizenship of the  British  child,  his  educational  needs,  and  other
   matters. The findings were, therefore, in error of law.

8. Considering what was said by the appellant's wife at [19] to  the  effect
   that she could not join the appellant in Bangladesh as he shared  a  room
   with his brother, the judge's rejection of that at [39] of  the  decision
   is challenged as without evidential foundation.  However, this is a minor
   point and not material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.  I  am  also  not
   satisfied that the judge was inconsistent as to whether  article  8  ECHR
   was engaged. Clearly what was intended at [48] was to find that article 8
   was not infringed, in other words, that refusal of  entry  clearance  was
   not disproportionate.

9. It follows that the decision cannot stand and must be  set  aside  to  be
   remade. Where the facts and findings are unclear and need  to  be  remade
   entirely, the appropriate course is to remit this matter  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to be remade, on the basis that this is a case which  falls
   squarely within the Senior President's Practice  Statement  at  paragraph
   7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant of a  fair
   hearing and that the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which
   is necessary for the decision in  the  appeal  to  be  re-made  makes  it
   appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  determine
   the appeal afresh.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

      The making of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal at Manchester.

      I make no order for costs.




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       5 July 2021





