
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/10292/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26th July 2021                  |On the 12 August 2021              |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

             SRIMAL SUMEDHA RATHNAYAKA RATHNAYAKA MUDIYANSELAGE

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal of Counsel, instructed  by  Shanthi  &  Co
Solicitors



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. To avoid confusion, for the purpose this decision I have  referred  below
   to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka with  date  of  birth  given  as
   3.7.86.

3. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   31.10.19 (Judge Lucas), allowing  the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 29.5.19, to  refuse
   his application made on 9.2.18 for leave  to  remain  on  long  residence
   grounds, pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

4. The grounds of application first  assert  a  procedural  irregularity  in
   refusing to allow the presenting officer adequate time  to  consider  the
   appellant's late-served bundle, which  exceeded  600  pages,  creating  a
   severe disadvantage and prevented the presenting officer from  adequately
   putting her case. It  is  further  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to
   adequately address the burden of proof in line with SM  and  SM  &  Qadir
   [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, which  makes  clear  that  the  'generic  evidence'
   combined with evidence specific to an appellant discharged the evidential
   burden of proof that a TOEIC certificate had been obtained by  dishonesty
   and called for an innocent explanation  by  the  appellant.  It  is  also
   argued that the judge overlooked aspects of the evidence,  including  the
   report of Dr French to the effect that there is a less than 2% chance  of
   a false positive. Other grounds refer to  the  judge's  reliance  on  the
   appellant's English ability despite the  Upper  Tribunal  finding  in  MA
   Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 that there is a  range  of  reasons  why  persons
   proficient in English may engage in TOEIC fraud.

5. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  24.2.20,
   on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
   failing to grant an adjournment  request  made  at  the  hearing  by  the
   presenting officer on the ground that further evidence had been submitted
   by the appellant on the day of the hearing. The judge granting permission
   observed that the decision is silent as to any  adjournment  application,
   "as such it is difficult to make an informed decision as  to  whether  or
   not the judge's decision was sound in respect of the adjournment request.
   This matter must  be  looked  into  further.  Accordingly,  there  is  an
   arguable error of law."

6. The Upper Tribunal has received Ms  Iqbal's  submission  in  response  to
   directions issued by the Upper Tribunal on  31.3.20,  together  with  the
   witness statement of counsel  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  Mr
   Solomon, dated 1.4.20, which attaches the back sheet of his brief and his
   notes. The Upper Tribunal has  also  received  the  Presenting  Officer's
   Minute of the  hearing,  dated  15.10.19.  I  was  also  referred  to  Mr
   Solomon's skeleton argument put before the First-tier Tribunal and  dated
   15.10.19. I was told that Mr Solomon was available to give oral  evidence
   if necessary. However, Mr Tan  did  not  challenge  the  account  in  the
   witness statement, so oral evidence as to what happened  at  the  hearing
   was not necessary.

7. I have also looked at the judge's record of  proceedings,  but  these  do
   not address the issue raised by the presenting officer  and  the  request
   for time to consider the material, or an adjournment.

8. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

9. There are a number of difficulties with this decision.

10. First, the judge referred to  the  wrong  decision  of  the  respondent,
   referring to the appeal being against the decision of 19.6.18.  In  fact,
   that decision, which rejected the appellant's further  submissions  under
   paragraph 353, did  not  grant  the  appellant  a  right  of  appeal.  In
   response, he launched judicial review proceedings, as a result  of  which
   the respondent agreed to reconsider the  decision  as  reflected  in  the
   consent order of 22.3.19. In that consent order,  the  respondent  agreed
   that if the appellant succeeded in any appeal on the basis  that  he  did
   not commit a TOEIC fraud,  "then  in  the  absence  of  some  new  factor
   justifying a different course, the respondent will rescind  his  decision
   of the 3 September 2014 and treat  the  claimant  as  being  an  in  time
   applicant since 03 September 2014 (and  any  earlier  period  as  may  be
   established) as if  he  had  3C  leave..."  He  would  also  be  given  a
   reasonably  opportunity  being  not  less  than  60  days  to  submit  an
   application for further leave.

11. The respondent remade her decision on 20.5.19, again refusing  the  long
   residence application, against which the appellant appealed to the First-
   tier Tribunal asserting breach of human rights. That the judge failed  to
   appreciate the history and referenced the wrong decision  being  appealed
   did not bode well when considering the other aspects of the grounds.

12. The Presenting Officer's Minute records that the  judge  was  asked  for
   time to go through the late-served appellant's bundle,  or  for  a  short
   adjournment. The minute notes that whilst the judge  accepted  that  such
   late service of such a large bundle was not acceptable, the judge "wanted
   to proceed and was happy for me not to ask anything and let  him  do  the
   work." The presenting officer made clear that she was not happy with this
   and indicated she would be present and would ask questions. Mr  Solomon's
   recollection was that at the outset of  the  hearing  there  had  been  a
   general discussion regarding  the  late  service  "but  no  clear  formal
   application to adjourn was made by the presenting officer," and  that  if
   this had been made and refused, he would have noted it.

13. I am satisfied that no formal  adjournment  application  was  made,  but
   accept that there was  a  discussion  about  the  late  service  and  the
   difficulties in which the presenting officer was  placed.  Unfortunately,
   none of this was noted in the record of proceedings and is  not  referred
   to at all in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Tan  complains
   that the presenting officer  was  denied  the  opportunity  of  preparing
   properly to address both the ETS and the article 8 aspect of the  appeal.
   It is difficult to say with hindsight whether the judge's  rather  robust
   approach to the complaint of the presenting officer and his refusal of at
   least a short adjournment to prepare  the  case  (or  at  least  time  to
   canvass with the appellant's representative what of the huge  appellant's
   bundle was relevant), was material to the outcome of the appeal. However,
   I  am  satisfied  that  the  insistence  in  going  on  immediately   was
   procedurally unfair and put the presenting  officer  in  difficulties  in
   advancing her case properly, through no fault of the respondent. Even  if
   I am wrong on that assessment, I  am  satisfied  that  the  other  errors
   identified below require this decision to be set aside.

14. I am satisfied that the complaint that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
   address the legal and evidential burdens of proof consistent with SM  and
   SM & Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 is made out. Whilst the judge  repeatedly
   pointed out that the legal burden was  on  the  respondent,  he  made  no
   reference to the generic evidence with that  relating  to  the  appellant
   being sufficient to discharge the evidential burden. At  [36]  the  judge
   appears  to  criticise  the  respondent  for  not  obtaining  the   voice
   recording, without recognition that even in  the  absence  of  the  voice
   recording the evidence adduced was sufficient to discharge the evidential
   burden. The judge did not consider whether the evidential burden had been
   satisfied or properly consider whether there was an innocent explanation.
   I am satisfied that this approach was in error of law.

15. I am also satisfied that the judge either  misunderstood  or  overlooked
   the evidence in support of the respondent's case. Whilst at [8] the judge
   referred to the supplementary bundle as the  generic  evidence  "that  is
   well know(n)  to  the  Tribunal,"  and  the  Annex  A1  relating  to  the
   appellant, there was no reference to the other evidence,  including  that
   of Professor French as  to  the  low  likelihood  of  a  false  positive.
   Further, there was no reference to Annex B which set out the results from
   the particular college on the very date of the appellant's test,  showing
   that 91% of tests had been invalidated, with 9% questioned, and none were
   allowed  to  proceed  unquestioned.  This  was  highly  material  to  the
   assessment of the evidence and the appellant's credibility. At  [10]  the
   judge referring to the overall results for the South Quay College between
   2012 and 2014 and incorrectly stated that there was  "no  other  specific
   evidence in relation to this appellant". It  follows  that  the  findings
   were made without adequate consideration of the evidence as a whole  and,
   therefore, that those findings are flawed and cannot stand.

16. There are other concerns  highlighted  in  the  grounds,  including  the
   judge's apparent reliance on the fact that the appellant  speaks  English
   and that he had a parking ticket for the  vicinity  of  the  college.  As
   highlighted above, those who speak English may have a  range  of  reasons
   for using a proxy. Further that the appellant attended  the  centre  does
   not demonstrate that  he  took  the  test.  The  evidence  is  that  many
   dishonest persons attended test centres but allowed proxies to  take  the
   test in their place. No adequate and balanced assessment of this evidence
   was made.

17. Mr Tan also points out that the judge stopped consideration of the  case
   on the assessment of the ETS English  language  point,  when  there  were
   other  reasons  cited  in  the  refusal  decision   for   rejecting   the
   application, including the Knowledge of Life in the United  Kingdom  test
   requirement. Neither did the judge  make  any  adequate  article  8  ECHR
   assessment.  Ms Iqbal argued that given the terms of the  consent  order,
   all the judge had to do was determine whether there had  been  dishonesty
   in the obtaining of the ETS certificate. However, as is clear  from  what
   is set out above, the judge appeared unaware of the history of the appeal
   or even which decision was under appeal. Nevertheless, if  the  appellant
   succeeded so that the 2014 decision was incorrect,  it  would  inevitably
   follow that the appeal would be allowed on human rights grounds.  In  the
   premises, I find no error of  law  in  failing  to  further  address  the
   article 8 ECHR aspect.

18. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  it
   must be set aside.

19. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge vitiate both the findings of fact and the  conclusions  from  those
   facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the  issues  in
   the appeal. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal  for  a  fresh
   hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis  that  this  is  a  case
   which falls squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement  at
   paragraph 7.2.



Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside with no  findings
      preserved

      The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       26 July 2021





