
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10653/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 2nd June 2021                 |On the 21st June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                ABDUL HAMEED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slatter
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 11 March 2021, I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision should be  set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, a male citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  17
         April 1988, appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         (Judge Alis) which was promulgated on 16 January 2020.  The  First-
         tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
         of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  24  April  2018  refusing  the
         appellant's application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  long
         residence and private/family life. The hearing  before  Judge  Alis
         had been necessary because the Upper  Tribunal  had  set  aside  an
         earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Raikes).

         2.   The first ground of appeal concerns the status in  the  appeal
         before Judge Alis of the findings made by Judge Raikes. Judge  Alis
         found that the Upper Tribunal (Judge Juss) had not preserved any of
         the findings made by Judge Raikes (the Upper Tribunal  decision  is
         silent as to whether any findings were preserved or set aside) and,
         consequently, all matters remained to  determined  de  novo.  Judge
         Raikes [15] had found that the appellant  had  not  been  dishonest
         providing different details of his income from  self-employment  to
         HMRC and, the same tax year (2010/2011), to the Secretary of  State
         in support of a Tier 1 application. The judge had  found  that  the
         Secretary of  State  had  been  wrong  to  refuse  the  appellant's
         application for leave to remain under paragraph 322(5) and that the
         allegation of dishonesty had not been proved. The judge had gone on
         to dismiss the appeal under Article 8 ECHR. Judge Alis found  that,
         as  the  decision  of  Judge  Juss  had  said  nothing  about   the
         preservation of findings or about the paragraph 322(5) issue, Judge
         Raikes's finding that the appellant had not been dishonest had been
         set aside together with the rest of his decision. Judge  Alis  went
         on to find that the appellant had been dishonest.

         3.   I find that Judge Alis has  erred  in  law.  Mr  Slatter,  who
         appeared before the Upper Tribunal for the appellant, relied on the
         recent  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AB  (preserved  FtT
         findings; Wisniewski principles) Iraq [2020] UKUT 00268  (IAC).  At
         [41] the Upper Tribunal held:

             "What  the  case  law  demonstrates  is  that,  whilst  it  is
             relatively easy to articulate the principle that the  findings
             of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal should  be  preserved,
             so far  as  those  findings  have  not  been  "undermined"  or
             "infected" by any "error or errors of law", there is no  hard-
             edged answer to what that means in practice, in any particular
             case.  At one end of the  spectrum  lies  the  protection  and
             human rights appeal, where a fact-finding failure by the First-
             tier Tribunal in respect of risk of serious harm on return  to
             an individual's country of nationality may have nothing to  do
             with  the  Tribunal's   fact-finding   in   respect   of   the
             individual's Article 8 ECHR private and  family  life  in  the
             United Kingdom (or vice versa).  By contrast, a legal error in
             the task of assessing an individual's overall credibility  is,
             in general, likely to infect the conclusions as to credibility
             reached by the First-tier Tribunal."

         Before concluding that none of the findings  of  Judge  Raikes  had
         survived the setting aside of his decision, Judge  Alis  failed  to
         consider whether  any  of  those  findings  had  or  had  not  been
         'infected' by errors of law. It would have been  helpful  and  good
         practice if Judge Juss had expressly stated which, if any,  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal 's findings he had preserved but his silence on
         the issue did not mean that none of the findings remained. The line
         of authority identified by the Upper Tribunal in AB (in particular,
         the remarks of Lord Carnwath in HMRC v Pendragon plc [2015]  1  WLR
         2838)  indicates  that  only  those  findings   which   have   been
         contaminated by error of law should fall  with  the  decision.  The
         reasons for this are obvious;  it  is  potentially  unfair  for  an
         appellant to be denied the  benefit  of  favourable  findings  when
         these have not been challenged whilst the efficient  administration
         of justice generally is promoted  if  parties  can  rely  upon  the
         issues between them being narrowed. In the instant  appeal,  it  is
         wholly clear that Judge Raikes's findings on the  paragraph  322(5)
         issue were not only entirely discreet and unaffected by  the  error
         of law identified by Judge Juss but also that  those  findings  had
         not been the discussed at all, let  alone  challenged,  before  the
         Upper Tribunal. Judge Juss had, unsurprisingly,  focussed  only  on
         those issues which remained in contention. He  had  not,  as  Judge
         Alis states at [12], 'simply remitted  [the  appeal]  back  to  the
         [First-tier] Tribunal for fresh findings to be made ... de novo  on
         all issues.'

         4.   The second ground concerns the alleged failure of  Judge  Alis
         to apply the Secretary of State's  Long  Residence  Policy  Version
         8.0. The appellant had been found by the respondent to have  failed
         to accrue 10 years' continuous lawful  residence  and  consequently
         had been refused leave to remain under paragraph 276B of HC 395 (as
         amended). Mr Bates, who appeared before the Upper Tribunal for  the
         Secretary of State,  relied  on  Hoque  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1357  as
         authority (which Mr Slatter acknowledged is binding  on  the  Upper
         Tribunal) as to  the  correct  interpretation  of  paragraph  276B.
         However, Mr Slatter sought, in  effect,  to  bypass  the  issue  of
         continuous lawful residence for 10 years (which  I  note  different
         counsel before Judge  Alis  had  accepted  the  appellant  had  not
         achieved (Alis at [31]). He submitted that the Court of  Appeal  in
         Hoque had accepted  that  the  respondent's  own  policy  was  more
         generous than the rule [39]:

             "I  should  acknowledge  in  connection  with   the   previous
             paragraph  that  there  may  be  a  question  whether  it   is
             legitimate to refer to the Guidance as an aid to construction.
             At paras. 10-11 of his judgment in Mahad  (Ethiopia)  v  Entry
             Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16, [2010] 1 WLR 48, Lord  Brown
             disapproved the use  of  IDIs  (the  predecessor  to  Guidance
             documents) for this purpose; and para. 23 of the  judgment  of
             Dyson LJ in MD (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2010] EWCA Civ 213 is to the same effect. At para.
             15 (7) of its judgment in Masood Ahmed the Court  referred  to
             Lord Brown's observations in the context of this  very  issue.
             However at para. 42 of his judgment in Pokhriyal  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1568  Jackson
             LJ noted a qualification to that approach  in  cases  where  a
             rule is ambiguous and  the  Secretary  of  State  has  in  her
             published guidance adopted the interpretation more  favourable
             to applicants. The intended scope of element [C] is  certainly
             ambiguous, given  the  mismatch  between  its  terms  and  its
             placing within the paragraph, and the  interpretation  that  I
             believe to be correct is more favourable to applicants. In any
             event, however, the terms of the Guidance are not essential to
             my conclusion."

         However, as he acknowledges  in  his  skeleton  argument  [20],  Mr
         Slatter  was  unable  to  say  exactly  why  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered the policy more favourable to applicants than the  rule.
         He submitted, correctly in my view, that, because the appellant had
         wrongly been refused on Article 8 ECHR grounds in part  on  account
         of a dishonesty which he had never perpetrated, he  should,  having
         succeeded in setting aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
         Ground 1, be considered on the remaking  of  the  decision  on  the
         basis that there existed no suitability grounds which  should  deny
         him leave. He relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Patel
         (historic injustice; NIAA  Part  5A)  [2020]  UKUT  00351(IAC),  in
         particular [47]:

             "Although not immediately apparent, one way in which this kind
             of erroneous treatment of an individual can have a bearing  on
             Article 8  proportionality  is  in  an  ensuing  human  rights
             appeal, as was envisaged by Underhill LJ. In such  an  appeal,
             the individual would be able to argue that, if the  respondent
             had not formed the mistaken view of their conduct, he  or  she
             would have been given leave to remain; and that this should be
             given weight in the balancing exercise,  comparably  with  how
             the Court of Appeal, in AA (Afghanistan)  etc,  spoke  of  the
             respondent taking account of past mistakes in deciding whether
             to exercise discretion in the individual's favour."

         Section 117B of the  2002  Act  (as  amended)  provides  that  'the
         maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
         interest' in  all  cases  involving  Article  8  ECHR.  Mr  Slatter
         submitted that that public interest was diminished; it matters  not
         whether  the  injustice  he  has  suffered  is   characterised   as
         'historic' or 'historical' (see Patel). In the words of the counsel
         (Mr Aslam) who had appeared before Judge Alis, 'it would be  unfair
         to require the appellant to return  to  Pakistan  in  circumstances
         where he has been living in this country for  12  years  and  ha[s]
         clearly established a private life.' (see Alis, at [27]).

         5.    The  problem  with  Mr  Slatter's   submission   (which   was
         persuasively advanced) is that the appellant was not refused  leave
         to remain on the application which is the subject  of  this  appeal
         solely because the respondent had erroneously  considered  that  he
         had been dishonest. That had been one reason but he had also failed
         to satisfy the relevant provisions of any part of HC 395, including
         those as to long residence. The text of the 'more generous'  policy
         of the respondent was not addressed in any detail  at  the  initial
         hearing; as Mr Slatter accepts, the Court of Appeal's discussion of
         this policy in Hoque  is  unclear,  possibly  because  it  was  not
         'essential' to the conclusion which  the  Court  reached.  I  fully
         accept that the appellant has succeeded in removing any  suggestion
         that his conduct has been unsuitable but I do  not  find  that  any
         past injustice is so strong a  factor  that  it  trumps  all  other
         considerations, including the proper application of section 117B. I
         note that Judge Alis at  [52]  recorded  that  the  appellant  'now
         relies on the support of friends and indicated that his family  are
         no longer  providing  any  financial  support.  There  was  limited
         evidence, if any, of what support would be available  and  for  how
         long bearing in mind that the appellant has not worked for a number
         of years.' None of those matters, which  may  be  relevant  in  any
         proportionality assessment, were considered at the initial hearing.
         Despite the fact that Mr Slatter urged me to proceed to remake  and
         allow the appeal, I have concluded  that  there  shall  be  resumed
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal at which  the  appellant  may  adduce
         evidence bringing his  circumstances  up  to  date  (any  evidence,
         including witness statements, should be served on the  other  party
         and filed at the Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days prior  to  the
         resumed hearing). I shall also consider any additional  submissions
         which the parties may wish to make. Finally, in  the  light  of  my
         finding that the paragraph 322(5) issue is settled and shall not be
         revisited, the Secretary of State may wish to  look  again  at  the
         appellant's case before the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None  of  the
         findings of fact shall stand. The decision shall be remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane;  first  available  date;
         remote hearing;  no  interpreter;  2  hours)  following  a  resumed
         hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing on 2 June 2021, I heard the submissions  of  the
    representatives of both parties. I reserved my decision.

 3. My  Slatter,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the
    appellant had suffered a historic (as opposed to historical)  injustice
    as defined by the Upper Tribunal in  Patel  (historic  injustice;  NIAA
    Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 351(IAC) (and see above). The  headnote  reads  as
    follows:

         "A. Historic injustice

         (1) For the future, the expression "historic injustice", as used in
         the immigration context, should be reserved for cases such as those
         concerning certain British Overseas citizens or families of  Gurkha
         ex-servicemen, which involve a belated recognition  by  the  United
         Kingdom government that a particular class of persons  was  wrongly
         treated, in immigration terms, in the past; and that this injustice
         should be recognised in dealing  with  applications  made  now  (eg
         Patel and Others v Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ
         17; AP (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 89).

         (2) The fact that the injustice exists will be uncontroversial.  It
         will be generally recognised. It will apply to a  particular  class
         of persons. Unlike cases of what might be described as  "historical
         injustice", the operation of historic injustice will not depend  on
         the particular interaction between the  individual  member  of  the
         class and the Secretary of State. The effects of historic injustice
         on the immigration position of the  individual  are  likely  to  be
         profound, even determinative of success,  provided  that  there  is
         nothing materially adverse in their immigration history.

         B. Historical injustice

         (3) Cases that may be described as involving "historical injustice"
         are where the individual has suffered as a result of  the  wrongful
         operation (or non-operation) by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  her
         immigration functions. Examples are where the  Secretary  of  State
         has failed  to  give  an  individual  the  benefit  of  a  relevant
         immigration policy (eg AA (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 12); where  delay  in  reaching
         decisions is the result of a dysfunctional system (eg EB (Kosovo) v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  41);  or
         where the Secretary of State forms a  view  about  an  individual's
         activities or behaviour, which  leads  to  an  adverse  immigration
         decision; but where her view turns out to be mistaken (eg  Ahsan  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  2009).
         Each of these failings  may  have  an  effect  on  an  individual's
         Article 8 ECHR case; but the ways in which this may  happen  differ
         from the true "historic injustice" category.

         C. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and
         the weight to be given to the maintenance of effective  immigration
         controls

         (4) In all cases where, for whatever reason, the public interest in
         the maintenance of effective immigration controls falls to be given
         less than its ordinary weight, the usual course should be  for  the
         judge so to find in terms, when addressing section 117B(1)  of  the
         2002 Act. The same  result  may  be  achieved,  at  least  in  some
         situations, by qualifying the consideration in section 117B(4) that
         little weight should be given to a private  life  formed  when  the
         person concerned is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. Judicial fact-
         finders should, however, avoid  any  recourse  to  double-counting,
         whereby not only is the weight to be given to effective immigration
         controls diminished but also, for the same reason, a  private  life
         is given more weight  than  would  otherwise  be  possible  by  the
         undiluted application of section 117B(4).

         (5)  The  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  unlikely  to  be
         reduced because of disappointments or inadequacies  encountered  by
         individuals from teaching institutions or employers."

    He submitted that the appellant fell into a clearly  defined  class  of
    applicant for leave to remain, that is those applicants for  leave  who
    have been victims of injustice perpetrated by the  Secretary  of  State
    who had now recognised the need to adopt a fair procedure,  namely  the
    policies referred to Mr Slatter at [26] of his skeleton argument of  25
    February 2021.

 4. I do not agree with  that  submission.  First,  the  operation  of  the
    injustice against which the appellant complains does indeed 'depend  on
    the particular interaction between the individual member of  the  class
    and the Secretary of State', that is the incorrect refusal of his  2016
    application for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  under
    paragraph 322(5)  of  HC  395  (as  amended).  Secondly,  Mr  Slatter's
    submission presents a rather circular argument according to  which  all
    appellants who fall  into  the  category  of  victims  of  'historical'
    injustice as defined by  Patel  would  also  have  suffered  'historic'
    injustice  thereby  rendering  the   distinction   meaningless.   Patel
    indicates that those in the latter category are likely (in the  absence
    of an adverse immigration history) to succeed in an appeal  whilst  for
    those in the other category the injustice which they  have  experienced
    will be one of a number of factors in the Article 8 ECHR assessment. In
    other words, the appellant may yet succeed in his appeal under  Article
    8 ECHR but perhaps not as  readily  as  he  would  have  done  had  his
    injustice have been 'historic'.

 5. Mr Whitwell, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  submitted  that
    the appellant could not meet the long residence requirements on account
    on account of a gap in continuous lawful residence (see  error  of  law
    decision above at [4]). Therefore, to succeed the appellant would  have
    to show the existence of very significant obstacles to  his  return  to
    Pakistan  (the  appellant  speaks  Urdu  and  English)  or  exceptional
    circumstances (any private life he has acquired in the  United  Kingdom
    had been at a time when his immigration status  had  been  precarious).
    Since the appellant's private life should attract little weight in  the
    Article 8 ECHR assessment (Section 117  B(5)  of  the  2202  Act),  the
    factors favouring the appellant could not outweigh the public  interest
    notwithstanding that  the  latter  may  have  been  diminished  by  the
    operation of a historical injustice.

 6. Mr Whitwell is correct to say that the decision which is the subject of
    this appeal concerns an application  for  leave  to  remain  which  the
    appellant himself appears to acknowledge could not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules (see error of law decision above  at  [4]).  However,
    the fact remains that the previous application which the appellant made
    in June 2016 (for indefinite leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant) had been based on 5 years' continuous lawful  residence  as  a
    migrant in that category. The application was refused on the sole basis
    of deception under paragraph 322(5); I accept Mr  Slatter's  submission
    that, now that the deception allegation has been  removed,  it  follows
    that the  application  should  have  resulted  in  a  grant  of  leave.
    Moreover, that application did not attract a  right  of  appeal.  I  am
    satisfied that the 'historical' injustice of the 2016 refusal should be
    treated an exceptional circumstance in the Article 8 ECHR assessment in
    the appeal against the 2018 refusal.

 7. I accept also Mr Slatter's submission that, into whatever  category  of
    'Patel injustice' any wrongful refusal may  fall,  'the  respondent  is
    obliged to deal with [the appellant] thereafter as far as  possible  as
    if that error had not been made.' The effect of the operation  of  that
    obligation is to diminish significantly the public  interest  attaching
    to the removal of the appellant; if the  injustice  had  not  occurred,
    then the appellant would now be settled and enjoying  indefinite  leave
    to remain. Mr Whitwell did not  seek  to  challenge  the  new  evidence
    adduced by the appellant at the resumed hearing that the  appellant  is
    not and is unlikely to become reliant  on  public  funds  (although  Mr
    Slatter accepted that would  not  act  as  a  positive  factor  in  the
    appellant's favour). There are no other obvious factors  in  favour  of
    the appellant  or  of  neutral  operation  whilst  I  can  identify  no
    circumstance capable of restoring the (significantly diminished) public
    interest. Upon careful reflection, I find that there exist  exceptional
    circumstances which would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    for  the  appellant;  whilst  the  appellant  could  reintegrate   into
    Pakistani society, he would only be obliged to do so,  after  14  years
    living continuously in this country, on  account  of  the  respondent's
    false allegation of dishonesty. Accordingly, I allow his appeal. As  Mr
    Slatter submitted, it will be for the Secretary of State  to  determine
    the period of the grant of leave to remain.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed.




    Signed   Date 3 June 2021
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
