
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10875/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                          |On 21st December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             Mr Md Jillur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa (instructed by Kalam Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  by  the
    Appellant.  It relates to a Decision and Reasons of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Buckwell promulgated on 16th January 2017 following a hearing  in
    December at Taylor House.

 2. The application was for leave to remain, the background being that  the
    Appellant had been granted entry clearance  as  a  student  valid  from
    December 2009 until 2013, arriving in the country in 2010.  Then  there
    was a Decision to curtail his leave to expire in May 2012.  He was then
    given a further period of leave  but  that  also  was  curtailed  by  a
    Decision of 25th September 2012, expiring in  November.   He  was  then
    given a period of leave to remain as a spouse for six months  and  then
    he made a further application based  on  that  marriage  prior  to  his
    latest period of leave expiring.

 3. The Secretary of State  had  refused  the  application  on  suitability
    grounds because  it  was  said  that  the  Appellant  had  fraudulently
    obtained  an  English  language  test  certificate.    The   judge   in
    determining the appeal  made  no  finding  about  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had used fraud but he looked at  the  other  aspects  of  the
    Immigration Rules and found that the Appellant did not meet  those  and
    therefore believed that he did not need to make a finding  in  relation
    to the fraud.

 4. The grant of permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  refers
    to the fact that the judge did not consider when considering Article  8
    the fact that there were two British children and EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
    or Section 117B(6) could arguably have applied.  What Judge  Reeds  did
    not note was that of course EX.1 does not apply if an  applicant  fails
    to meet the suitability grounds.  Whether or not this  Appellant  meets
    the suitability grounds is entirely dependent on whether or not he  has
    used fraud and therefore that question requires a finding.

 5. It was accepted by both the representatives before me that that was  an
    error of law material to  the  outcome  and  that  it  was  appropriate
    therefore for the Decision and Reasons of  Judge  Buckwell  to  be  set
    aside in its  entirety  and  the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent  that  the  matter
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 21st December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
