
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10486/2015
     HU/10497/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|Birmingham                           |                                       |
|On 21st July 2017                    |On 3rd August 2017                     |
|                                     |                                       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           Nanurai Jeffrey Zinarei
                        Macdonald Muchineripi Zinarei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by Dipak Acharya &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Judge P J M  Hollingworth
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FFT) promulgated on 10th November 2016.

 2. The Appellants are brothers, and are  citizens  of  Zimbabwe  born  4th
    December 1988 and 3rd August 1990 respectively.   The  first  Appellant
    was aged 28 and the second Appellant aged 26 at the date of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Hearing.

 3. The father of the Appellants is Clive  Zinarei  who  has  been  granted
    refugee  status  in  the  UK.   The  Appellants  together  with   their
    stepmother  and  half-sister  applied  for  entry  clearance  on   19th
    September 2011 in order to join their father in  the  UK.   The  second
    Appellant together with the  stepmother  and  half-sister  was  granted
    entry clearance on 31st October 2011.  The second Appellant arrived  in
    the UK on 21st December 2011.  His visa was valid  until  28th  January
    2015.

 4. The first Appellant appealed against refusal of entry clearance and his
    appeal was heard on 12th April 2012  by  Judge  Bell  of  the  FTT  and
    allowed.  It was found that he satisfied the requirements of  paragraph
    319V of the Immigration rules which sets out the requirements to be met
    in order to be granted leave to enter the  UK  as  the  relative  of  a
    refugee.

 5. The decision of  Judge  Bell  was  not  appealed.   However  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer did not grant entry clearance  following  the  appeal
    but issued a further refusal dated 27th June 2012, not  accepting  that
    the requirements of paragraph 319V were satisfied.

 6. However, for reasons that have not been explained, the Entry  Clearance
    Officer then issued the first Appellant with an entry clearance visa on
    22nd April 2014 enabling him to  join  his  refugee  father  and  other
    family members in the UK.  The first Appellant arrived in the UK on 6th
    August 2014.  His visa was valid until 28th January 2015 in  line  with
    the other family members.

 7. On 10th January 2015 the Appellants, together  with  their  half-sister
    and stepmother applied for indefinite leave to remain.  The  stepmother
    and half-sister were granted indefinite leave to  remain,  as  was  the
    Appellant's father.  The applications of the Appellants  were  refused.
    The reasons for refusal are set out below;

         "You have applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom as the dependant of Clive Zinarei, however as you have  not
         been granted asylum or humanitarian protection either in  your  own
         right or in line with Clive Zinarei nor have  you  been  granted  a
         family reunion visa.  It is  noted  that  your  passport  has  been
         endorsed with 'ODR-LLE to  join/acc  parent(s)  C  Zinarei.'   Your
         aspect of the application has been rejected as you (sic) there  are
         no provisions under the Settlement Protection route to  be  granted
         leave.

         If you wish to remain in the United Kingdom  you  should  make  the
         appropriate application and  pay  the  correct  fee.   For  further
         advice on which application is relevant to you,  you  should  visit
         the Home Office website at www.homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk.

         I should remind you that as the application was made  in  time  you
         have 28 days to make a valid application, if you fail to regularise
         your stay you may be liable for removal action."

 8. The Appellants thereafter  made  applications  on  1st  June  2015  for
    further leave to remain on human rights  grounds,  using  form  FLR(O).
    They relied upon their family and private lives.

 9. These applications were refused on 26th October 2015.   The  Respondent
    found that the Appellants could not rely upon Appendix FM  in  relation
    to family life.  It was not accepted that their applications should  be
    granted pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1) because they  had  not  resided
    continuously in the UK for at least twenty years, and there would be no
    very significant obstacles to their integration into Zimbabwe.

10. The Respondent considered Article 8 outside the Immigration rules,  not
    finding that any exceptional circumstances existed which would  warrant
    granting leave to remain pursuant to Article 8 outside the  rules.   It
    was acknowledged that the Appellants had established family  life  with
    their parents and sibling, but it was not accepted that this was strong
    enough to engage Article 8.

11. The appeals were heard together by the FTT on 31st October  2016.   The
    FTT found that the Appellants had established a family life that  would
    engage Article 8, notwithstanding that they were adults.  The FTT  went
    on to consider proportionality, and concluded that the public  interest
    in the removal of the Appellants from the UK, outweighed their  Article
    8 rights.  The appeals were therefore dismissed.

12. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Hodgkinson  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds appear to adopt a 'scattergun' approach  in  terms
             of criticising the judge's consideration  of  Article  8,  the
             appeal being limited to consideration of Article 8 outside the
             rules.  However, a reading of the judge's findings presents  a
             confusing picture.  The  judge  indicates  that  he  considers
             there to be 'very compelling circumstances' applicable to  the
             Appellants (paras 33-34 of the decision).  At paragraph 47, he
             concludes that the second Appellant is  financially  dependent
             upon his father  in  the  UK  and  that  both  Appellants  are
             emotionally dependent.  He concludes that there is  an  extant
             family life between the Appellants and their immediate  family
             in the UK.  His findings present as arguably  inconsistent  in
             terms of whether the Appellants were admitted to the UK in the
             first place for the purposes of family reunion, or not,  which
             is  a  potentially  highly  material  factor   in   terms   of
             proportionality (see para 42, 44, 47-48 and 51).  There  is  a
             lack of clarity in the judge's  findings  as  to  whether  the
             second Appellant is capable of employment.  The net result  is
             that the judge's reasoning  is  arguably  unclear  and/or  the
             overall decision  arguably  perverse.   The  decision  reveals
             arguable errors of  law  and  permission  is  granted  on  all
             grounds."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  directed  itself
    appropriately and if an holistic approach was taken to the findings  of
    the FTT, they were not contradictory or  perverse.   It  was  contended
    that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with the findings  made  by
    the FTT but did not disclose a material error of law.

14. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. I heard oral submissions from both representatives.  Mr Mills helpfully
    supplied a document clarifying  the  list  of  endorsements  for  entry
    clearance.  This indicates that the endorsement  upon  the  Appellants'
    passports did relate to paragraph 319V of the Immigration rules.

16. Both representatives made oral submissions  at  some  length.   I  will
    summarise those submissions in brief terms.

17. Mr Vokes relied upon his skeleton argument.  I was asked to  find  that
    the FTT decision was unclear and confused.  The FTT erred by failing to
    make any reference to the decision of Judge  Bell,  which  should  have
    been a starting point under the Devaseelan principles.

18. It was contended that  the  FTT  had  adopted  the  wrong  approach  at
    paragraphs 33-34 to consideration of Article 8 as it was not  necessary
    to find  very  compelling  circumstances  before  deciding  whether  to
    consider Article 8 outside the rules.

19. I was asked to find that the FTT had  made  contradictory  findings  at
    paragraphs 42, 44, 47 and 50.  I was asked to find that because the FTT
    decision was unclear and confused, it should be set aside and remade.

20. Mr Mills accepted that there  appeared  to  have  been  some  confusion
    before the FTT.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellants  together  with
    their stepmother and half-sister had applied for family  reunion.   The
    passports of the stepmother and half-sister (contained at pages 120 and
    129 of the Appellants' bundle prepared for the Upper Tribunal  hearing)
    were endorsed with the words "visa  family  reunion-Sponsor  C  Zinarei
    25/01/1951.".  That was  different  to  the  endorsement  made  on  the
    Appellants' passports, which endorsement was set  out  in  the  refusal
    decision dated 30th April 2015, referred to above.

21. Mr Mills submitted that the FTT had  been  correct  to  find  that  the
    Appellants  did  not  have  a  legitimate  expectation  of  settlement.
    Although the incorrect test may have been applied at paragraphs  33-34,
    Mr Mills submitted that this was not material, because the FTT had gone
    on to consider Article 8.

22. Overall Mr Mills submitted that  the  FTT  decision  was  rational  and
    adequately reasoned and should therefore stand.

23. In response Mr  Vokes  noted  that  Mr  Mills  had  not  addressed  the
    Devaseelan point.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I  reserved  my  decision  as  to
    error of law.  Both representatives indicated that if an error  of  law
    was found, the decision could be remade by the Upper Tribunal without a
    further hearing, based upon the evidence that had been before the  FTT.
    My attention was drawn to paragraph 47 of the FTT decision in which the
    FTT specifically accepted the evidence  that  had  been  given  by  the
    Appellants and their father.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Error of Law

25. I find the FTT materially erred in law.  The decision is unclear.

26. I find that there should have been a reference to the  previous  appeal
    by the first Appellant in April 2012 which resulted in his appeal being
    allowed.  The principles in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702,  indicate
    that the conclusions made in  this  earlier  appeal  should  have  been
    regarded as a starting point.  The conclusions reached in  the  earlier
    appeal were that the first  Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319V of the Immigration rules.

27. I find that the FTT made some conflicting and  contradictory  findings.
    The findings made by the FTT commence at paragraph 33.  The  FTT  found
    that very compelling circumstances existed which enabled Article  8  to
    be considered outside the Immigration rules.  Supreme  Court  case  law
    now makes it clear that this is not  the  appropriate  test.   Although
    this is an error, I do not find it to be material, as the FTT  went  on
    to consider Article 8 outside the rules.

28. However at paragraph 38 the FTT found that the Appellants were able  to
    join their father "as the Immigration rules were fulfilled."  There  is
    no specific reference to paragraph 319V,  but  that  is  the  paragraph
    setting out the requirements to be satisfied in  order  to  be  granted
    entry clearance as the relative of  a  refugee,  and  therefore  it  is
    presumed that the FTT found this paragraph to be satisfied although  it
    is not absolutely clear.

29. If the FTT accepted that paragraph 319V was satisfied, it is not  clear
    why at paragraph 42 the FTT finds "on the basis of the  nature  of  the
    leave granted to the Appellants that they could not in  fact  have  had
    the expectation of being able to remain in the United Kingdom."

30. At paragraph 44 the FTT makes a finding  which  appears  to  contradict
    paragraph 42 stating that when the Appellants came to the UK "I  accept
    that their expectation was that they were coming to settle  with  their
    father and other family members on the footing of what they regarded as
    family reunion."  The FTT does in fact go on to say that this  was  not
    in fact the reality of the position.  It would appear that this was  an
    error and the Appellants had been granted  entry  clearance  to  rejoin
    their family members.

31. The basis upon which the Appellants were granted entry clearance is  an
    important factor, and the FTT is not clear in setting out  this  basis.
    This is relevant when proportionality is considered under Article 8.

32. The FTT found at paragraphs 40 and 47 that the Appellants, even  though
    they were adults, had established family life with their family members
    which engaged Article 8.

33. As the FTT appears to have accepted that the Appellants  satisfied  the
    Immigration rules in order to be granted entry clearance, and they  had
    established family life which  engaged  Article  8  with  their  family
    members, the FTT has not adequately explained why the Appellants  could
    not have an expectation of being able to remain in the UK.

34. I do not find that clear findings have been made, and adequate  reasons
    for the findings have not been supplied.

35. The above amounts to a material error of law and I therefore set  aside
    the decision of the FTT.

Remaking the Decision

36.  I  have  taken  into  account  by  way  of  documentary  evidence  the
    Respondent's bundles that were before  the  FTT  in  relation  to  both
    Appellants.  The Respondent's bundle in relation to the first Appellant
    has Annexes A-D, the bundle in relation to  the  second  Appellant  has
    Annexes A-C.  I have also taken into account  the  bundle  prepared  on
    behalf of the Appellants for the Upper Tribunal hearing comprising  173
    pages.

37. In considering Article 8 I have  adopted  the  balance  sheet  approach
    recommended by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC
    60, and in so doing have regard to the guidance given by Lord  Reed  at
    paragraphs 39 to 53.

38. The burden of proof lies on the Appellants to establish their  personal
    circumstances in this country, and to establish  why  the  decision  to
    refuse their human rights claim will  interfere  disproportionately  in
    their private and family life rights in this country.  It  is  for  the
    Respondent to establish the public interest  factors  weighing  against
    the Appellants.  The standard of proof is a  balance  of  probabilities
    throughout.

39. I find that the Appellants have established private lives  since  their
    arrival in the UK.  I find that the findings made by  the  FTT  to  the
    effect that they have established family life which engages  Article  8
    have not been challenged and therefore stand.

40. I find that the Appellants were granted entry clearance because it  was
    accepted that the requirements of paragraph  319V  of  the  Immigration
    rules were satisfied.  I find that the Appellants have lived with their
    family members since their  arrival  in  this  country.   Their  family
    members have been granted indefinite leave to remain.

41. In my  view  the  different  endorsements  upon  their  passports  when
    compared to the passports of their stepmother and half-sister have  not
    been satisfactorily explained, and the refusal  of  their  applications
    for indefinite leave to remain  on  30th  April  2015,  have  not  been
    satisfactorily explained, considering that the  applications  of  their
    other family members were granted.

42. As Article 8 is engaged I must have  regard  to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This confirms  that  the
    maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.

43. Both Appellants can speak English  but  this  must  be  regarded  as  a
    neutral factor in the balancing  exercise.   The  first  Appellant  has
    employment and is financially independent but again this is  a  neutral
    factor.  The second Appellant does not have employment because  he  has
    not been given permission to work and therefore he is  not  financially
    independent.

44. I  find  that  little  weight  must  be  given  to  the  private  lives
    established by the Appellants, because their private  lives  have  been
    established initially when the Appellants had a precarious  immigration
    status, in that they only had limited leave to remain,  and  thereafter
    when they have been in the UK unlawfully.

45. With reference to their unlawful status, I do accept  that  when  their
    application was refused on 30th April 2015, they were notified of  this
    on 5th May 2015 and submitted a further application within 28  days  of
    being notified, on 1st June 2015.

46. I do not find that the Appellants have what could  be  described  as  a
    poor immigration history.  They were granted entry clearance as it  was
    accepted that they satisfied paragraph 319V, and thereafter  they  have
    lived with their family members.  There is no evidence to indicate that
    they have obtained or attempted to obtain public funds  to  which  they
    were not entitled, and there is no evidence  of  criminality,  although
    these considerations must again be regarded as neutral factors  in  the
    balancing exercise.

47. As the Appellants were granted entry clearance to enable them to rejoin
    family members even though they were adults, and they have rejoined and
    lived with those family members, and the FTT  finding  that  they  have
    family life which engages Article 8 has not been challenged, I  do  not
    find that evidence of public interest factors which would mean that  it
    would be proportionate for  the  Appellants  to  be  removed  has  been
    provided.

48. My overall conclusion is that I do not find that  the  public  interest
    requires the removal of the Appellants, and I therefore  conclude  that
    their removal would be disproportionate, and their appeals are  allowed
    under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.






Signed                              Date 28th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals have been allowed but I do not make  fee  awards.   The  appeals
have been allowed because of evidence submitted to  the  Tribunal  that  was
not before the original decision maker.




Signed                              Date 28th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

