

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/10244/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th September 2017                       |On 5th December 2017          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                          MR joseph mwabueze nwaka
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Dr. C Ikegwuruka; Almond Legals
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by FtT  Judge  Alty
       promulgated on 28th November 2016.


    2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 7th February 2005 and was granted  leave  to  enter  as  a
       student until 30th April 2006.  He was subsequently granted leave  to
       remain in the UK until 20th February 2010.  In May 2009,  he  applied
       for an EEA Residence card as the extended family  member  of  an  EEA
       national.  That application was  refused  on  26th  March  2010,  but
       following a successful appeal, the appellant was issued with  an  EEA
       residence card on 15th March 2011, valid until 15th March 2016.


    3. On 5th May 2015, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
       in the UK on the basis of 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence.  A
       decision was made by the respondent on 29th October  2015  to  refuse
       the application, and it was that decision that was the subject of the
       appeal before the FtT Judge.


    4. I should note at this stage that the appellant  was  married  to  his
       wife, Hope Nwaka, in Nigeria on 2006.  She later joined the appellant
       as a dependant in 2007 and on 12th April  2008,  their  son  MJN  was
       born.  Like the appellant, his wife and their son  MJN,  were  issued
       with an EEA Residence card as extended family members on  15th  March
       2011, valid until 15th March 2016.  The appellant and his  wife  have
       another son, JN born on  20th  April  2012.  They  are  all  Nigerian
       nationals.


    5. The appellant's immigration history is set out at  paragraph  [2]  of
       the decision of the FtT Judge.  At paragraphs  [4]  to  [10]  of  her
       decision, the FtT Judge sets out the  evidence  before  her  and  the
       issues in the appeal.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be
       found at paragraphs [20] to [53] of her decision.


    6. At paragraph [22] the Judge notes the  concession  by  the  appellant
       that he had not provided any evidence that he was a member of the EEA
       sponsor's household or that the sponsor was exercising Treaty  rights
       in the UK, and the explanation for the absence of that evidence.  The
       Judge found, at [23], the explanation  to  be   unconvincing  and  at
       paragraph [24], concluded that the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated
       that he was part of the same household as the sponsor from  2011,  or
       that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights during that time.  That
       finding and conclusion of the FtT Judge, is not challenged.


    7. The Judge then turned her attention to the appellant's  human  rights
       claim under the immigration rules and Article 8.  The Judge found, at
       [25], that the requirements for leave to remain in the UK as set  out
       in Appendix FM of the rules are  not  met  by  the  appellant.    The
       appellant's wife is not a British citizen, was not settled in the UK,
       or in the UK with refugee status or humanitarian protection.


    8. At paragraph [27] of her decision,  the  FtT  Judge  noted  that  the
       appellant has two sons, both of whom were born in the UK  and  living
       in the UK.  The Judge noted that neither child is a  British  citizen
       or settled in the UK.  She accepted that MJN was born on  12th  April
       2008 and had been living in the UK for seven years as at the date  of
       the appellant's application.  At paragraph [28] of her decision,  the
       Judge  found  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
       relationship with MJN and that the  issue  is  therefore  whether  it
       would be reasonable to expect MJN to leave the UK.


    9. In reaching her decision, the Judge notes at paragraph  [29]  of  her
       decision that the best  interests  of  the  children  are  a  primary
       consideration.  At paragraphs  [29]  and  [30],  she  refers  to  the
       relevant authorities including  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
       affecting children) [2013] UKUT 00197,  ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011]
       UKSC 4, E-A )Article 8 (best interests of the child)  Nigeria  [2011]
       UKUT  00315  and  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.   Having
       considered the evidence before her, and having made  findings  as  to
       the best interests of  the  children  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
       paragraphs [31] to [37] of her decision, the Judge states, at [37]:


             Taking an overall view, I have ultimately concluded  that  the
             best interests of the children lie with their  parents  within
             the family unit even upon removal. The best interests  of  the
             child are a primary not a paramount consideration. Even had  I
             found that it would be in the  children's  best  interests  to
             remain in the UK, I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  still  be
             reasonable to expect MJN to leave when taking an overall view.
             In reaching that conclusion, no other consideration would have
             more inherent significance than the child's best interests.


   10. Having found that the 'family life' requirements  as  a  partner  and
       parent cannot be met by the appellant, the Judge went on to  consider
       the  appellant's  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
       immigration rules. The Judge found, at paragraph [40], that there are
       no significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria.


   11. At paragraphs [41] to [43] the Judge considered the appellant's claim
       on Article 3 grounds, and in particular,  the  health  of  MJN.   The
       Judge found that the high threshold set out by the Grand Chamber in N
       -v- UK 26565/05,  is not met.


   12. At paragraphs [46] to 53] of her decision,  adopting  the  five-stage
       approach set out in Razgar, the Judge found that  the  appellant  and
       his family have established a family and private life in the UK.  She
       was satisfied that the respondent's decision may have consequences of
       such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation  of  Article  8,
       that any such interference is in accordance with the law  and  has  a
       legitimate aim.  The real issue  in  this  appeal  was  whether  such
       interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought  to
       be achieved.


   13. At paragraphs [50] and [51] of her decision, the Judge refers to  the
       matters  that  she  is  required  to  consider   as   part   of   the
       proportionality assessment under s117B of the 2002 Act.   Again,  the
       Judge accepted that MJN is a qualifying child, but concluded it would
       be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK for the reasons  she  had
       already given.  At paragraph [52], the Judge again notes that she has
       had regard to the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
       consideration. At paragraph [53], the Judge states:


             "Having considered all the evidence, when balancing the public
             interest against the personal circumstances of the Appellants,
             by reference to Part 5A of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 (the Act) and taking  into  account  the  best
             interests  of  the  children,  I  find  that   it   would   be
             proportionate to remove the Appellant to Nigeria,   In  making
             this finding, I am conscious that the family  wish  to  remain
             and that there will be some difficulties to  face  on  return.
             However, this does not mean it  would  not  be  proportionate.
             In reaching this conclusion, I  take  into  account  that  the
             family are Nigerian nationals.   The Appellant  and  his  wife
             have spent the majority of their lives in Nigeria and would be
             able to support their sons in adapting to life there.    There
             are no language or cultural barriers to return.    They  could
             practice their faith. They would be returning to  an  extended
             family network. No evidence is given of extended family in the
             UK to which any particular attachment has been formed.   MJN's
             medical issues are not of  a  severity  to  persuade  me  that
             removal would not be proportionate."


   14. In the grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant  it  is  contended
       that in a separate appeal before the Tribunal,  the  appeals  of  the
       appellant's wife and children have now been heard, and  allowed.  The
       appellant advances five grounds of appeal. First, the Judge erred  in
       her assessment of the best interests of  the  children.  More  weight
       should have been given to the private life established by the  eldest
       child, and the Judge did not appropriately  consider  that  the  best
       interest of the affected children must rank  higher  than  any  other
       consideration. Second, the Judge did not properly apply the ratio  of
       ZH Tanzania with regards to ascertaining the views  of  the  children
       and when considering the appellant's immigration history.  Third,  if
       she could not decide on the  issue  of  the  best  interests  of  the
       children, (because the  respondent  had  not  carried  out  a  proper
       assessment of the best interests of the children) it was open to  the
       Judge to remit the matter to the respondent for a lawful decision  as
       one of the options available to her. Fourth, it was  unfair  for  the
       Judge to find that it is reasonable for the appellant and his  family
       to return to Nigeria when his  partner  and  their  children  had  an
       appeal pending before the FtT that was to be  listed.   Finally,  the
       Judge erred in finding that the high threshold for an Article 3 claim
       has not been met.


   15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 4th
       July 2017. In granting permission, the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  noted:
       "On 12th April 2017, the appeals of the Appellant's wife and children
       were allowed. Judge Alty found that the Appellant had a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his eldest child, MJ.  MJ's  appeal  was
       subsequently successful under the  Immigration  Rules.  Although  the
       judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  failing  to  take  into   account
       information which was not before him, it is arguable that he erred in
       law in his assessment of whether it would be reasonable to expect  MJ
       to leave the UK."  The matter comes before me to consider whether  or
       not the decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of  a  material
       error of law, and if the  decision  is  set  aside,  to  re-make  the
       decision.


   16. Before me, Dr Ikegwuruka submits that the Judge of  the  FtT  accepts
       that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
       MKN.  He submits that  in  reaching  her  decision  as  to  the  best
       interests of the children, the Judge did not have  proper  regard  to
       the evidence before her as to the health of the eldest child and that
       the error  lies  in  the  Judge's  failure  to  carry  out  a  proper
       assessment of the best interests of the eldest child  in  particular.
       Dr Ikegwuruka refers to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
       (Pakistan) -v- Upper Tribunal & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  in  which
       the Court considered how the test of reasonableness should be applied
       when determining whether or not it is reasonable to  remove  a  child
       from the UK once he or she has been resident here  for  seven  years.
       He also refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in PD and Others
       (Article 8 - Conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT  108  in
       which the President of the Upper Tribunal held  that  in  considering
       the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple  family  members,
       decision-makers should first apply  the  Immigration  Rules  to  each
       individual applicant and, if appropriate,  then  consider  Article  8
       outside the Rules.


   17. Dr Ikegwuruku submits that the Judge of the FtT erred in  determining
       the Article 3 claim relying upon the health of MJN through  the  lens
       of the decision in N -v- UK.  He submits that since the  decision  of
       the FtT, the Grand Chamber of the CJEU has handed down  its  decision
       in  Paposhvili -v-  Belgium  (Application  41738/10).  He  refers  to
       paragraphs [181] to [190] of the decision of  the  Grand  Chamber  in
       particular, and submits that the Judge applied too high a threshold.


   18. In reply, Ms Peterson adopts the matters  set  out  in  the  Rule  24
       response dated 12th July 2017 that has been filed by the  respondent.
       She submits that the Judge  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence
       before her, and the findings and conclusions  reached  by  the  Judge
       were open to her. She submits that the Judge correctly considered the
       application under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration
       rules and directed herself to the relevant  statutory  framework.  Ms
       Peterson submits that the Judge adequately addressed the  real  issue
       in the appeal. That is, whether it is reasonable to expect the eldest
       child to return to Nigeria with the appellant, on the evidence before
       her.   She  submits  that  the  Judge  could  not  have  guessed  the
       subsequent outcome of  a  separate  appeal  before  the  FtT  by  the
       appellant's wife and the children. The fact that a different Tribunal
       had reached a different decision as to  the  best  interests  of  the
       children, and whether it is reasonable to expect  MJN  to  return  to
       Nigeria, is not to say that the FtT Judge here, made an error of  law
       in her decision.  As to the Article 3 claim, Ms Peterson submits that
       however one reads the decision of the Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili,
       the threshold still  remains  a  high  one.   She  submits  that  the
       evidence before the FtT Judge does not establish that the test,  even
       as set out in Paposhvili, is met. Any error in deciding the Article 3
       claim by  reference  to  the  decision  N  -v-  UK  is  she  submits,
       immaterial.


DISCUSSION


   19. I remind myself that in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
       the Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.


   20. It is common ground that  in  the  assessment  of  the  appeal  under
       Article 8, the best interests of  the  children  must  be  a  primary
       consideration. That meant that they  must  be  considered  first.  At
       paragraph [28] of her decision, the Judge  correctly  identified  the
       issue in the appeal.  That is, whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
       expect MJN to leave the UK.  At paragraph [29] of her  decision,  the
       Judge noted that the best interests of the  children  are  a  primary
       consideration in the analysis. In ZH (Tanzania),  the  Supreme  Court
       held that the best interests of a child are "a primary consideration"
       but that is not the same as "the  primary  consideration"  and  still
       less "the paramount consideration.  In MA (Pakistan),  the  Court  of
       Appeal held that the fact that a child had been in the UK  for  seven
       years should be  given  significant  weight  in  the  proportionality
       assessment.


   21. The Tribunal must "have regard" to  the  considerations  set  out  in
       section 117B of the Nationality,  immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       (section 117A).  The Judge properly identified that in  this  appeal,
       by operation of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the  public  interest  does
       not require a person's removal where, (a) the person  has  a  genuine
       and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b)
       it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.


   22. I reject the claim that the Judge erred in her assessment of the best
       interests of  the  children.  At  paragraphs  [31]  to  [36]  of  her
       decision, having noted the respective ages of the children,  the  FtT
       Judge found that it is in the children's best interests to live with,
       and be brought up, by their parents in the family  unit.   The  Judge
       found that the children and their parents are all Nigerian  nationals
       and the  children  are  entitled  to  citizenship  of  Nigeria.   The
       children will have the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of
       the society to which they belong.  They  will  be  able  to  continue
       their education in Nigeria, and to continue attending Church  and  to
       pursue their faith.  The Judge noted  that  the  appellant's  mother,
       sister and cousins remain in Nigeria, as  does  his  wife's  brother.
       The children would therefore  be  returning  to  an  extended  family
       network.  The Judge considered the challenging behaviour  and  mental
       health of MJN, and the Care Plan that notes that he is managing  well
       with few difficulties, and that his social care needs are met by  his
       family.


   23. In my judgement, the claim that more weight should have been given to
       the private life established by the eldest child, and that the  Judge
       did not appropriately consider that the best interest of the affected
       children must rank higher than any other  consideration,  is  nothing
       more than a disagreement with the findings  and  conclusions  of  the
       Judge. The Judge of the FtT properly noted that the best interests of
       the children are a primary consideration in the analysis. There is no
       reason to believe that she did not consider the best interests of the
       children as a primary consideration in the analysis that followed.


   24.  Having  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  in  my
       judgement, it was open to the Judge, on the evidence, to find that it
       would not be unreasonable to expect the eldest child  in  particular,
       to return to Nigeria. The Judge took into account the best  interests
       of the children, and found that it was in  their  best  interests  to
       continue to live with those who cared for them, namely their parents.
       When considering the childrens'  circumstances,  she  considered  the
       length of time that they had spent in the UK,  their  education,  and
       the  health  of  MJN.   The  judge  applied   the   public   interest
       considerations under section 117 and in particular  S117B(6)  on  the
       basis that the eldest child had been in the UK for a period in excess
       of 7 years and she addressed the crucial question of whether it would
       be unreasonable to expect the eldest child in particular to return to
       Nigeria.


   25. In light of her findings,  the  Judge  applied  the  decision  in  MA
       (Pakistan) and had regard to the wider public interest in reaching  a
       decision on the question of reasonableness of return.  MA  (Pakistan)
       concludes that the  reasonableness  test  in  this  context  is  wide
       ranging, effectively bringing back into play all potentially relevant
       public interest considerations, including the matters  identified  in
       section 117B.


   26. I reject the claim that the Judge erred with regards to  ascertaining
       the views of the children and whether she should remit the matter  to
       the respondent for a  lawful  decision.  At  paragraph  [38]  of  her
       decision, the Judge noted that in ZH (Tanzania),  the  Supreme  Court
       identifies the need to endeavour to seek the child's views  in  cases
       where they are capable of forming their own views.  The children here
       were aged 4 and 8 as the Judge recorded  at  paragraph  [31]  of  her
       decision.  The Judge noted, at [38], that the children are very young
       and  the  eldest  child  is  mentally  challenged  with   behavioural
       problems.  In my judgement, it was open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude
       that:


          "38.     ....I am not convinced that the children in this case are
             capable of forming and expressing their  views  reliably.  Had
             their views been sought and expressed to be that  they  wished
             to remain, this would have been a factor for me to  take  into
             account, however it would  not  have  altered  my  findings.in
             respect of their best interests.


   27. I also reject the claim that it was unfair for the Judge to find that
       it is reasonable for the  appellant  and  his  family  to  return  to
       Nigeria when his partner and their children  had  an  appeal  pending
       before the FtT, that was to be listed.  There was no application  for
       an adjournment made by the appellant so that the two appeals could be
       heard together.  The fact that another Judge of  the  FtT  has  since
       held in a separate appeal, that the  appellant's  wife  and  children
       have established that it is unreasonable to expect the  eldest  child
       to return to Nigeria, is not to say that  the  decision  of  the  FtT
       Judge here, is infected by a material error of law.   The  FtT  Judge
       here, properly made her decision on the evidence before her.   It  is
       to be noted that the Judge of the FtT here heard only the evidence of
       the appellant.  There was no evidence given by the appellant's  wife.




   28. Finally, I reject the claim that the Judge erred in her assessment of
       the Article 3 claim based upon the  health  of  MJN.   Dr  Ikegwuruka
       relies upon the decision of the  Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili.   He
       submits that the Grand Chamber has now moderated the "close to death"
       exception applied previously in N -v- UK, and that the Tribunal  must
       now consider  other  factors  such  as  the  absence  of  appropriate
       treatment in the receiving country, lack access  to  such  treatment,
       and the risk of being exposed to a serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
       decline in his or her health resulting in intense suffering, or to  a
       significant reduction in life expectancy.


   29. The domestic law at present is that set out by N v UK  and  the  high
       threshold remains. The judgment of the Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili
       may be persuasive but it has not been incorporated into domestic law.
       I do not therefore find the criticism made by the appellant  in  this
       respect to be made out. The judge did not accept,  having  considered
       the evidence before her, that the high threshold for establishing  an
       Article 3 claim has been met in this case.


   30. The decision of the FtT Judge  must  be  read  as  a  whole.  I  have
       carefully read the paragraphs that the appellant seeks  to  criticise
       and the decision as a whole. I am satisfied that it was open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence before her, to have reached the conclusion that
       it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK.   It
       was open to the Judge to reach the conclusion  that  the  appellant's
       removal was proportionate having regard to all the circumstances. The
       Judge took into account the best interests of the children which  are
       a  primary  consideration  and  the  public  interest  in   effective
       immigration control. In my judgement, it was open  to  the  Judge  to
       dismiss the appeal on the material  that  was  before  her,  for  the
       reasons that she has given.


   31. Here, it cannot be said that the Judge's analysis of the evidence  is
       irrational  or  perverse.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  irrelevant
       factors, and the weight that she  attached  to  the  evidence  either
       individually or cumulatively, was a matter for her.  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge's decision is a sufficiently  reasoned  decision  that
       was open to her on the evidence.


Notice of Decision


   32. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date       20th November 2017



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


The appeal is dismissed and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date     20th November 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




