
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10748/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4 December 2018                   |On 14 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                   [D Z E]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi, Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  O'Hagan  dated  4  August  2017  dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision of October 2016 refusing  entry  clearance  and  refusing  the
    appellant's human rights claim.

2     The appellant is a national of Eritrea, and is a  minor,  aged  15  at
    the date of hearing on 27 July 2017. The appellant's sister, [ME], is a
    recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.  On  or  around  30  December
    2015, the appellant made an application, from Ethiopia, to join her  in
    the UK. The application was stated to  have  been  for  family  reunion
    under part 11 of the  immigration  rules  relating  to  asylum.  It  is
    relevant to note that the sponsor herself has a minor child,  [S],  who
    also made an application for entry clearance at that time.

3     An  initial  decision  was  made  on  7  April  2016,  refusing  entry
    clearance to the appellant on the grounds that the respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was related to  the  sponsor  as  claimed.
    [S]'s application was also refused. The  respondent  reconsidered  both
    applications  in  October  2016  (seemingly  as  a  result   of   fresh
    applications), resulting in a grant of entry clearance to [S], but  the
    appellant's application was  refused  again  for  reasons  set  out  in
    summary in the Judge's decision at [8]:

         (i)      as the appellant was the sponsor's brother rather than her
             child, he was not able to meet the requirements  of  paragraph
             353D(i) of the immigration rules;

         (ii)     the correct provision under which the  application  should
             have been made was paragraph 319X, but the  relevant  fee  had
             not been paid  (although  I  note  that  the  application  was
             declared invalid);

         (iii)     the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  within
             paragraph 319X that the  sponsor  was  able  to  maintain  and
             accommodate the appellant without recourse  to  public  funds,
             and that there were serious and  compelling  family  or  other
             considerations making the appellant's exclusion undesirable;

         (iv)     in relation  to  consideration  under  Article  8  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights, the  respondent  did  not
             accept that the  sponsor  had  been  the  appellant's  primary
             carer, or that the appellant's father could not care for him.

4     The appellant's appeal came before the judge, who heard oral  evidence
    from the sponsor. The  appeal  was  dismissed,  the  judge  making  the
    following findings, in summary:

         (i)      the fact that the sponsor had been recognised as a refugee
             did not by itself determine her credibility as a witness [24];



         (ii)     the sponsor was someone who struggled with details such as
             dates of birth and ages, and no  adverse  inference  would  be
             drawn from the sponsor's inability  to  give  the  appellant's
             date of birth [25];

         (iii)    it would be unsafe to draw any conclusions about the  fact
             that the sponsor had stated that she had lost contact  with  a
             particular sister, and yet that sister's name had recurred  as
             a person signing for consent for DNA samples to be taken [26];



         (iv)     no adverse inference would be drawn from the fact that the
             sponsor was unable to  provide  supporting  evidence  for  her
             mother's death or her subsequent care for the appellant [27];

         (v)      the Judge held at [28]:

                  "There are elements of the sponsor's evidence to  me  that
                  does (sic) undermine her account. When Mr Birkumshaw asked
                  the sponsor about the  appellant's  age  when  her  mother
                  died, and the care that she provided, it was clear  to  me
                  from the evidence that she gave that she had confused  her
                  son with the appellant. Her evidence related to a child of
                  one and a half when the appellant would  have  been  about
                  nine at the time. The care she described  was  appropriate
                  to a child one and a half, but not to a child of nine. The
                  fact that, asked about the appellant,  she  described  her
                  son, a far younger child, is difficult to  reconcile  with
                  her having cared for the appellant. It may,  in  fairness,
                  have  been  a  simple  misunderstanding.  It  is  however,
                  difficult to  understand  in  the  context  of  her  son's
                  application having succeeded,  and  the  sole  live  issue
                  being her brother's case";

         (iv)     no satisfactory explanation had been  given  for  why  the
             appellant  had  left  Eritrea  for  Ethiopia  where  his  care
             arrangements appeared to be more precarious [29];

         (vii)    the sponsor's evidence about the care arrangements for the
             appellant in Ethiopia was incoherent [30];

         (viii)   the judge accepted that the sponsor  was  the  appellant's
             brother, but did not accept that the sponsor had made out  the
             other elements of her case [31];

         (ix)     the judge did not accept the sponsor's  account  that  she
             was her brother's de facto carer before she left Eritrea [32].

5     The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  which
    argued, in summary, that the judge erred in law in:

         (i)      incorrectly understanding the factual matrix of the  case;
             the appellant's mother had died when he was  about  18  months
             old; it was accepted  that  the  sponsor's  witness  statement
             contained an error at paragraph 2 in that regard, but  it  was
             asserted that the remainder of the sponsor's witness statement
             and oral evidence established that the sponsor cared  for  the
             appellant from a very young age (Grounds, paras 1-2);

         (ii)     failing to take into  account  the  'crucial  explanation'
             that the appellant had left Eritrea for  Ethiopia  because  no
             application for entry clearance could  be  made  from  Eritrea
             (Grounds, para 3);

         (iii)    making inconsistent findings, finding  at  [30]  that  the
             sponsor  had  been  incoherent  about  the  appellant's   care
             arrangements in Ethiopia, but at [38] that it  was  reasonable
             to conclude that the appellant's care  needs  were  being  met
             (Grounds, para 6);

         (iv)     failing to carry out an adequate best interests assessment
             for the appellant (Grounds, para 7).

6     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Froom on 1 February 2018.

7     I heard submissions from the parties. Mr Azmi adopted his  grounds  of
    appeal.  In particular, he asserted that the judge had proceeded  under
    a mistake of fact, and referred to the following passage in the judge's
    decision at [10]:

         "The sponsor told me that the appellant was one and  a  half  years
         old when her mother died. She described the care that she gave him.
         I interpose that it was clear to me that the appellant (sic) and Mr
         Burkumshaw were confused. The appellant's statement said that  [S],
         rather than the appellant, was one a half years old when her mother
         died. The appellant would have been about nine at the time."

8     Mr Azmi accepted, as did the grounds of appeal,  that  there  are  had
    been a drafting error in the sponsor's witness statement  so  that,  at
    paragraph 2 of that statement, the sponsor intended  to  refer  to  the
    appellant, rather than her own son [S], being one half years  old  when
    the sponsor's mother died. This was said to  have  contributed  to  the
    judge's misunderstanding of the case, repeated at [28].

9     Further, in relation to the explanation as to why the  appellant  left
    Eritrea for Ethiopia, it was said that the sponsor had  given  evidence
    that this was to facilitate the entry clearance application.

10    Mrs Aboni submitted  that  the  judge  had  directed  himself  in  law
    appropriately, and made adequate findings in the appeal. The judge  was
    entitled to proceed on the basis that  the  appellant  was  about  nine
    years old when the mother of the appellant and sponsor had  died;  this
    was a fair reading of paragraph 2 of the sponsor's  witness  statement,
    and it was open to the judge to find that the sponsor's  oral  evidence
    was discrepant. Further, the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    sponsor had been incoherent regarding the  care  arrangements  for  the
    appellant in Ethiopia. The judge had been entitled  to  hold  that  the
    strength of the family life between the appellant and sponsor  was  not
    as had been claimed, and had been entitled to dismiss the appeal.

    Discussion

11    It is appropriate in this matter to  set  out  certain  parts  of  the
    sponsor's witness statement:

         "2.      My mother died when Suneal was just one and a  half.  From
         that age I have always raised him and he is really like  a  son  to
         me. I am quite a bit older than him. I have always been the  mother
         figure for him and looked after him.

         3. Even when I was married as a 16-year-old I did not go  and  live
         with my husband's family as is the custom. [D] was still very young
         and I was his main carer. In time he became the older brother to my
         son.

         ...

         8. My son [S] is missing [D] a lot...

         9. [S] is stranded now. He cannot go back  to  Eritrea  because  he
         left the country illegally  and  he  will  be  detained  and  taken
         forcibly to the Army ...

         10.      I am constantly worried and upset about [S]. I think about
         his welfare all of the time. I don't want him to try and come  here
         illegally..."

12    There  are  clear  tensions  within  those  passages.  The  judge  was
    entitled to observe the difference between the sponsor's oral evidence,
    that the appellant was one and a half years old when their mother died,
    with the content of the sponsor's witness statement, which stated  that
    it was [S] who was one half at that time.

13    Insofar as the appellant asserts  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    proceeding under a mistake of fact, I note that  the  requirements  for
    such an error to be established are set out in E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ
    49:

         "66.     In our view, the time  has  now  come  to  accept  that  a
         mistake of fact giving rise to unfairness is  a  separate  head  of
         challenge in an appeal on  a  point  of  law,  at  least  in  those
         statutory contexts where the  parties  share  an  interest  in  co-
         operating to achieve the correct result. Asylum law is  undoubtedly
         such an area. Without seeking to  lay  down  a  precise  code,  the
         ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness are apparent from
         the above analysis of CICB. First, there must have been  a  mistake
         as to an existing fact, including a mistake as to the  availability
         of evidence on a particular matter. Secondly, the fact or  evidence
         must  have  been  "established",  in  the   sense   that   it   was
         uncontentious and objectively verifiable.  Thirdly,  the  appellant
         (or his advisers) must not  been  have  been  responsible  for  the
         mistake. Fourthly, the mistake must have  played  a  material  (not
         necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."

14    Those requirements are not satisfied. The alleged error as to  whether
    the sponsor intended to refer to the appellant, or [S], at paragraph  2
    of  her  witness  statement  is  not  uncontentious   and   objectively
    verifiable. Further, the appellant's representatives appear  to  accept
    that an error was made in the preparation of the witness statement.

15    However, I am nonetheless satisfied that the judge erred  in  law,  in
    failing to have regard to  the  sponsor's  evidence  as  a  whole,  and
    proceeding  unfairly.  There  was  clearly  something  wrong  with  the
    sponsor's witness statement. If the sponsor had genuinely  intended  to
    refer to her own son, [S], at paragraph 2, there was no apparent reason
    why she would say that he was 'like a son', as opposed  to  simply  her
    son; why it was necessary to point out that she was quite a  bit  older
    than him (something which would have been obvious had she been  talking
    about her own son); or why she  considered  herself  to  be  a  'mother
    figure' to him rather than simply, mother. The more obvious reading  of
    the paragraph was that the sponsor was here referring  to  her  bother,
    the appellant, not her own son.

16    Further, there appear  to  be  two  other  instances  of  the  sponsor
    mistakenly referring to [S], rather than the appellant; at paragraphs 9
    and 10, in appearing to suggest that [S] was 'stranded' and  could  not
    go back to Eritrea; and that she was constantly worried and upset about
    [S], and thinking about his welfare. However,  the  judge  was  already
    aware that [S] had  already  been  granted  entry  clearance,  and  the
    sponsor describes at her paragraph 8 that  [S]  was  missing  [D]  (the
    appellant), and had cried for him many times, and  the  sponsor  stated
    that she was trying to get a travel document for [S] so that they could
    go and visit the appellant in Ethiopia. It was thus clear that [S]  had
    already entered the UK. The content of paragraphs 9  and  10  therefore
    made no sense when referring to [S]  being  stranded.  Although  again,
    this appears to have been sloppy  drafting  by  those  acting  for  the
    appellant (and the appellant's representatives have  far  from  covered
    themselves in glory in this matter), it should have set off alarm bells
    to the judge that there were errors in the sponsor's witness statement.

17    It seems to me that where, at paragraph [10] of the judge's  decision,
    the judge interposed that it was clear  to  him  that  the  'appellant'
    (should be sponsor) and Mr Birkumshaw were confused, this interposition
    was within the narrative of the judge's decision.  It is not  clear  to
    me that the judge actually raised at the hearing  any  query  with  the
    sponsor or Mr Birkumshaw as to whether the sponsor's witness  statement
    was correct.

18    I find that the sponsor's witness statement, read as  a  whole,  would
    tend to suggest very much more clearly that the sponsor  was  referring
    at paragraph 2 to the appellant, and not [S]. The judge appears to have
    taken  the  first  sentence  of  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  at
    paragraph 2 at face value, without querying the  accuracy  of  it,  and
    without reading it in the context of the remainder of the paragraph  or
    indeed the remainder of the statement. This represents  in  my  view  a
    failure to take the sponsor's evidence into account as a  whole  and/or
    represents a failure to proceed fairly, by failing to put any  concerns
    that the judge had, to the witness.

19    In relation to the  appellant's  second  round,  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account  of  the  'crucial  explanation'  that  the
    appellant left Eritrea for Ethiopia in order to make an entry clearance
    application, it is not clear to me where this explanation was given. It
    is asserted by Mr Azmi that the sponsor gave such evidence, but  it  is
    not set out in her witness statement, and there is no advocate's record
    of oral evidence. I find that he is not made out that the sponsor  gave
    such evidence.

20    However, it is also not clear from the judge's record of  evidence  at
    [10]-[17] that any question was actually put to  the  sponsor  on  this
    specific issue. I find that given the significance which the judge  has
    placed on the fact that the appellant's care arrangements  appeared  to
    be more precarious in Ethiopia than an Eritrea, I find that as a matter
    of procedural fairness, the judge should have ensured that the  sponsor
    had an opportunity to explain why she  had  organised  the  appellant's
    departure from Eritrea to Ethiopia. We are able  to  anticipate,  given
    the assertion within the grounds of appeal, what the sponsor's evidence
    would have been; so that the appellant could make  an  application  for
    entry clearance, which was  not  possible  from  Eritrea.  That  is  an
    explanation which is clearly capable of having weight attached  to  it.
    However, the  sponsor  does  not  appear  to  have  been  afforded  the
    opportunity to give such explanation, not having been asked to  provide
    it. I find that the judge erred procedurally in failing to put an issue
    of such concern to him, to the relevant witness.

21    My findings above undermine the overall conclusion  of  the  judge  at
    [33] that the sponsor had not  been  the  appellant's  de  facto  carer
    before she left Eritrea. If, as asserted, the sponsor did care for  the
    appellant since he was one and a half, until  the  sponsor  left,  this
    would represent a much more prolonged period  of  time  for  which  the
    sponsor had cared for the appellant, which would  be  relevant  to  the
    assessment of the strength of their family life.

22    I find that the judge's overall decision, that the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance did not disproportionally  interfere  with  any  family  life
    right between the appellant and sponsor, is therefore unsustainable.  I
    therefore set aside the  judge's  decision.  It  is  not  necessary  to
    consider the appellant's remaining grounds.

23    I find that due to the extent of findings of fact which would need  to
    be re-made in this appeal, it is appropriate  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

24    In the he-hearing of this appeal,  it  goes  without  saying  that  it
    important that any witness statements relied upon do  not  contain  any
    drafting errors.

    Decision

    The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.

    I set aside the judge's decision.

    I remit the appeal to the first-tier tribunal.


Signed:     Date: 30.1.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

