
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10472/2016
                                                               HU/10475/2016
                                                               HU/10479/2016
                                                               HU/10481/2016
                                                               HU/10483/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2018                  |On 20 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                ADEBUKOLA [O]
                               OLUWASEGUN [B]
                                    [O B]
                                    [K B]
                                    [C B]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah (for Del and Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Lindsay (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These are the appeals of Adebukola [O], Oluwasegun Olanrewaju Bakare,
       [OB], [KB] and [CB], citizens of Nigeria  who  are  the  parents  and
       children born respectively [~] 1983, [~] 1980, [~]  2008,  [~]  2011,
       and [~] 2013. They appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal of 15 September 2017 to dismiss their  appeals  against  the
       refusal of their human rights claims by the Respondent  (of  5  April
       2016).

    2. Adebukola was granted leave to enter the UK as a spouse on 16 January
       2006, until 16 January 2008. She applied for ILR on domestic violence
       grounds in  February  2008,  that  application  being  refused  on  5
       February 2008.  She  made  an  application  on  Zambrano  grounds  in
       February 2014 which was rejected in March  2014;  she  re-applied  at
       once, and that was refused on 17  June  2014.  She  was  served  with
       notice of her removability on 22 December 2015.

    3. Oluwasegun entered the UK first as  a  family  visitor  in  September
       2004. He subsequently applied to visit again, and a visa was  granted
       in November 2005; he was refused leave to enter when he arrived on  5
       December 2005, and the subsequent appeal  was  allowed,  and  he  was
       granted leave to enter until 11 November 2007. He  subsequently  came
       to the Respondent's attention when he applied for leave on family and
       private life grounds in April 2013, which was refused in  June  2013;
       subsequently he had made  Zambrano  applications  in  line  with  his
       partner.

    4. The family's present application was based on their links with the UK
       and their children's best  interests.  The  application  was  refused
       because there were no viable entitlements under the partner or parent
       route under Appendix FM. Having regard to the exception  therein,  it
       was thought unreasonable for [OB] (then already a seven-year resident
       child) or her siblings to live in  Nigeria,  as  she  was  not  at  a
       critical stage  of  her  education  and  Nigeria  had  a  functioning
       education  system.  The  adults  would  not  face  very   significant
       obstacles to integration in Nigeria, where  they  had  grown  up  and
       where they presumably retained cultural and social ties.

    5. A statement of additional grounds set out that  Adebukola's  move  to
       the UK following her marriage to a  British  immigration  officer  in
       2005; he had insisted that she join him in the UK, and she  abandoned
       her education. Their relationship deteriorated and he became violent;
       she moved to his sister's home and subsequently moved elsewhere.  She
       had reported the injuries she had received to her doctor but had  not
       taken things further as she still loved him, did not want  to  damage
       his career, and did not want her childrens' upbringing to be  clouded
       by knowledge of her mistreatment.

    6. Before the First-tier  tribunal  Oluwasegun  argued  that  he  lacked
       connections in Nigeria and has strong family ties here. He had worked
       here as a construction labourer; his mother in Nigeria was unwell and
       was herself cared for by her church community, so could not help  him
       or his family; he had high blood pressure.

    7. The First-tier tribunal accepted that Adebukola had established  that
       she had been a  victim  of  domestic  violence  during  her  previous
       marriage, given that her doctor's notes included a reference  to  her
       having a human bite mark on one shoulder.

    8. There were no school reports and no evidence to  suggest  the  family
       unit was other than a normal close one which  interacted  with  their
       relatives here and with the church. [OB] had not expressed any  views
       of her own, and her parents' assertions were the only material relied
       on to show that she  could  not  adapt  abroad.  Education  would  be
       available in Nigeria. It was not credible that any financial  support
       from family in the UK could  not  continue  once  they  had  returned
       abroad.

    9. The family's application had been made  when  Adebukola  had  already
       overstayed her leave and whilst the  Tribunal  sympathised  with  her
       predicament given the history of domestic violence she had  suffered,
       this in itself did not show that any family member  would  face  very
       significant obstacles to integration abroad.  Examining  their  cases
       outside the Rules, there  was  a  strong  public  interest  in  their
       departure given their lack of immigration status. The Judge  directed
       himself that it was necessary to determine the appeal as at the  date
       of hearing; perhaps a different decision might be taken based on more
       up-to-date circumstances.

   10. Grounds of appeal essentially contended that

        a) The wrong approach had been taken to the best interests  of  the
           children;

        b) There was an inconsistency of approach in  apparently  accepting
           the fact of Adebukola  having  suffered  domestic  violence  yet
           still penalising her for precarious residence  in  the  UK:  the
           compassionate circumstances should have been given more weight;

        c) The immigration history of the parents had  been  wrongly  taken
           into account when assessing the best interests of the children.

   11. Although the First-tier tribunal refused permission to appeal  on  22
       March 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal  on  16
       August 2018 on the basis that arguably  the  best  interests  of  the
       elder child had not been lawfully assessed having regard  to  the  MA
       (Pakistan) requirement to identify strong reasons justifying a seven-
       year resident child's departure.

   12. Before me Mr Miah submitted that the critical  principles  identified
       of the governing authorities on the best interests  of  children  had
       not been applied. Once a family unit contained a seven-year  resident
       child, the case law established that there was no basis for  removing
       them unless there was some  significant  public  interest  factor  in
       play. Bare overstaying was not enough. Mr Lindsay replied that  there
       were sufficient factors identified  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       demonstrate that the parents' immigration history was  sufficient  to
       overcome  the  best  interests  of  the  children:  they   had   both
       overstayed,  the  children  were  Nigerian  citizens,  and  the  case
       required assessment of how emphatic an answer should be given to  the
       question of in which direction the best  interests  of  the  children
       pointed. MA Pakistan had been referenced  and  the  Judge  should  be
       presumed to be aware of the reasoning therein whether or not  it  had
       been spelt out.

  Findings and reasons

   13. It is first necessary to set the scene via the  relatively  extensive
       case law that has fallen from the oft-litigated scenario  of  parents
       with children. The central provisions  in  these  appeals  are  those
       governing the consequences for a family unit of significant residence
       in the UK by children. The Rules state:

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life

           276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of application, the applicant ...

                (iv)    is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any
                period of imprisonment) and it would not  be  reasonable  to
                expect the applicant to leave the UK;"

   14. Section 117B NIA 2002 provides:

           "PART 5A

           Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations ...

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

           ...

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom."

   15. The upshot of these provisions is that a child who has been  resident
       in the UK for seven years can only be  expected  to  depart  if  that
       would be reasonable in all the circumstances (Rule 276(ADE(vi)); this
       conclusion will also militate against the departure  of  any  parents
       caring for them (section 117B(6)). Elias LJ in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
       EWCA Civ 705 explained that wider public interest considerations  had
       to be taken into account  when  assessing  the  reasonableness  of  a
       child's relocation, beyond its best interests. The fact that a  child
       has been here for seven years must be given significant  weight  when
       carrying out  the  proportionality  exercise  as  was  shown  by  the
       Secretary of State's published guidance from August 2015 in which  it
       is expressly stated that once the seven years' residence  requirement
       is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for  refusing  leave,
       because after such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down
       roots and developed social, cultural and educational links in the  UK
       such that it is likely to  be  highly  disruptive  if  the  child  is
       required to leave the UK.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  reasonable  to
       require the child to leave where there are good cogent reasons,  even
       if they are not compelling.

   16. Every Child Matters: Change for Children (Guidance issued in November
       2009 under section 55(3) and 55(5) of the 2009  Act)  specifies  that
       safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children requires:-

           "protecting children from maltreatment;

           preventing impairment of children's health or development (where
           health means 'physical or mental health' and  development  means
           'physical,  intellectual,  emotional,  social   or   behavioural
           development');

           ensuring  that  children  are  growing   up   in   circumstances
           consistent with the provision of safe and effective care; and

           undertaking that role so as to enable  those  children  to  have
           optimum life chances and to enter adulthood successfully."

   17. A parent's immigration history should not be held against a  child  -
       at least under the "best  interests"  assessment.  Lord  Hope  in  ZH
       (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 at [44]:

           "The fact that the mother's immigration  status  was  precarious
           when they were conceived  may  lead  to  a  suspicion  that  the
           parents saw this as a way of strengthening her  case  for  being
           allowed to remain here. But considerations of that  kind  cannot
           be held against the children in this  assessment.  It  would  be
           wrong in principle to devalue what was in their  best  interests
           by something for which they could  in  no  way  be  held  to  be
           responsible."

   18. However, as explained by the President in Kaur [2017] UKUT 14  (IAC),
       whilst a child's best interests are to be assessed without regard  to
       the sins of the parents, factors  such  as  illegal  entry,  unlawful
       overstaying or illegal working may legitimately enter the equation at
       the second stage of the assessment, being  plainly  relevant  to  the
       public interest in the maintenance of immigration  control.  At  that
       stage a child's best interests, though  a  consideration  of  primary
       importance, can potentially be outweighed by the public interest. The
       "best  interests"  assessment  is  most  aptly  carried  out  at  the
       beginning of the overall exercise.

   19. Seven-year resident  children  enjoy  especially  strong  protection,
       then. Nevertheless, the best interests of children who have not  been
       resident for seven years remain relevant. As it was put in MM Lebanon
       �89 citing Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17:

           "89.  We have already explained how the internationally accepted
           principle requiring primary attention to be given  to  the  best
           interests of affected children is given clear effect in domestic
           law and policy. The same principle is restated as  part  of  the
           considerations relevant to the article 8 assessment in  Jeunesse
           ... requiring national decision-makers to:

                "... advert  to  and  assess  evidence  in  respect  of  the
                practicality, feasibility and proportionality [of  any  such
                removal of a non-national parent] in order to give effective
                protection and sufficient weight to the  best  interests  of
                the children directly affected by it." (para 119)""

   20. Jackson LJ in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [35] stated: "A
       decision as to what is in the best interests of children will  depend
       on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of  time
       that they have been here; (c) how long they have been  in  education;
       (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they
       have become distanced from the country to which it is  proposed  that
       they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may  be;  (f)
       to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,  medical   or   other
       difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the  extent
       to which the course proposed will interfere with  their  family  life
       ..."

   21. The bare fact of seven years' residence is not in  itself  sufficient
       to demonstrate a lack of reasonableness  -  an  evidence-backed  case
       must be put, in order that the evaluative exercise  required  by  the
       case law of the European Convention on Human Rights is given  effect.
       In Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the  President's  Tribunal  set
       out that:

           "ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

           iii)  Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
           origin  can  lead  to  development  of   social   cultural   and
           educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  in
           the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
           to lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
           policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

           iv)   Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child that the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable."

   22. Bare  assertions  that  a  change  of  school  regime  is  in  itself
       unreasonable do not suffice. The Tribunal in AM  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
       260 (IAC):

           "39.  ... Nor should the difficulties of a move from one  school
           to another become unduly exaggerated. It would be highly unusual
           for a child  in  the  UK  to  complete  the  entirety  of  their
           education within one school. The trauma, or excitement, of a new
           school, new classmates and new teachers is an integral  part  of
           growing up. In too  many  appeals  the  FtT  is  presented  with
           arguments whose basic premise is that to change a school  is  to
           submit a child to a cruel and unduly harsh  experience.  Indeed,
           as if to illustrate the point, we note that the eldest child  of
           this family has been required to move schools, and move from one
           end of the UK to the other, as a result of the decisions of  her
           parents. The evidence does not suggest she suffered any hardship
           or ill effect from so doing."

   23. The Tribunal here  did  assess  best  interests  at  the  appropriate
       juncture consistently with Kaur. And in general it  took  account  of
       the  relevant  considerations  identified  for  all  children  in  EV
       (Philippines). Nevertheless, I accept the grounds of appeal gain some
       purchase from the lack of an express direction as to the  appropriate
       legal test being that set out in MA (Pakistan). It  is  not  apparent
       that the First-tier Tribunal appreciated that the presence of a seven-
       year resident child elevates the case to one where strong or powerful
       reasons are required to justify the family's departure from  the  UK.
       To that extent it seems to me that the First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
       error of law. I also accept that there is an  unresolved  tension  in
       the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that   Adebukola   was
       consistently present on a precarious basis given she had entered  the
       UK lawfully in a settlement route, her route to indefinite  leave  to
       remain  being  interrupted  only  by  the  domestic   violence   that
       contributed to her previous relationship's failure.

   24. However, that leaves the further question of whether or not the error
       of law was a material one. One  feature  of  these  appeals  are  the
       brevity of the supporting evidence. There are no letters from schools
       or similar.  The  witness  statements  are  slight  in  the  extreme.
       Adebukola set out that her partner had a "heavy  family  presence  in
       the UK and our children are  used  to  them";  the  children  had  no
       knowledge of  any  other  country  than  this  one.  Both  the  adult
       Appellants  stated  they  had  engaged   themselves   in   creditable
       endeavours by working, paying taxes  and  making  national  insurance
       contributions. A letter from [OC]  stated  that  Oluwasegun  was  his
       brother and that the children were being  schooled  here.  There  was
       nothing of substance beyond these relatively vague assertions.

   25. Whilst [OB] is a seven-year resident child, he remained at  the  more
       youthful end of the spectrum  identified  in  Azimi-Moayed  when  the
       First-tier Tribunal determined this appeal around a year ago. Clearly
       in those circumstances the strength of his  UK  connections  required
       careful consideration. Yet the evidence base relied on was slight  in
       the extreme.

   26. Mr Miah pressed on me the submission that evidence from  the  schools
       was not required given that this was a case where  the  Secretary  of
       State had to demonstrate powerful reasons for the family's expulsion.
       I do not agree. The progress of a child's education and the extent of
       any meaningful private life of their own outside of the  family  unit
       is the centre point of the necessary enquiry. The eponymous Appellant
       in MA (Pakistan) itself 61ff in fact failed to demonstrate  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  finding  his  departure  to  be
       reasonable given the lack of evidence  put  forward  on  the  child's
       behalf.

   27. Absent sufficient detail of the actual connections, it is  much  more
       difficult to be satisfied that the relevant public  interest  factors
       present here were overcome. For example, there is no explanation  for
       Oluwasegun's very  significant  period  of  overstaying,  and  whilst
       Adebukola's  continued  presence  in  the  UK  following  her   first
       relationship's breakdown might be understandable, the  mere  fact  of
       being a victim of domestic violence does not immunise one from having
       subsequently to satisfy the Immigration Rules (unless of  course  one
       succeeds  in  an  application  under  the  Rules  that  make  special
       provision for such  individual).  There  is  no  detail  provided  of
       Adebukola's  state  of  mind  following  the  domestic  violence   in
       question, and no explanation as to why  she  chose  to  enter  a  new
       relationship in the UK with a person who  lacked  immigration  status
       rather than returning to  her  country  of  origin  where  she  would
       presumably retain family and social connections. One  might  add  the
       fact that the three children are presumably being educated at  public
       expense.

Decision

The appeals are dismissed.


Signed      Date 8 October 2018
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
