
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10850/2017
     HU/10856/2017
     HU/10860/2017
     HU/10862/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decisions Promulgated              |
|On 23rd August 2018                |On 4th October 2018                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                 OGEECHI [I]
                                 DONATUS [I]
                                    [C I]
                                    [O I]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel instructed by TM Fortis Solicitors
Ltd
For the respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant is the wife of the second appellant: the third and
      fourth appellants are their children. The children were born
      respectively on 1 September 2003 and 27 May 2005. They have a third
      child, [PI], born on the 23rd September 2009. She is not a party to
      these proceedings. All are nationals of Nigeria.


   2. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom on 8 September 2009 as
      a student. Her husband and their then two children came as her
      dependents. Various other applications were made giving her leave
      until 3 April 2016. Before her leave expired she unsuccessfully
      applied under the entrepreneur scheme and review applications were
      unsuccessful.

   3. On 10 November 2016 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of
      her family life. This was refused on 11 September 2017. The
      application was considered under the parent route of appendix FM. It
      was accepted she had children who had spent seven years in the United
      Kingdom. The respondent took the view that it would be reasonable to
      expect the children to return to Nigeria with their parents. Regard
      was had to private life under paragraph 276 ADE of the rules.  She had
      not spent the necessary length of time here and the decision-maker
      felt the appellant could reintegrate. The decision maker took a
      similar line in relation to her husband. Regarding the children,
      reference was made to section 55 and the conclusion was again that
      they could integrate back into life in their home country.

   4. The appeals were heard before Judge of the First Tier Tribunal O R
      Williams at Manchester on 16 February 2018. In a decision promulgated
      on 14 March 2018 they were dismissed.

   5. The judge found that save for a break between 13 October 2016 and 10
      November 2016 the appellants had been in the United Kingdom legally
      from arrival. The judge accepted the children were qualifying children
      within the meaning of the immigration rules. They were all extremely
      well settled here and the children had not returned to Nigeria since
      their arrival at the age of six and four respectively. All of the
      children were doing well at school with the eldest girl excelling. The
      judge referred to the 2015 Home Office guidance and acknowledged they
      have put down roots and integrated.

   6. Against this, the judge found that the children could make new friends
      in Nigeria whilst continuing to remain in contact with their friends
      here. They had extended family members in Nigeria, including
      grandparents. Their parents had been educated in Nigeria to post
      degree level. The judge commented that the family had been able to
      adapt to moves within the United Kingdom. The first appellant had
      established a business here from which she could raise capital or
      continue to run remotely.

   7. The judge concluded that the best interests of the children would be
      to remain with their parents and to return to Nigeria.

   8. Regarding section 117 B the judge noted the adults speak English and
      are financially self-sufficient. The judge referred to the provision
      whereby private life formed against the precarious immigration status
      was to be given little weight. The judge also referred to the failure
      of the entrepreneurial application and stated that the maintenance of
      effective control was in the public interest. The judge concluded that
      the respondent's decision was proportionate.

   The Upper Tribunal

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that amongst other
      grounds it was arguable that the judge failed to give appropriate
      weight to the length of residence of the qualifying children or to
      give strong reasons why wider public interest considerations
      outweighed their interests. It was also argued that the judge was
      factually wrong in suggesting the children adapted to numerous changes
      in the United Kingdom. They had not moved to a succession of schools.
      They had attended primary school and then move to secondary school
      which would be the norm.


  10. At hearing I was given a copy of the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and Upper
      Tribunal decision in MT and ET (Childs best interest; ex tempore
      pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 as well as an extract from the
      respondent's guidance as of February 2018 in relation to children's
      best interests.

  11. Having reflected upon the appeal I wish to express my gratitude to
      both representatives for the clear way in which they have both
      presented their respective positions. The issues have been clearly
      identified and fully addressed by the representatives.

  12. The emphasis in the appeal is upon the position of the children. Ms
      Patel said that they are now aged 15, 13 and 9, the youngest child
      having been born here. The first appellant arrived in September 2009,
      with her husband arriving a month later. She stated that the judge was
      mistaken in stating the first appellant had returned to Nigeria in
      2014. In fact she has never returned since arriving. There was also
      reference to some disharmony between the grandparents in relation to
      the issue of FGM.

  13. Ms Patel emphasised the decision of MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the
      application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.This is referred to by the judge at paragraph
      6 of the decision. I was referred to paragraphs 43 to 45 of the Court
      of Appeal decision. The Court of Appeal was giving guidance on how the
      test of reasonableness should be applied when determining whether or
      not it is reasonable to remove a child from the UK once he or she has
      been resident here for seven years. Following a discussion on the
      factors to be taken into account in the reasonableness test Lord
      Justice Elias at Para 46 stated:

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that a
         child has been here for seven years must be given significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years' residence requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view they merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links in the UK such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when the children are very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on their families,
         but the disruption becomes more serious as they get older."

  14. Ms Patel argued that First Tier Tribunal Judge Williams did not set
      out powerful reasons that would outweigh the children remaining. She
      emphasised that there had been no was overstaying or criminality on
      the part of their parents. She distinguished their situation from that
      in MT and ET (Childs best interest; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria where
      the parents came as visitors and then overstayed. The Upper Tribunal
      at paragraph 27 referred to the same paragraphs I was referred to in
      MA (Pakistan.


  15. In response, Ms Pettersen said 7 years was not necessarily
      determinative and referred me to paragraph 47 of MA (Pakistan) & Ors:

             "Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test where
             the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever the child's best
             interests are in favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's
             submission that the best interests assessment automatically
             resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament had wanted
             the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave
             application, it would have said so. The concept of "best
             interests" is after all a well established one. Even where the
             child's best interests are to stay, it may still be not
             unreasonable to require the child to leave. That will depend
             upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links
             in the UK and in the country where it is proposed he should
             return. What could not be considered, however, would be the
             conduct and immigration history of the parents."

  16. Ms Pettersen said the judge set out the relevant case law and the
      factors taken into account. She acknowledged that there was a mistake
      in referring to the family having moved around and believed this
      derived from para 13 of the social report submitted. However, she
      contended that that in itself plus a reference to the first appellant
      returning to Nigeria was not so fundamental as to undermine the
      decision. She acknowledged that another judge may have come to a
      different conclusion but it could not be said the decision was
      perverse.


  17. I would agree that the factual mistakes are not so fundamental as to
      undermine the decision. The judge does refer to the relevant case law
      and the respondent's own guidance. The judge sets out the factors that
      are relevant to consideration of the appeal. I am conscious that I am
      not hearing the appeal at first instance. It may well be that a
      different judge could have reached a different conclusion on the same
      facts. However, having considered the decision I do not find a
      material error of law established. I find the judge has carefully
      considered the appeal and has set out relevant considerations. The
      judge referred to the relevant case law. The evaluation of those
      factors was a matter for the judge and the conclusion was one open to
      the judge. In reaching this conclusion I do not seek to take away from
      the careful preparation and clear arguments of Ms Patel.

Decision
No material error of law has been established in the decision of First Tier
Tribunal Williams. Consequently that decision, dismissing the appeal, shall
stand.

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




