
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10185/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 22 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Marssaille Mboh arrey
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (to whom I shall refer hereafter as "the respondent",  as
    she was before the First-tier Judge)  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of a First-tier Judge allowing the  appeal  of  Mr
    Arrey (to whom I shall refer hereafter as "the appellant"), as  he  was
    before the First-tier Judge, against the Secretary of State's  decision
    of 9 March 2016 refusing to vary leave to remain.

2.   The appellant sought leave to remain on the basis of Article 8,  having
    originally been granted entry clearance as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    valid from 25 December 2009 to 30 September 2012.  He was then  granted
    leave to remain as a member of the Armed Forces valid from 3  September
    2012 to 12 January 2014.  He was refused indefinite leave to remain  as
    an HM Forces discharged personnel on 6 October 2015.  The appellant was
    refused under paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis
    that the variation of leave to enter or remain was being sought  for  a
    purpose not covered by the Rules.  The appellant had requested leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom to enable him to pursue employment  as  an
    IT consultant.

3.   There was a previous hearing on 9 May 2017 before Mr Justice Lewis  and
    me and this was adjourned on the basis that Mr Jarvis wished  to  amend
    the grounds.

4.   The judge noted that the claim had to be considered only in respect  of
    Article 8 as the appellant conceded that the application  fell  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  She set out the Razgar  guidelines,  and  noted
    the evidence of the  appellant  and  also  of  Major  Buchanan  who  is
    Battalion Second-in-Command of a London Regiment.  Major  Buchanan  had
    explained the appellant's value as  a  reservist  and  support  to  the
    regular army and the economic cost in terms of the loss to  the  public
    purse of the training that he  had  and  the  cost  of  recruiting  and
    training a replacement.  He also spoke about the  appellant's  capacity
    and character.  The judge noted what had  been  said  in  UE  (Nigeria)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 975 about the relevance of the loss of  public  benefit
    as  a  consideration  when  assessing  the  public  interest  side   of
    proportionality under Article 8.  The judge found that the public value
    had been and potentially would continue to be very significant and that
    the loss of that benefit to the public purse was also very significant.
     She said that there was no public benefit in requiring  the  appellant
    to return to Cameroon and reapply to return to the United  Kingdom  and
    rejoin  the  reserves  with  the  consequent  loss  of  experience  and
    seniority.  She considered that the need to maintain a  firm  and  fair
    policy  of  immigration  control  did  not  outweigh  respect  for  the
    appellant's private life which provided so much  public  benefit.   She
    also took into account Section 117B of the 2002 Act,  noting  that  for
    example the appellant speaks English, is not a burden on the  taxpayer,
    as a reservist he provided a financial as well as a  security  benefit,
    his leave had been lawful and he had explained the difficulties he  had
    encountered in ensuring that he had correct leave.

5.   The appeal having been allowed, the Secretary of State sought  and  was
    granted permission to appeal on the basis that the judge had failed  to
    quantify the public interest when assessing proportionality and had  in
    effect concluded that army  reservists  were  exempt  from  immigration
    control due to the cost of their training and the service they  provide
    to the community.  It was also argued that the judge's  application  of
    the decision in UE was defective in that the kind of  case  where  this
    was appropriate had been set out in Singh [1986] UKHL 11 as  applicable
    in the case of a person of outstanding value to a particular section of
    the community of which they  would  be  deprived  if  the  person  were
    deported.  It was also said to be unclear on what basis  the  appellant
    could obtain entry clearance in the future.  The  amended  grounds  set
    out  the  relevant  guidance  of  the  Secretary  of  State  concerning
    reservists and  the  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    indefinite leave to remain by virtue of at least his overstaying in the
    United  Kingdom  and  the  fact  that  he  had  not  met  the  relevant
    eligibility  requirements.   The  test  remained  one   of   compelling
    circumstances and the judge had failed to identify the  precise  nature
    and weight of the public  interest  in  the  Rules.   This  was  not  a
    Chikwamba type case.  The appellant had not had leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom since 12 January 2014.

6.   In his submissions Mr Jarvis relied on and  amplified  the  points  set
    out in the grounds.  It was clear that the appellant could not claim to
    be a former member of HM Forces in light of the  guidance.   There  had
    been periods when he had been exempt  from  immigration  control.   The
    judge was required to engage with his  history  and  approach  it  with
    regard to benefit to the community as set out  in  UE  (Nigeria).   The
    effect of not taking account of the unlawful nature of the  appellant's
    stay in recent years in the United  Kingdom  was  that  the  judge  had
    placed a gloss over his history in the United Kingdom.

7.   In his submissions Mr Bandegani argued that there was no error of  law.
     If there were it was immaterial.  The judge had clearly  set  out  the
    relevant applicable law at paragraph 18 onwards.  It was conceded  that
    the claim could not come within the Immigration Rules and there was  no
    family life.  The judge had properly applied Section 117B.   Everything
    had to be read together.  The facts and evidence before the judge  were
    those on which she had based her decision and there was no error of law
    in deciding the appeal in that way.  In his Rule  24  response  he  had
    addressed the case as originally put in the grounds and what seemed  to
    survive that was the UE (Nigeria) point.  All  that  said  was  that  a
    contribution to the community and  to  society  at  large  could  be  a
    relevant, sometimes  highly  relevant  factor  in  the  proportionality
    balance.   The  judge  had  addressed  this  in  paragraph  23  of  her
    determination.  She had found that the loss of  that  benefit  and  the
    loss to the public purse were very  significant  and  the  witness  had
    given evidence on the latter point.  There was no argument that on  any
    finding this was an irrational conclusion so it was hard  to  see  how,
    based on proper authority, the decision could be wrong in  law.   There
    was no inconsistency between what was said in  UE  (Nigeria)  and  what
    Parliament had said.  Even if what Mr Jarvis  said  was  correct  about
    periods when the appellant had  overstayed,  and  the  times  when  the
    appellant was exempt from immigration control, any misunderstanding  of
    that nature was not material to  the  overall  findings  based  on  the
    evidence.  It was clear that the appellant spoke  English,  was  not  a
    burden on the taxpayer, was a reservist and his leave had  been  lawful
    and for some periods exempt from immigration control.  It was  hard  to
    see what the error of law was.  If the Tribunal disagreed then it would
    depend upon the nature of the error found whether the matter would need
    to be reheard in the First-tier or remain in the Upper Tribunal.
8.   By way of reply Mr Jarvis emphasised that  it  was  not  a  rationality
    challenge but that the judge, he said, had erred  in  setting  out  and
    applying the law.  It had been argued on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State why Section 117B had not been applied  properly.   It  was  clear
    from what had been said by the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803 that the relevance of the precariousness of immigration  status
    was the effect it had on the  extent  of  protection  which  should  be
    afforded  to  private  life  for  the  purpose   of   the   Article   8
    proportionality  balancing  exercise.   The  appellant  had   been   an
    overstayer so his residence for a period had been  unlawful,  and  that
    contrasted with what the judge had said about his leave  being  lawful.
    This was clearly a material mistake of fact.  The judge had to say  why
    the appellant did not benefit from the Rules as a  starting  point  and
    had failed to understand the appellant's immigration  history  and  why
    the application fell only to be considered outside the Rules.

9.   I reserved my decision.

10.  There are essentially two  matters  of  concern  with  respect  to  the
    judge's decision.  The first relates to her conclusion at paragraph  25
    that the appellant's leave had been lawful.  It seems clear, as pointed
    out at paragraph 3 of the amended grounds, that the  relevant  starting
    point was the fact that the appellant did not  qualify  for  indefinite
    leave to remain by virtue of overstaying in the United Kingdom and  the
    fact  that  he  had  not  met  the  "reckonable  service"   eligibility
    requirements in paragraph 11(a)(i) of the Armed Forces Appendix in that
    he had not completed at least  four  years  reckonable  service  in  HM
    Forces.  Also it was conceded he could not  benefit  from  the  private
    life Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1).  It is clear that the exemption from
    which the appellant  benefited  lasted  only  for  the  period  of  the
    deployment which concluded on 10 February 2015.  The appellant did  not
    make an application for leave to remain in the 28 day period  after  he
    returned to the United Kingdom and became an overstayer.  Thereafter he
    began work for Wonga as an IT consultant on 25 June 2015  but  did  not
    have leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  nor  did  he  have
    permission to work.  An application on 27 May 2015 for indefinite leave
    to remain under the Armed Forces Appendix as a discharged member of  HM
    Forces was refused on 6  October  2015  and  he  did  not  appeal  this
    decision.  A further application on 15 October 2015 was  refused  on  9
    March 2016.

11.  I accept also with reference to the 27 May 2015  ILR  application  that
    that could not succeed because the appellant was unable to show that he
    was "a member of the regular forces" and the law applicable to him  was
    contained in the Reserved Forces Act 1996.

12.  A consequence of this is that the judge erred in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's leave had been lawful.  There were clearly periods when his
    leave was not lawful and that required to be factored into the  Article
    8 proportionality evaluation.  He had never been a member of HM  Forces
    and was not discharged from HM Forces.  The guidance in  particular  in
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 is of relevance.

13.  The other matter  of  concern  is  the  judge's  evaluation  of  public
    benefit based on UE (Nigeria).  I consider that that was legally flawed
    on the basis that the case was clearly  distinctly  separate  from  the
    requirement of exceptional circumstances (in  effect)  as  set  out  in
    Bakhtaur Singh.  It is right also to argue as Mr Jarvis does  that  the
    identity and nature of the public interest in Article 8 cases has  been
    significantly clarified since 2010, including what was said in Rhuppiah
    about the relevance of the precariousness of immigration status and the
    effect that that has on  the  extent  of  protection  which  should  be
    afforded to private life.  The judge emphasised  the  issue  of  public
    value without taking proper consideration  of  other  relevant  factors
    such as, in particular, Section 117B(5).

Notice of Decision

14.  As a consequence I consider that the judge erred in her  evaluation  of
    Article 8 in this case.  I consider, bearing in mind the submissions on
    the point that the appropriate forum for remaking the decision  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal and therefore the Secretary of  State's  appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that the matter is  to  be  reconsidered  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

