
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10316/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |                                     |
|9th September 2020                   |On 14th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                        ABDURRAHIM AHMED MUSA ZINTANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. FtT Judge Manyarara  dismissed  Mr  Zintani's  appeal  against  the
         refusal of his human rights claim for reasons set out in a decision
         promulgated on  18th  September  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by FtT judge  Appleyard  on  28th  February  2020.  I  made
         directions for the further conduct of the appeal which were sent on
         28th April 2020 and, in the  circumstances  surrounding  COVID  19,
         provision was made for the question of whether there was  an  error
         of law and if so whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  should  be
         set aside to be determined on the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the  directions;  the  appellant  stated
         that he had nothing to add to the grounds of  appeal.  He  did  not
         state he objected to the issue of error of law being determined  on
         the papers. The respondent did not state whether  she  objected  to
         the issue of an error of law being determined on the papers.

      3. I am satisfied that the  grounds  of  appeal  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant and the respondent's submissions together with the papers
         before me[1] are sufficient to enable me  to  be  able  to  take  a
         decision on whether there is an error of law in the decision of the
         FtT and if so whether the decision should  be  set  aside,  on  the
         papers and without hearing oral submissions.

         Background

      4. The appellant, a Libyan national date of birth 11 July 1996,  first
         entered the UK on 2nd August 2003 (age 7) as  a  dependant  on  his
         parent's visa, valid until 24th August 2003. On 26th August 2003 (2
         days after his visa expired) he sought an  extension  of  leave  to
         remain as a dependant,  such  application  subsequently  varied  to
         another application for leave to remain on 9th September  2003;  he
         was granted leave to remain on 2nd October 2003 until 24th February
         2004. The appellant was an overstayer between  25th  February  2003
         and 2nd October 2003, although he was only a child.

      5. On 20th February 2004 the appellant applied for leave to remain  as
         a dependant and was granted leave until 31st December 2007. On 21st
         December 2007 he applied for further leave to remain as a dependant
         and was granted leave to  remain  until  30  November  2008.Further
         periods of leave were  granted,  following  'in-time'  applications
         until 28th June 2011. He left the UK in July  2010  and  re-entered
         the UK on 15 May 2014 as an unaccompanied minor with a  visa  valid
         until 28 October 2018. He left in September 2014  and  applied  for
         entry clearance as a Tier 4 student on 24th  September  2014.  That
         application was refused.

      6. On 12th January 2015, the appellant re-entered the UK as a  Tier  4
         student valid until 26th October 2015. He was granted further leave
         to remain, following an 'in time' application until 30th  September
         2018.

      7. On 29th September 2018, the appellant applied, through  solicitors,
         for indefinite leave to remain.  The  solicitors  acknowledged  the
         appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
         with regard to 'continuous residence' but asked that discretion  be
         exercised, given the circumstances in which he had been absent from
         the UK, the compassionate circumstances during  his  childhood  and
         that he returned to the UK as soon as practically possible for him;
         he, it was submitted he had spent more than half his life in the UK
         and was, at the date of application 22 years old.

      8. That application, identified as a human rights claim,  was  refused
         for reasons set out in a letter dated 30th May 2019 and it was  his
         appeal against that decision that led to the FtT decision.




         FtT decision

      9. The FtT judge correctly set out the framework within which she  was
         required to reach her decision. She summarised the appellant's case
         and that of the respondent. She refers to the appellant having made
         an application for ILR on the basis of 10 years  lawful  residence,
         refers to the policy guidance, how  documents  and  expert  reports
         should be assessed and sets out very lengthy extracts of caselaw.

     10. The judge concludes that she cannot rely on the documents  produced
         in relation to the claimed kidnapping or  his  mental  health.  She
         concludes the appellant has only been in the UK most recently since
         2015 and has spent significant amounts of his life in  Libya  where
         he has his parents and that he is not suffering from active  health
         problems that require medical intervention or are likely to  impair
         his ability to meet the needs of day-to-day living.  She  does  not
         accept that he was kidnapped. She concluded that he would not  meet
         with very significant obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Libya.  She
         considered whether there were compelling circumstances such  as  to
         render his removal to Libya disproportionate  and  concluded  there
         were none.

         Error of law

     11. The appellant relied upon 4 grounds of appeal.

         Ground 1

     12. The appellant  submitted  that  although  the  judge  had  provided
         'breathtakingly wide' extracts from caselaw, she had either  failed
         to apply the principles to his case or they were not relevant.

     13. It is correct that the judge has provided extensive  case  extracts
         and it is unclear why  she  considered  this  necessary  given  the
         principles to be derived from the cases are well established and do
         not need to be supported by such extracts. Such  reliance  on  such
         extracts in the body of the decision makes the  decision  difficult
         to follow and over lengthy. Nevertheless the consideration  by  her
         of the documentary evidence relied upon  by  the  appellant  was  a
         consideration and assessment that was open to her. That there was a
         mistranslation of a part of a document was a matter  that  she  was
         entitled to have regard to. That the medical report  had  not  been
         prepared in accordance with established  principles  was  a  matter
         upon which she was entitled to place weight.

     14. Her consideration of the evidence was conducted  holistically.  She
         did not reach a  decision  on  the  documents  in  the  absence  of
         consideration of the evidence as a whole, including the appellant's
         oral evidence and the lack of other evidence that could  have  been
         available to him and she was entitled to reach the conclusions  she
         reached.

     15. The judge has not erred in law in her application of the  necessary
         jurisprudential principles.




         Ground 2

     16. The appellant submits the judge made  a  mistake  of  fact  on  the
         evidence he relied upon in support of his claim that  he  had  been
         kidnapped. He referred to her  reference  to  him  having  provided
         "only one document" being  incorrect  because  he  had  provided  a
         medical report, background material, his witness statement and that
         an error of translation of a small part of  the  document  was  not
         relevant because it was the main content that was relevant.

     17. The judge considered and refers to the  evidence  before  her.  She
         notes there is  no  other  independent  documentary  evidence  that
         refers specifically to the appellant having been kidnapped. She  is
         entitled to consider the reliability  of  a  document  that  has  a
         mistranslation, even though it is not the whole  document.  She  is
         entitled to take account of the fact that the appellant was sent to
         the UK as an unaccompanied child.

     18. On the basis of the evidence before her, it was open to  the  judge
         to reach the decision she did  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
         kidnapped as he claimed.

         Ground 3

     19. The appellant submits the judge erred in her conclusions  regarding
         insurmountable obstacles to his return to Libya in the  context  of
         his personal circumstances, education and the situation  in  Libya.
         He refers particularly to the fact that he had not been a financial
         burden to the UK, he had been sponsored by the  Libyan  government,
         that he still needed to complete his current course, which was  not
         available in Libya, there were no flights to Libya.

     20. The judge  did  not  fetter  her  discretion.  She  considered  all
         relevant elements of the appellant's private life in  reaching  her
         conclusion that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  his
         return to Libya. The decision was a decision that was open to  her;
         this ground of appeal is arguing for a different outcome  and  does
         not identify an error of law. The lack of flights as at the date of
         the decision was not  an  insurmountable  obstacle  or  significant
         obstacle to the appellant's reintegration. The lack of flights is a
         matter that is considered by the SSHD on arranging actual  removal;
         it is  not  personal  to  the  appellant  in  the  context  of  the
         proportionality of the decision to refuse his human  rights  claim.
         The lack of reference to this by the judge is not an error of law.

         Ground 4

     21. The appellant submits that had the judge considered the  appeal  in
         the context of an application for further leave to remain -which is
         what he had sought - as oppose to indefinite leave to  remain,  the
         outcome would have been different.

     22. The applicant however, through  his  solicitors  sought  indefinite
         leave to remain.  There  is  no  error  of  law  by  the  judge  in
         considering the appeal in that context.




         Conclusion

     23. The judge considered the whole of the evidence before  her  in  the
         context of the appeal as it was  argued  before  her.  She  reached
         conclusions that were rationally and lawfully open to her  on  that
         evidence. There is no error of law by the judge in  dismissing  the
         appeal.




    Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision. The appeal is dismissed.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date: 9 September 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a)the respondent's bundle; (b) the bundle filed on behalf of the
appellant and received by the Tribunal on 28 August 2019 and the skeleton
argument; (c) the decision of FtT judge Manyarara; (d) The application for
permission to appeal with grounds; and (e) the grant of permission to
appeal.

