
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10614/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 26 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Foziyeh [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 3rd September 1965 is a  citizen  of  Iran.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Bazini of Counsel.  The Respondent  was
    represented by Ms Willocks-Briscoe a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant has said that she first entered the United Kingdom on 6th
    April 1996.  She returned to Iran in 2002.  On  23rd  August  2011  she
    entered the UK as a visitor returning to Iran within the  timeframe  of
    that visa.  On 15th September 2016 she entered the  UK  with  leave  to
    enter as a visitor valid until 4th February 2017.  On 3rd February 2017
    she applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  her  family
    and private life.

 3. The Respondent had refused that application on 25th April 2018.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard at Taylor
    House on 15th November 2018 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach.  It
    was noted at the commencement of the hearing  that  the  Appellant  had
    left the UK but her Counsel submitted that the  appeal  should  not  be
    considered to have been withdrawn because it could not be said she  had
    left voluntarily  because  of  her  mental  health.   The  judge  heard
    evidence from the Appellant's husband  and  son  and  then  provided  a
    decision at the conclusion of which he did not find the appeal to  have
    been abandoned and allowed the appeal.

 5. Application for permission to appeal was made  by  the  Respondent  and
    initially refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  9th  January
    2019.  Further permission to appeal was made by the Respondent and  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on 4th March 2019 on the  basis  that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  properly  addressed
    the question of whether a  person  could  be  said  not  to  be  taking
    voluntarily  action  when  that   person   retains   mental   capacity.
    Directions were issued for  the  Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  consider
    whether an error of law had been made in this case or not.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6.  I  heard  submissions  from  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  in  line  with  the
    Respondent's grounds of appeal that in summary stated that the evidence
    was not sufficient to show that the Appellant had acted  involuntarily.
    I was referred to the case of MM [2012].  It was said  that  there  was
    nothing in the medical evidence to show  the  Appellant  did  not  have
    mental capacity to form an intent and the evidence showed that she  had
    an intent to leave.  There was no evidence to show that  she  had  been
    forced to leave the country.  Accordingly it  was  submitted  that  the
    appeal should be treated as abandoned.  In those circumstances  it  was
    not relevant to look beyond that point.

 7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Bazini submitted that the case of MM  was
    not the most relevant or up-to-date case and referred me to the case of
    SR [2015].  It  was  submitted  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  show
    incapacity to demonstrate a lack of intent.

 8. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    those submissions and the evidence.  I now provide that  decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. This case turns on the issue of whether it can be  said  the  Appellant
    left the UK voluntarily and therefore her appeal  must  be  treated  as
    abandoned by virtue of Section 92(8) of the 2002 Act,  or  her  leaving
    the UK was, as  a  result  of  her  mental  health,  involuntarily  and
    therefore her appeal should not be treated as abandoned.

10. In submissions I was referred to the case of MM [2012] EWCA Civ 827 and
    SR [2015] EWCA Civ 1375  and  JG  [2019]  UKUT  00072.   Neither  party
    referred me to or were aware of any case law on the issue of an  appeal
    being abandoned with reference to the issue of mental capacity.

11. One construction of an Appellant having left the UK  in  terms  of  the
    abandonment of an appeal could focus solely on the  question  of  where
    the Appellant was physically located.  If an Appellant  had  physically
    left the UK and was abroad then that could  be  said  to  be  the  only
    relevant or determinative factor and could no doubt be answered swiftly
    and with ease.

12. In MM [2012] the court had looked at a few earlier cases concerning the
    question of "leave".  Paragraph 24 of  MM  [2012]  in  my  view,  makes
    clear, that there is a further part to the  concept  of  "leave"  other
    than simple physical absence from the UK.  The court  at  paragraph  24
    said

         "I am not able to agree that a person who travels out  on  a  short
         holiday and returns on the following day has not thereby  left  the
         UK within the meaning of Statute.  Such a person has left the UK as
         a physical act.  I would exclude the exceptional  case  of  someone
         who did not leave of his own volition but for example was kidnapped
         because the word leave implies a volitional act".

13. At paragraph 30 the court said

         "I agree with Chadwick LJ's suggestion  that  the  purpose  of  the
         provision appears to be that the Tribunal  should  be  required  to
         treat  an  appeal  or  application  for  permission  to  appeal  as
         abandoned upon the applicant 'leaving' the UK without  any  further
         enquiries into the facts of the particular case and  that  includes
         without further enquiry into the intentions of the departing person
         to return".

14. At paragraph 32 the court said "for these reasons in my view  the  word
    'leave' bears a purely physical meaning the question being whether  the
    Appellant has by his voluntary act physically left the UK whether for a
    short or a long term".

15. In summary MM found that the concept of "leave" had only  two  relevant
    factors:

      a) was the Appellant physically out of the UK;

      b) was his leaving the UK voluntary.

16. SR [2015] convened specifically to decide the issue of "leave" and  the
    effect of Section  92(8).   Although  the  matter  was  not  ultimately
    contested  LJ  Sales  gave  a  ruling  because  he  saw  the  potential
    importance of the point (paragraph 12).  In his ruling he said:

         "Where an applicant brings an appeal from within the UK but  leaves
         the  UK  before  the  appeal  is  finally  determined  defines  the
         circumstances in which the appeal is to be  treated  as  abandoned.
         In my view the word 'leaves' used in this context  means  voluntary
         leaves the UK.  It does not cover a situation in which an applicant
         is removed against his will by the Secretary of State".

17. It seems to me the context of  "leave"  as  defined  in  SR  [2015]  is
    entirely in line with the definition provided in the earlier case of MM
    [2012].  Lord Justice Sales at paragraph 16 in SR provided his  reasons
    for constructing "leave" in the  way  that  he  did.   In  summary  his
    reasons appear to be as follows:

      a) Leave has a strong connotation of an action being taken by an agent
         on a voluntary basis.

      b) The concept  of  voluntary  is  inferential  and  matching  in  the
         concepts of "brings an appeal" and "leaves the country".

      c) It will breach the rule of law if the State (a party to the ongoing
         litigation) could defeat litigation by removing the opposing party.

      d) Previous cases involving predecessor legislation have  referred  to
         "leave" meaning by a person's voluntary action.

18. There is therefore in my view no conflict  in  case  law  and  a  clear
    thread that runs through the case law that "leave"  means  not  just  a
    person being physically absent from the UK but having voluntarily left.
     Those cases referred to above have sought to emphasise  the  voluntary
    nature as an appropriate defence against the intervention  of  a  third
    party to remove an Appellant.  An example of a kidnapper was  given  in
    MM and more importantly in SR to prevent the removal of  an  individual
    by the Secretary of State who was themselves a party to the action.

19. I have not been referred to nor am  I  aware  of  any  case  where  the
    absence of intervention by a third party would render  the  Appellant's
    voluntary removal, involuntary, so to defeat the concept of "leave".

20. It is  theoretically  possible  to  think  of  circumstances  where  an
    Appellant may be removed from the UK having for example being  rendered
    unconscious, or drugged or even perhaps duped but all such  theoretical
    circumstances seem to require the intervention or  action  of  a  third
    party.

21. It is again perhaps theoretically possible to  envisage  a  case  where
    although the Appellant leaves the UK  without  the  intervention  of  a
    third party that Appellant's mental capacity is  so  severely  affected
    that it cannot be said they were capable  of  making  such  a  decision
    voluntary (or perhaps indeed capable of making any coherent  decision).
    There may be theoretically such a potential case but the case before me
    is not such a case.  The evidence in this case may well demonstrate the
    Appellant  was  suffering  from  depression   and/or   other   mentally
    debilitating features but the evidence does  not  demonstrate  she  was
    incapable of making decisions or had not voluntarily taken the  various
    steps necessary to leave the UK and return by aeroplane to Iran.  There
    was further no reference to any subsequent evidence such as  letter  or
    email to demonstrate that she had had a change of mind recognising that
    her leaving the UK was no more than the  temporary  aberration.   There
    was further no evidence provided as to her circumstances in Iran  which
    may or may not have provided support  for  the  concept  that  she  was
    unable to be left alone or make her own decisions.

22. There are serious implications for the submissions raised by Mr Bazini.
     One can readily understand how a person may leave the UK involuntarily
    as a result of the actions of a third  party,  some  specific  examples
    having been given by the Court of Appeal.  However to  suggest  that  a
    person is incapable of voluntarily making a decision because of  mental
    difficulties  has  potentially  profound  consequences.   The   logical
    conclusion of such assertion is that other people by necessity need  to
    take decisions on behalf of that individual and that  the  actions  and
    wishes of that individual can and perhaps should be disregarded because
    they cannot be deemed to think properly for  themselves.   The  serious
    restrictions on such an individual's free will and action  is  obvious.
    It goes against some of the most basic rights  of  human  being.   Such
    draconian action should only be considered in extremis and  only  after
    the presentation of proper evidence.

23. As I have indicated above the evidence in the case before me  does  not
    approach  that  level.   It  consists  of  the  observations   of   the
    Appellant's husband and the untested evidence of a psychologist.

24. It was a  material  error  of  law  to  find  that  that  evidence  was
    sufficiently robust and powerful to lead to  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant acted involuntarily when she took the various steps to  leave
    the UK and return to Iran, her home country, and where she has returned
    to in the past.

Notice of Decision

25. A material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Given that the  specific
    issue in this case is whether or not the Appellant voluntarily left the
    UK and therefore her appeal should be  treated  as  abandoned  or  not,
    having concluded that for reasons given she did  so  leave  voluntarily
    then it flows from that finding that there is no further extant  appeal
    to be heard  and  no  further  jurisdiction  to  be  exercised  by  the
    Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.




