
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10199/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Remotely                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2020                            |On 18 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     Y M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Marsh and Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
       any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the
       appellant or his partner. Breach of this order can be punished as a
       contempt of court. I make this order because the Decision and
       Reasons involves detailed consideration of the appellant's partner's
       circumstances and she is a refugee and entitled to privacy.

    2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
       dismiss the appeal of the appellant against a decision of the
       Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain in the United
       Kingdom.

    3. Permission was given by the First-tier Tribunal particularly because
       it was found arguable that the:

  "FtT Judge made a material error in law in failing to have sufficient
  regard to the Appellant's partner's status as a refugee, failing to
  adequately analyse the basis for this grant of asylum and the risks in
  her returning to Albania, and/or failing to give clear and sufficient
  reasons for going behind this grant and finding that, in the
  circumstances of this case, it is reasonable to expect the children to go
  to Albania.  In addition it is arguable that the judge, in finding that
  it is in the children's best interests to be with both parents, has
  failed to have sufficient regard to this factor when considering the
  particular circumstances of the case as a whole."

    4. I begin by looking carefully at the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
       decision.

    5. The appellant is a national of Albania who was born in 1986.  He
       claims to have entered the United Kingdom irregularly by lorry in
       July 2015 but to have left the United Kingdom in March 2016 after
       about eight months to go to Germany because of family problems.  He
       says that he re-entered the United Kingdom, again irregularly, in
       June 2018 and on 18 September 2018 he applied for leave to remain on
       "private and family life" grounds.

    6. When the appellant applied for leave he explained through his
       solicitors that his partner, who I identify simply as "R", was born
       in 1995 in Albania, that they have a daughter born in May 2016 in
       the United Kingdom and that his partner was expecting a second child
       in March 2019.  His partner "R" is a refugee.  It was her case that
       the present appellant is the biological parent of a child (now
       children) with refugee status in the United Kingdom.  They had lived
       together as a family unit when the appellant looked after the
       children on a daily basis and he wanted permission to be in the
       United Kingdom so that he could work to support his family.  It was
       the appellant's case that his family could not live in Albania.

    7. The application was refused and the judge considered the Reasons for
       Refusal.

    8. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant's
       "partner" was a partner within the definition in the Immigration
       Rules because they had not been living together in a relationship
       akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the date of
       application and, in any event, the appellant was not eligible for
       leave because he did not hold any leave to enter or remain in the
       United Kingdom.  The respondent found that the appellant had not
       shown "very significant obstacles to his integration" into life in
       Albania and that there were no exceptional circumstances warranting
       a grant of leave outside the Rules.

    9. The Secretary of State considered the interests of the appellant's
       children.  At the date of the application his daughter was 2 years
       and 3 months old and his son was not born until March 2019.  The
       Secretary of State's view was that they were developing language
       skills and awareness of their surroundings and could adapt.  The
       Secretary of State's reasons included the finding that it was "both
       reasonable and Section 55 compliant for your children" to return to
       Albania.

   10. It is not clear from that decision if the Secretary of State
       contemplated separating the children from their mother, who is
       entitled to be in the United Kingdom.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge consider the evidence.

   12. The Judge found the appellant's witness statements to be
       "repetitive" but noted the claim that there were significant
       obstacles to integration in Albania and that the appellant could not
       live in Albania with his partner because she was a refugee and was
       frightened of returning to Albania for a Convention reason.  There
       was little point in his returning to Albania and applying to enter
       regularly because his partner did not earn sufficiently to support
       him and her earning capacity was limited by reason of her needing to
       look after the children and particularly the youngest one, who she
       was breastfeeding.  The appellant regarded separating the children
       from their mother as a "serious breach of Article 8 ECHR".

   13. It is his case that he met his partner in October 2014 and their
       close relationship started not long after that.  He entered the
       United Kingdom in July 2015 and they started to cohabit in September
       2018.  He did not explain in his statement his reasons for going to
       Germany and living there for two years.

   14. The appellant's partner gave evidence and confirmed the details of
       the onset of their relationship and described the appellant as her
       "future husband".  At the time of the hearing they had two children.
        She feared that if the appellant were returned to Albania her
       family would be destroyed.  She did not intend to leave the United
       Kingdom because she was afraid.  She said she would not agree to the
       children going to Albania as she did not think it would be safe for
       them.

   15. They had not been able to marry because the Secretary of State had
       retained her husband's passport.

   16. When he gave evidence the appellant explained that he had travelled
       to Germany as his brother had suffered bleeding in the brain and the
       appellant wanted to help.  His evidence was that he and his partner
       were not "engaged" but they did live together and had two children.
       It had not been legally possible to marry.

   17. He agreed that they had not cohabited for two years because
       cohabitation began in September 2018.  He accepted that his partner
       was aware of his immigration status and he said they had arrived
       together when she was escaping a family problem.

   18. He explained that his partner had claimed asylum in 2016.  They had
       lived together since they arrived in the United Kingdom together but
       he went to Germany and thus broke their continuity of residence.  He
       did not want to claim asylum before he went to Germany as he did not
       know how the process would work.  The Home Office had invited him to
       claim asylum in a letter dated 7 May 2019 but he said he would do
       that if his human rights application were refused.

   19. The appellant's partner gave evidence.  She said that the basis of
       her asylum claim was threats from her father, who did not agree with
       her choice of partner.  Her father wanted her to marry an old person
       who would pay the family money.

   20. She said that they resumed cohabitation in September 2018.  She was
       not working because she wanted to give her attention to her 7 month
       old son.

   21. Helpfully and realistically the appellant by his Counsel, Ms Reid,
       conceded that the appellant was not her "partner" within the meaning
       of the Rules.

   22. Ms Reid confirmed that it was accepted that the trip to Germany
       broke the continuity of residence but she submitted that there was
       an insurmountable obstacle in the path of the relationship
       continuing outside the United Kingdom.  She said the children could
       not leave the United Kingdom without their mother and the mother
       could not leave because it was not safe.

   23. The judge noted that there was little supporting evidence about the
       intensity and longevity of the relationship although the judge did
       seem to be satisfied that the appellant and his partner do now
       cohabit and that the appellant is involved in the lives of the
       children.  For example, the judge accepted evidence that the
       appellant is known to the eldest child's nursery school and that he
       collects her from there.

   24. At paragraph 29 the judge noted the appellant's case that the
       appellant's partner and children are refugees and cannot be expected
       to return to Albania.  About this the judge said:

  "It is right that they cannot be expected to return however, this is
  still a choice available as the claim relates to the partner's difficulty
  with her family, she would not be returning to Albania to live as a lone
  woman or a single parent.  She would[?] have the appellant's support and
  there is no evidence which suggests that her family have influence
  throughout the country and that she could not live with the appellant and
  the children in another part of Albania."

   25. The judge went on to say that the children were young and that their
       best interests were to be with their parents.

   26. At paragraph 31 the judge made an alternative finding.  She said
       that the appellant could return to Albania and keep in contact with
       his family as he did when he was in Germany.

   27. She found the appellant's reluctance to claim asylum indicative that
       he did not have a sound protection claim but said in reality he had
       spent little time actually living with his family and his partner
       was able to manage in his absence.  His partner had never worked in
       the United Kingdom but had supported the children from public funds
       and noted that the letter showing the appellant to be known to the
       nursery school also indicated that he did not take primary
       responsibility for taking the child to and from nursery.  The judge
       found any interference in private and family life consequent on his
       removal to be proportionate.

   28. The judge then noted the appellant's weak ties in the United
       Kingdom.  There was no evidence of his "integration" and his
       residence had been for a short term only.  She said it was not
       unreasonable or disproportionate for the appellant to return to
       Albania.

   29. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first complains that the judge
       had "essentially redetermined the appellant's partner's asylum
       claim".  She said it had been established that internal relocation
       was not an option because her asylum claim had succeeded.  There was
       no evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant's partner would
       not be at risk if he were there with her.

   30. Secondly it was said that there had been a failure to give proper
       consideration to the best interests of the children.

   31. Special directions were issued in this case in a view to making an
       expeditious decision during the time of national lockdown and this
       led to the respondent serving written submissions dated 4 June 2020.
        They are signed by Mr Clarke.

   32. In response to ground 1, contending that the appellant's partner is
       a refugee and could not be expected to return to Albania, the
       submissions argue that the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal of
       the appellant's partner specifically because she feared her father
       because she was single.  At that point it was her case that her
       partner had gone to Germany to visit his brother and she had not had
       further dealings with him.  Against this background the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 54 that "the appellant is
       reasonably likely to fall into the category of women perceived as
       kurva as she is returning as a single mother" and this created a
       risk of persecution that could not be addressed by internal
       relocation.  The summary written submissions contended that the
       First-tier Tribunal was absolutely entitled to find that she would
       not be returning as a lone woman or single parent and therefore in
       the category of people who risk persecution.

   33. Mr Clarke then gave substance to this by producing a copy of the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which was in appeal number
       PA/12351/2016.

   34. Ground 2 complaining that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not
       given proper consideration to the best interests of the children is
       dismissed almost summarily by Mr Clarke.  He contends that the
       ground depends on a misunderstanding of the nature of the
       appellant's partner's case.  The problem was in her returning alone
       and that problem is not contemplated now.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in the appellant's
       partner's case is of limited value because it was not before the
       First-tier Tribunal. Rather disappointingly the Secretary of State
       did not ensure that it was available. It would have been helpful.
       However, its real value to me is to confirm that the judge's finding
       the reason for the partner being given asylum was fear of her father
       because she was single woman with a child.

   36. It is not absolutely clear on what basis the judge reached that
       conclusion but there was evidence before the judge that is not
       recorded in any detail before me and I am certainly not suggesting
       the judge was not entitled to reach that conclusion on what was
       before him.

   37. Mr Clarke contended that this was the proper approach, particularly
       in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in AL (Albania) v
       SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 950.  I find Mr Clarke's submission is right
       but did not understand them to be subject to significant challenge
       on the law.

   38. I have reflected on the oral submissions as well as the written
       matters that I have noted.  If there was any suggestion in the First-
       tier Tribunal's decision that the children should go and leave their
       mother behind then I would find that surprising.  The children are
       entitled to be in the United Kingdom and at present their mother is
       entitled to be with them.  If they are not going to have contact
       with their father then the evidence only points in favour of saying
       that their best interests lie in remaining where they are in the
       United Kingdom lawfully in the day-to-day care of their mother with
       some contact with their father when he is able to arrange it.
       Presently he is living with them but that has not always been the
       case.  Clearly this couple have found a way of exercising a family
       life whilst living apart.

   39. However, as the First-tier Tribunal clearly recognised, whatever the
       best interests of the children are, there is a strong
       proportionality argument in making decisions that do not allow
       people to prosper from casual disregard of the requirements of
       immigration control such as occurred here.

   40. Albania is a diverse country.  Some people live very well there.  If
       the appellant were concerned about the children he could have led
       evidence that the children would not have an acceptable lifestyle
       there but that has not happened.  In reality, no good reason has
       been given other than the fact of, rather than the reasons for,
       refugee status.

   41. I am entirely satisfied the judge was entitled to conclude that the
       family could remove to Albania and that there was nothing
       disproportionate in reaching such a decision.  This is not affected
       by any criticisms that might be found in the consideration of the
       best interests of the children.  I also find no legitimate criticism
       of the second limb of the judge's decision that the appellant can
       return to Albania and the family can live apart as they have chosen
       to do.  Again, this is probably not ideal and not in the best
       interests of the children but it is not a disproportionate
       interference with the private and family lives of the people
       concerned.  Rather it is a reflection of the fact that each parent
       and the children have different rights; one parent is entitled to be
       in Albania and the United Kingdom, the children are entitled to be
       in the United Kingdom and one parent is only entitled to be in
       Albania.  The judge was entitled to conclude that arranging affairs
       for the family who lived apart for much of the time was not
       disproportionate on the facts of this case.

   42. It follows that I find no material error in the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appeal against this decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 March 2021                   |



