
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10241/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 3 November 2020           |On 08 December 2020                  |
|via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [U]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by City Heights
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. By a decision promulgated on 13 March 2020, made following an  oral
         face-to-face hearing, I found an error of law in  the  decision  of
         Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell itself promulgated  on
         8 August 2019 allowing the Appellant's appeal.   My  error  of  law
         decision is appended to this decision for ease of reference.  I set
         aside Judge Manuell's decision and  gave  directions  for  the  re-
         hearing of the appeal in this Tribunal.

      2. In accordance with my directions, the Respondent filed and served a
         letter dated 6 April 2020 ("the Respondent's letter")  setting  out
         her position as to the Appellant's immigration status.  I will deal
         with that when I come to the  evidence.   The  Respondent's  letter
         crossed with a Note and Directions  dated  3  April  2020  but  not
         issued until 24 April 2020 when I directed a case management review
         due  to  a  delay  in  the  filing  of  the  Respondent's  position
         statement.

      3. However, following the Respondent's letter, I issued a further Note
         and Directions dated 6 May 2020, directing the Appellant to respond
         to the Respondent's letter and to  file  any  further  evidence  in
         relation to the claim that was made at the  error  of  law  hearing
         that he was unable to return to Bangladesh due to a  fear  of  what
         would await him there ("the  new  claim").   I  also  directed  the
         Respondent to indicate whether she  considered  the  new  claim  to
         amount to a "new matter" and, if so, whether she  consented  to  me
         considering it.  As I will come to, having reconsidered  the  legal
         position in advance of the hearing on 3 November, I formed the view
         that I was precluded in any event from considering  the  new  claim
         except on a more limited basis due to a lack of jurisdiction.

      4. On 28 April 2020 and 2 June 2020, the Appellant's then  solicitors,
         Gulbenkian Andonian, wrote to the Tribunal to  indicate  that  they
         had lost contact with the Appellant and asking for an extension  of
         time to comply with the directions.  In my decision dated  16  June
         2020, I refused that extension and directed a resumed  hearing  via
         Skype for Business not before 31 August 2020.

      5. On 8 October 2020, the Appellant, now represented  by  a  different
         set of solicitors, City Heights, filed his supplementary  evidence.
         Although that was significantly out of time, no objection was taken
         by the Respondent to its admission.  Ms Everett did not  have  that
         evidence before her at the start of the hearing  although  accepted
         it had been served electronically on the Respondent.  She was  able
         to obtain a further electronic copy from the Appellant's solicitors
         during a short adjournment that I permitted at  the  start  of  the
         hearing and indicated that she was ready to proceed even though she
         had not been able to read all the evidence in detail.

      6. I had before me the bundle  which  was  filed  for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  I refer to that below as [AB/xx].   The  Appellant  also
         filed a bundle of further evidence at the time of the error of  law
         hearing to  which  I  refer  below  as  [ABS/xx].   I  also  had  a
         substantial bundle of new evidence filed for this hearing as  above
         to which I refer below as [AB2/xx].  I heard oral evidence from the
         Appellant and  his  friend,  Mr  [AH].   Although  the  Appellant's
         solicitor asked for an interpreter for Mr [AH] and one was  booked,
         the interpreter did  not  join  the  hearing.   Mr  [AH]  confirmed
         however that he was able to understand and communicate sufficiently
         in English to give his evidence and I observed no difficulty in his
         understanding of the questions or giving of answers.

      7. The resumed hearing was heard via Skype for Business.  It proceeded
         without technical difficulties.   Neither  party  objected  to  the
         forum of the hearing or  raised  any  issues  in  relation  to  its
         conduct.

      8. At the outset of the hearing, I indicated to Mr Malik  that  I  had
         formed the view that I did not have jurisdiction  to  consider  the
         Appellant's  new  claim  as  a  protection  claim.   I  explain  my
         reasoning below.  I also pointed out to Mr  Malik  that  the  claim
         which the Appellant was now advancing was entirely new and  that  I
         would be making credibility findings, so far as  I  could  consider
         the new claim, for the first time.  As such, although  I  obviously
         had not formed a view about the credibility of the evidence at that
         stage, if my findings were adverse, the Appellant's only  route  of
         appeal would require him to satisfy the Court of  Appeal  that  any
         onward appeal meets the second  appeals  test.   Further,  since  I
         could not  consider  the  claim  as  a  protection  claim,  if  the
         Appellant wished to claim asylum at a later stage, he would also be
         fixed with my credibility findings about the new claim.

      9. I permitted Mr Malik  a  short  adjournment  to  take  instructions
         whether the Appellant wished to consider his position and wanted to
         seek a remittal of the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  to
         withdraw  it  in  favour  of  an  asylum   claim.    Having   taken
         instructions, Mr Malik informed me that  the  Appellant  wished  to
         proceed with the hearing before me.

    THE NEW CLAIM: JURISDICTION

     10. The Appellant now claims to be at risk on return, mainly due to his
         sexuality.  He claims that he identifies as  homosexual.  In  brief
         summary, he says that Facebook posts of him attending the Gay Pride
         parade in Brighton in 2015  went  viral  and  that  his  family  in
         Bangladesh is now aware of his sexuality and has disowned him.   He
         also says that he has received threats from persons  or  groups  in
         Bangladesh as a result of the posts.  He also claims to be at  risk
         due  to  his  activities  with  the  Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party
         ("BNP").

     11. Those claims are on any view protection claims.  A protection claim
         is defined by Section 82 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 ("the 2002 Act") as "a claim  made  by  a  person  ('P')  that
         removal of P from the United Kingdom (i) would  breach  the  United
         Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, or  (ii)  would
         breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to  persons
         eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection".

     12. There are two reasons why I consider that I  lack  jurisdiction  to
         consider what is clearly a protection claim as such.  The first  is
         that Section 82 of the 2002 Act gives a right of appeal if there is
         a refusal of a protection claim by the Respondent.  A refusal of  a
         protection claim is defined at Section 82(2)(b) as follows:

             "P's protection claim is refused if  the  Secretary  of  State
             makes one or more of the following decisions -

             (i)  that removal of P  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  not
             breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
             Convention;

             (ii) that removal of P  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  not
             breach the United Kingdom's obligations in relation to persons
             eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection."

         There is no  refusal  of  a  protection  claim  in  this  case  and
         therefore no decision against which  the  Appellant  may  currently
         appeal.

     13. Second, Section 84 of the 2002 Act sets out the grounds  which  may
         be relied upon by an appellant. Section 84(1) allows  an  appellant
         to appeal against the refusal of  a  protection  claim  on  Refugee
         Convention,  humanitarian  protection  or  human  rights   grounds.
         However, Section 84(2) provides that  "[a]n  appeal  under  Section
         82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights claim) must  be  brought  on  the
         ground that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998".  Accordingly, the Appellant cannot argue in  this
         appeal that he is at risk on return as that would amount to a claim
         that removal would breach the Refugee Convention  which  is  not  a
         ground available to him in an appeal against the refusal of a human
         rights claim.  I add that he has never raised such a ground in this
         appeal.

     14. Mr Malik drew my attention to  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  Birch
         (Precariousness and mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT  00086  (IAC)
         where the Tribunal held that "[t]he prohibition on considering  new
         matters in s85 of the 2002 Act does not apply to proceedings in the
         Upper Tribunal".  That would be relevant if the only  objection  to
         my considering the claim was that  set  out  in  my  error  of  law
         decision, namely that the Secretary of  State's  consent  would  be
         required in order to consider it.  That is however a very different
         point to the fundamental jurisdictional objection which I  set  out
         above.

     15. Having considered my preliminary conclusions,  Mr  Malik  indicated
         that he did not wish to seek to persuade me that my  interpretation
         was incorrect and that he would argue  the  Appellant's  new  claim
         only on the basis that to remove him to Bangladesh as a  "gay"  man
         would be a breach of his Article  8  ECHR  rights  and  lead  to  a
         finding  that  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to   his
         integration in Bangladesh.

     16. I therefore turn to summarise the issues before me  and  the  legal
         framework which applies

    THE ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

     17. I begin with the length of the Appellant's  residence  in  the  UK.
         Before Judge Manuell, the Appellant claimed that he had been in the
         UK lawfully for ten years and was  therefore  entitled  to  succeed
         under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").   I
         will  come  on  in  due  course  to  the  evidence  regarding   the
         Appellant's immigration history.

     18. The Court of Appeal has  recently  considered  the  legal  position
         regarding lawfulness of stay where  there  is  an  application  for
         leave to remain made out of time in the case of Hoque and others  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1357
         ("Hoque"). In those cases, the Court of Appeal drew  a  distinction
         between "open ended" or "current" overstaying on the one  hand  and
         "book-ended" or "previous" overstaying on the other when looking at
         the periods which fall to be disregarded when assessing the  period
         of lawful residence.  In the case of "book-ended" overstaying where
         there is a gap  in  lawful  residence  but  leave  is  subsequently
         granted, that gap is to be regarded as part of the lawful residence
         for assessing whether the requirement for a  continuous  period  of
         ten years is met whereas in the case of "open  ended"  overstaying,
         the period is not taken into account.

     19. Mr Malik noted that the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  Hoque  was
         reached by a majority of  two  to  one  (as  I  accept).   He  also
         accepted that the majority judgment does not assist  the  Appellant
         but reserved his client's position in case the issue  goes  further
         as it may well do or he wishes to argue the point  in  any  further
         appeal. I was informed that the Court of Appeal in the  Hoque  case
         is considering granting permission to appeal to the  Supreme  Court
         given the conflicting views expressed in that judgment.

     20. In relation to the Appellant's claim within the  Rules,  therefore,
         it is accepted that he cannot meet the long  residence  requirement
         in paragraph 276B.  He cannot  meet  any  of  the  other  residence
         requirements in paragraph 276ADE.  His case  within  the  Rules  is
         therefore firmly pinned  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  whether
         there are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration  in
         Bangladesh.

     21. It is to this issue that the Appellant's  new  claim  is  relevant.
         Although I am unable to consider the  new  claim  as  a  protection
         claim, I accept that whether the Appellant is in fact a gay man  is
         relevant to his ability to integrate in his home country.   Indeed,
         Ms Everett conceded that, if I were to find  that  the  Appellant's
         new claim as to his sexuality to  be  credible,  he  would  satisfy
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.  It would then  be  a  matter
         for the Respondent what period of leave to  grant  given  that  the
         Appellant has never claimed asylum on account of his sexuality.

     22. The Appellant does not claim to have a partner or child in the  UK.
         He does not make any claim based on a family life here (although he
         does have family members in the UK with whom he claims  to  have  a
         strong relationship).  His claim is based  solely  on  his  private
         life.  If the Appellant does not succeed under the Rules,  I  still
         need to consider whether he is able to succeed outside  the  Rules.
         When doing so, the crucial issue is whether the decision to  refuse
         the Appellant leave to remain is proportionate.   To  that  end,  I
         should balance the interference with the Appellant's  private  life
         against the public interest in his removal.

     23. When considering the public interest which applies, I am  bound  to
         have regard to  the  factors  in  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act
         ("Section 117B") which are as follows so far as relevant:

             "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  ...,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  ..."

    CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE

    Appellant's Immigration History

     24. The Appellant arrived in the UK as a student on 18 April 2008  with
         leave to remain to 2 October 2011.  His leave was extended in  this
         category to 11 April 2014 and again to 16 August 2015.

     25. On 7 August 2015, the Appellant applied for further leave as a Tier
         2 General Migrant.  His application was refused on 14 October  2015
         and his application for administrative review was  rejected  on  16
         November 2015.  The decision letters in that regard are at  [AB/37]
         to [AB/49].

     26. The foregoing chronology  is  accepted  on  both  sides.   However,
         thereafter the history is disputed.

     27. The Respondent says that the Appellant's leave to remain  ended  on
         16 November 2015 when his Tier 2 application was  finally  refused.
         The Appellant says that what happened next means that his leave was
         effectively reinstated.

     28. The Appellant claimed to be the victim of a  fraud  perpetrated  by
         his intended sponsor.  He reported the matter to Sussex Police  and
         Action Fraud and along  with  other  victims  to  the  Metropolitan
         Police ([4] of his statement at [AB/2]).  He says that as a  result
         of this and a judicial review challenge to the Tier 2  refusal,  in
         which he achieved partial success, his leave did not end. I do  not
         have evidence in relation to the judicial review which is  said  by
         the Respondent in the decision letter under  appeal  to  have  been
         refused on 6 June 2016.

     29. The answer to the evidential dispute in relation to the Appellant's
         immigration history lies in the letter from the Respondent dated 18
         May 2016 at [AB/50-52] which withdrew the reason for refusal of the
         Tier 2 application under paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules.  That rule
         would have automatically prevented the Appellant's re-entry in  the
         future.  That  may  well  be  an  indication  that  the  Respondent
         accepted that the Appellant did not  deliberately  deceive  her  in
         relation to the Tier 2 application (as I will come  to).   However,
         the Respondent otherwise maintained the refusal as she was bound to
         do, given the lack of a genuine sponsor.  There is no indication or
         evidence that the refusal of the Tier 2 application was quashed  as
         a result of the judicial review.

     30. The Appellant then made an application for  further  leave  outside
         the Rules on 30 June 2016.  That led to the letter dated 20 October
         2016 at [AB/55] on which the Appellant places reliance  as  showing
         that he continued to have leave.  That reads as follows:

             "1.  On 18 May 2016 we sent you a letter  which  withdrew  the
             finding of deception  which  was  contained  in  the  original
             decision letter issued in  respect  of  your  application  for
             leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 2 (General) migrant.

             2.   This letter  is  supplemental  to,  and  should  be  read
             alongside, the original decision of 14 October  2015  and  the
             previous supplementary letter.

             3.    In  view  of  the  circumstances  of  your   case,   any
             application for leave to remain that you make in the UK within
             28 days of the date you receive this letter will be treated as
             if it had been made within 28 days of the expiry of your  last
             grant of leave and will not be refused on the basis  that  you
             are an overstayer.

             4.   If you leave the UK and  then  make  an  application  for
             entry clearance, for the purposes of paragraph 320(7B) of  the
             Immigration Rules, the start date of any period of overstaying
             will be calculated from the date you received this letter."

             [emphasis added]

     31. The effect of that letter is,  as  submitted  in  the  Respondent's
         letter dated 6 April 2020, that "the Respondent...agreed  to  treat
         the subsequent out-of-time application dated 30 June 2016  for  LTR
         on compassionate grounds of 30 June 2016  (which  was  subsequently
         varied to ILR) as 'in-time'".  As also indicated  in  that  letter,
         the Respondent "does not have the power to extend periods of  leave
         conferred by statute under s3C of Immigration Act 1971".

     32. If the Appellant had subsequently been granted leave, his period of
         overstaying, following the majority judgment in Hoque,  would  have
         fallen to be disregarded when calculating the continuous period  of
         lawful residence.  However, the Appellant  was  never  subsequently
         granted leave.

     33. The Appellant  next  made  an  application  to  vary  his  30  June
         application to one  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   That  was
         acknowledged by the Home Office on 16 December 2016 ([AB/56]).   At
         that time, on any view, the Appellant had not  accrued  ten  years'
         lawful leave as he did not arrive in the UK until April 2008.   The
         application was refused on 28 June 2017  ([AB/61-68]).   The  human
         rights claim was certified under section 94 of the 2002 Act.   That
         refusal is the basis on  which  the  Respondent  indicated  in  the
         decision under appeal that the Appellant's leave ended on  29  June
         2017.  As I have already noted,  the  Respondent  has  changed  her
         position.  However, even if that had been  the  end  date  for  the
         Appellant's leave to remain, he would  not  have  completed  a  ten
         years' period of lawful residence by that date.

     34. The Appellant then submitted a further  application  based  on  his
         private life in July 2017 and varied that on 8 November 2017 (again
         prior to the  completion  of  ten  years'  residence)  to  one  for
         indefinite leave to remain.  That  was  therefore  the  application
         refused by the decision under appeal.

     35. As I have indicated above, I agree with  the  Respondent's  revised
         position and I find that the Appellant's leave ended on 16 November
         2015, some seven and a half years after he arrived.  Even if  I  am
         wrong about that, his leave ended on 29  June  2017  and  therefore
         prior to him completing a period of ten years' lawful residence.

    Appellant's Private life in the UK

     36. I leave aside for the moment the new claim based on the Appellant's
         sexuality and focus on the evidence which was before Judge  Manuell
         as contained in the first bundle and the further evidence which the
         Appellant produced thereafter and prior to the error of law hearing
         before me as contained in the supplementary bundle.

    The Appellant's Evidence and Documentary Evidence

     37. The Appellant's first statement dated  17  July  2019  at  [AB/1-4]
         focusses in large part on his  immigration  history  which  I  have
         dealt with above.  The following is the only  evidence  as  to  his
         private life:

             "8.  The Home Office  also  refused  my  application  as  they
             believe I have not established a private life here in the  UK.
             However, I submit that I have a host  of  relatives  including
             cousins and friends in the  UK  whom  I  have  created  strong
             relationships with.  I have registered as a blood donor (Donor
             ID: P2100229A) in the UK and I am a  volunteer  with  The  Red
             Cross organisation, where I have volunteered for 10 months.  I
             am also part of my local cricket club and  take  part  in  the
             games frequently.  I have been offered a job with the  British
             Army however due to my leave I am unable  to  join  the  army.
             Once I am granted my visa, I will be able to  join  and  serve
             the British Military Force.  Please find attached letter  from
             The British Army.  Subsequently, the Member of  Parliament  Mr
             Peter Kyle has also expressed his support for me in making  my
             appeal in hope to acquire indefinite leave to remain."

             [emphasis in the original]

     38. The Appellant submitted as proof of identity the photo page of  his
         Bangladeshi passport which shows that it was issued in Dhaka  on  8
         October 2014.  It is not clear whether the Appellant  travelled  to
         Bangladesh to renew his passport; he had leave  to  remain  at  the
         relevant time and could readily have done so.  He has not  produced
         the other pages of his passport which would show his travel in  and
         out of the UK.

     39. The Appellant has studied in the UK and has achieved a Second Class
         Honours (1st Division) degree awarded by the University of  Central
         Lancashire in Business Administration in December  2013  ([AB/93]).
         It appears from the document at [AB/95] that the Appellant  studied
         at the London School of Business and Finance.  The  Appellant  also
         achieved a Master of Business Administration in Banking and Finance
         awarded by the University of Trinity St David  (London  Campus)  in
         the academic years 2013/14 to 2014/15 ([AB/94]).   Those  documents
         indicate that the Appellant was studying in London until 2015.  The
         Appellant has passed his Life in the UK test ([AB/97]).

     40. When the  Appellant  applied  for  Tier  2  leave,  he  produced  a
         certificate of sponsorship ("CAS") which the Respondent found to be
         false. That it was false is not disputed by the Appellant who  says
         that he was the victim of fraud.  The  letters  at  [AB/78-79]  and
         [AB/104-105] bear out his case that he reported the fraud in  2016.
         The correspondence with the Respondent to  which  I  have  referred
         above shows that  the  allegation  of  deception  and  reliance  on
         paragraph 320(7B) was withdrawn.  When I  asked  Mr  Malik  whether
         that necessarily indicated that the Respondent  accepted  that  the
         Appellant was a victim of the fraud and had not knowingly  obtained
         a false CAS, he pointed out that the Respondent had not  taken  any
         point on suitability in the decision under appeal.  I  accept  that
         this indicates that the  Respondent  does  not  now  say  that  the
         Appellant was involved in the deception.

     41. The documents at [AB/106-125] show that, following the  refusal  of
         his Tier 2 application, and  his  subsequent  application  in  June
         2016, from July 2016 to November 2016, the  Appellant  was  seeking
         another  course  of  study  or  sponsor  for  employment.   He  was
         evidently unable to find another such course or employer.

     42. A letter at [AB/84] confirms that the Appellant made an application
         to join the British Army and that the Army was in  a  position,  in
         April 2018, to offer him employment  on  a  conditional  basis  but
         could not do so unless he had a visa.

     43. Following that offer, the Appellant made a written plea to the Home
         Office on 18 May 2018 ("the May 2018 letter") to be given leave  so
         that he could join the army ([AB/85]).  As well as setting out  his
         immigration history including that he had  been  defrauded  by  his
         supposed sponsor, the Appellant said this (which is now relied upon
         in relation to the new claim):

             "Moreover I do really love UK more than anything else.   I  do
             love United Kingdom's people and their kindness,  people  here
             call me 'love  and  darling'  love  Britain  because  you  are
             literally the most polite nation ever I met I don't  find  any
             differences between British people and sense of humour, I  can
             be whoever I want to be here, love  Britain's  people  accent,
             cultures, the way of life, foods, the history.  Since I  born,
             I am fan of the literature William Shakespeare, David Beckham,
             The Queen and Royal Family.  I am very much proud because I am
             living in here.  I love very much Brighton & Hove city because
             it's simply beautiful.  This is an excellent city by the sea I
             have ever seen.  I love very  much  The  Seagulls,  Brighton's
             nightlife, The Park, Brighton's Festival,  The  beach  sunset,
             the pier, the land just beautiful!  It  feels  like  I  am  on
             holiday.  It is very healthy to live here and people here  are
             very friendly.  I called Brighton the city of full of life.  I
             cannot imagine a day without Brighton.  My favourite  time  is
             in Brighton gay pride season in August every  year.   I  never
             missed it.  I think few years  ago,  me  and  my  friend  were
             enjoying in gay  pride.   One  of  my  friends  he  put  those
             pictures in social media and it's gone to viral.  After that I
             got a death threat by email from an Islamist  terrorist  group
             called Harkatul Jihad from  Bangladesh  (please  see  attached
             that e mail).  Since that time I am really scared to  go  back
             home.  I am also scared to go  back  home  as  our  opposition
             party is in power in Bangladesh.  Because I  was  involved  in
             politics back home."

             [my emphasis]

   44. The e-mail said to be attached to that letter does not appear in the
       bundle.  Neither is any evidence produced of the Facebook posts.   I
       will deal with this evidence in more detail when I come on  to  look
       at the new claim.

   45. Peter Kyle MP (for Hove and Portslade) has supported  the  Appellant
       in his quest for further leave.  The MP's letter at [AB/81-82] dated
       4 July 2019 sets out the Appellant's difficulties and finishes  with
       an expression of support for the Appellant's  appeal.   His  earlier
       letter confirms the Appellant's volunteering and services as a blood
       donor as well as the application to join the army and finishes  with
       the following sentence:

             "It seems to me that Mr [U] is working hard to  contribute  to
             his community and I support him in his application to make his
             residency permanent."

     46. There is also a supportive letter from the  British  Red  Cross  at
         [AB/80] and evidence at [AB/88-92] that the Appellant  is  a  blood
         donor.  The documents  at  [AB/134-143]  show  that  the  Appellant
         occasionally plays cricket for Brighton and Hove Cricket club.

     47. The focus of the Appellant's second witness statement dated 2 March
         2020 ([ABS/1-2]) is his private life. That statement  is  expressly
         stated to be in response to the Respondent's rejection of his case.
          The  Appellant  there  says  that  he  "further  [relies]  on  the
         following  relationships  that  [he  has]  formed"  ([3]   of   the
         statement).  As such, one would expect it to  contain  the  fullest
         possible details about his private life and relationships formed by
         that time (March 2020).  In that statement, the Appellant says  the
         following:

             "4.  My  friends  and  uncle  have  detailed  in  depth  their
             relationship with me and our interactions.

             5.   I am a fan of cricket, I enjoy watching test matches  and
             watching the English team play, it makes me feel at  home  and
             distracts me from my current situation.

             6.   I am often out with my friends, they are the  support  in
             my life.  My uncle helps me substantively financially,  he  is
             closer than just an uncle and I owe him so much  more  than  I
             could ever repay.

             7.   I am very close with the friends I have  in  the  UK.   I
             celebrate Eid and Ramadan  in  the  UK  and  regularly  attend
             prayers.

             8.   In order to keep going I do volunteer from the Red Cross.
              I believe it is a good cause and as I am  unable  to  work  I
             just want to help those that need help.  I also give blood  on
             a regular basis.

             9.   I help my friends out  on  a  regular  occasion,  I  love
             helping my friends out and watching the children grow.

             10.  I have applied before to join the army, this is still  my
             wish.  I have only ever wanted to  be  a  positive  person  in
             society and fully embrace  British  culture.   I  have  always
             tried to do the right thing.  I  struggle  on  a  daily  basis
             since my immigration issues, but I still love this country and
             the family and friends I have made in it.

             11.   I  provide  this  statement  in  order  to  answer  more
             questions and help  the  Tribunal  make  a  decision  in  this
             matter."

    Evidence from the Appellant's Friends and Relatives

     48. The initial evidence from such  sources  appears  in  the  form  of
         letters at [AB/18-27].  Those letters are written by Mr Ashok  [T],
         Mr Ershadul [A], Mr Can [B], Mrs Roma [L] and Mr Cenk [D].  Mr  [A]
         and Mrs [L] are the Appellant's uncle and aunt.  Both were born  in
         Bangladesh and now live in London.  Mr [T] lives  in  Brighton  and
         met the Appellant in about 2012.  Mr [B] lives in  London  but  met
         the Appellant when Mr [B] was studying at the University of Sussex.
          Mr [D] is a former employer.

     49. Of those persons, two provided witness statements as  part  of  the
         Appellant's supplementary evidence (Mr [A] and Mr [D] - [ABS/7-10 &
         15-16]).  The Appellant also produced statements at that time  from
         Mr Zahid [H] and Md  [R]  (ABS/3-6  &  11-14]).  The  supplementary
         evidence was filed shortly before the error of law hearing in March
         2020.  One of the grounds relied upon  by  the  Respondent  was  an
         error  in  relation  to  the  assessment  that  there  were   "very
         significant  obstacles"   to   the   Appellant's   integration   in
         Bangladesh.  I assume therefore that the evidence was  intended  to
         support the Appellant's case both as to his private life  and  that
         he could succeed also under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

     50. Of those  who  provided  statements  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing, only Mr [D] gave oral evidence before Judge Manuell.  None
         of those persons who provided evidence for the First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing or at the error of law stage provided additional statements
         for the resumed hearing before me  and  none  was  called  to  give
         evidence for the Appellant.  I therefore deal  with  this  evidence
         based  on  the  letters  and  statements   in   the   initial   and
         supplementary bundles.

     51. Mr [T] confirms in his letter dated 7 July 2019 (AB/18] that he met
         the Appellant at a party "over 7 years ago".  He describes  him  as
         "caring, hardworking and  thoughtful"  and  "honest,  peaceful  and
         conscientious".  He  provides  no  detail  about  the  relationship
         between himself and the Appellant nor how often he meets  with  the
         Appellant or socialises with him.  They both live in Brighton.

     52. Mr [B] says in his letter dated 11 July  2019  ([AB/22])  that  the
         Appellant "is one of [his] very close friends".  He  says  that  he
         has "known him for a very long time and very well".   He  describes
         him as law abiding and "community minded" as well as hard  working.
         Again, he provides no detail about their relationship nor the level
         and extent of their continuing contact.

     53. Mr [A] and Mrs [L]  provided  letters  which  are  at  [AB/20]  and
         [AB/24] respectively.  Both attest to their family relationship and
         the Appellant's good character.  Mr [A]  also  provided  a  witness
         statement dated 28 February 2020 (ABS/15-16]  which  contains  more
         detail as follows:

             "2.  I am the Paternal Uncle of Mohammad and he is  my  family
             in the UK.  I have known Mohammad since he was very young.   I
             have watched him grow from a child, and I am so sad to see him
             in his current circumstances.

             3.   Mohammad is with me and my family in the UK  pretty  much
             every weekend.  We are together for Eid  gatherings,  birthday
             parties and wedding celebrations.

             4.   I am the main financial support of Mohammad in regards to
             his survival in the  UK,  I  provide  him  with  anything  and
             everything that he needs to survive financially in the UK.  He
             is my family and one of my own.

             5.   Mohammad has only ever been a kind loving person, he  has
             made many friends in the UK.  He is kind and  generous,  as  a
             personality he is wonderful and warm.

             6.   I believe that he has grown closer as family member  than
             just a nephew, he is my close family and I treat  him  like  I
             would a son.

             7.    I  provide  this  statement  in  order  to  answer  more
             questions and help the Tribunal make a decision in  Mohammad's
             matter."

     54. Mr [D] is a former employer but also a friend of the Appellant  who
         lives and works in Brighton.  In his statement  dated  28  February
         2020 ([ABS/7-8], he  describes  the  Appellant's  character  as  an
         employee.  The Appellant worked for him from June to August 2015 as
         an assistant manager.  In terms of their friendship, he goes on  as
         follows:

             "4.  Mohammad became a very good friend, we  have  always  met
             for coffee, go to the beach in Brighton in summer,  have  BBQs
             together and go for bowling whenever there is free time.

             5.   As Mohammad is struggling to survive in the  UK,  I  help
             him financially, I give him money when he needs it as  I  hate
             seeing him this way.  I would say  that  he  is  a  very  good
             friend of mine, and I will always help him on his bad days. He
             is loyal, kind and respectful as a  person.   Mohammad  has  a
             great sense of humour and would be a model citizen in the  UK.
             If he has the right to  work,  he  will  be  working  with  me
             immediately.

             6.    I  provide  this  statement  in  order  to  answer  more
             questions and help the Tribunal made a decision in  Mohammad's
             matter."

     55. Mr [H] is originally from Bangladesh.  In his  statement  dated  28
         February 2020 (at [ABS/3-4], he says  that  he  met  the  Appellant
         about ten years previously, in 2011, at  a  Bengali  festival.   In
         relation to their friendship, he says the following:

             "4.  We see each other on a weekly basis and have many friends
             in  common.   We  celebrate   holidays   together,   religious
             festivals and nearly every week.

             5.   Mohammad is struggling financially, I help him out when I
             can, I will always do so as he is a  wonderful  person  and  a
             very close friend.

             6.   I honestly feel that  Mohammad  has  been  so  strong  in
             coping with his current issue and has continued to be a  kind,
             caring and honest man.

             7.   I provide this statement in order to  help  the  Tribunal
             make a decision in Mohammad's matter."

     56. The final witness statement in the supplementary bundle comes  from
         Md [R].  That statement is at [ABS/11-12]  and  is  also  dated  28
         February 2020.  Mr [R] is of  Bangladeshi  origin  although  now  a
         British citizen.  He says the following about his relationship with
         the Appellant:

             "I am a long term friend of Mohammed and have  known  him  for
             the last twenty years.  We  lived  in  the  same  hometown  in
             Bangladesh.  We have been close friends since childhood.

             Mohammed entered the UK in April 2008 and I entered the UK  to
             study in June 2008.  We have always been close and studied  at
             the same school when I studied my ACCA exams.

             Mohammed is a brother to me, we have been close since we  were
             children, he knows my family very well, he gets on  very  well
             with my wife and my two children.  He stays with me often  and
             we go out a lot as a family.  We spend a lot of time  together
             and he is actually a very good cook.

             Mohammed has always been a good and kind person. I hate seeing
             him this way and struggling to stay in  the  UK  when  he  has
             always done his very best to be positive as  a  person  and  a
             good person in British society.

             I provide this statement in order to help the Tribunal make  a
             decision in Mohammed's matter."

     57. The supplementary bundle also  contains  five  further  letters  of
         support.  The first ([ABS/17] is from a friend living  in  Brighton
         who has known the Appellant since 2012  (Mr  Sadi)  who  says  that
         "[a]s good friends [they] are always up to see each other" and that
         they discuss their lives and careers.  He describes  the  Appellant
         as "kind to everyone, honest and peaceful". Mr Sadi  is  originally
         from Bangladesh and now a British citizen.

     58. Mr Kibria is also a good friend who has  known  the  Appellant  for
         more than eight years.  He says in his letter ([ABS/21]) that  they
         "always meet up for coffee, dinner or any  social  events  and  any
         festival".  They  are  in  "regular"  contact.   He  describes  the
         Appellant as an "honourable individual and a good human being".

     59. Mr Capucci is an  Italian  citizen  who  met  the  Appellant  at  a
         birthday party in Brighton five years previously.   His  letter  at
         [ABS/23] is dated 2 March 2020.  He lives in Brighton and says that
         he and the Appellant "always meet up for dinner, tea  or  coffees".
         He says that he joins the Appellant for Bengali festivals and  they
         arrange barbecues on Brighton beach.

     60. Mrs Sultana  is  originally  from  Bangladesh  and  now  a  British
         citizen.  She lives with her husband in Reigate and says  that  the
         Appellant is her husband's best friend and often visits their home.
          She describes the Appellant in her letter  (ABS/25])  as  "a  very
         nice and honest person" who is law abiding and  "will  be  a  great
         citizen of British society".

     61.  The  final  letter  at  [ABS/19]  comes   from   the   Appellant's
         grandmother, also of course  from  Bangladesh  but  now  a  British
         citizen.  She lives, it appears, with  the  Appellant's  uncle  and
         aunt in London.  She says the following:

             "I consistently think he is a part of  my  family.   We  don't
             celebrate any party or any special day  without  him.   He  is
             regularly  with  us.   Whenever  I  cook  something  nice   or
             especially Bengali food I always call him to come and join us.
              Se we can enjoy together.  He used to live with us.  Still he
             comes especially in the weekend and stay with us.   [Mohammad]
             is a person of good moral  character,  polite,  good  manners,
             integrity, goodwill towards others and  he  has  retained  all
             those beliefs.

             In his personal life as per I know, [Mohammad] has established
             his private life in the UK.  He has many friends  in  the  UK,
             among whom he is quite well respected and liked.  He never has
             a bad word to say about anyone."

     62. The picture painted from those statements in terms of  the  factors
         relevant to  my  consideration  is  that  the  Appellant  is  well-
         integrated into British society although tends  to  socialise  with
         those from the Bangladeshi diaspora.  The  evidence  also  suggests
         that the Appellant is very family focussed and sees  his  relatives
         from Bangladesh who are settled here on a regular basis. So far  as
         friends are concerned, the letters and indeed the  Appellant's  own
         evidence at these stages indicate that  the  Appellant  is  a  very
         sociable and outgoing person.

    The New Claim

     63. As indicated previously, the Appellant's new claim is based on  his
         sexuality  and  his  political  activities.   As  I  have   already
         concluded, I have no jurisdiction to determine  a  claim  that  the
         Appellant is at  risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh.   As  such,  the
         Appellant's activities for the BNP (if such  are  credible)  is  of
         limited relevance in this appeal although I will deal briefly  with
         that evidence.

     64. The new claim based on the Appellant's sexuality is of a  different
         nature.  It is relevant to the potential  for  his  integration  in
         Bangladesh.  As I have already noted, Ms Everett conceded that,  if
         I found as a fact that the Appellant is a gay man,  I  should  also
         accept  that  there  would  be  very   significant   obstacles   to
         integration in Bangladesh.

    Medical Evidence

     65. In his evidence for this hearing,  the  Appellant  has  produced  a
         report from Ms Mai Atas-Kelly (BSc Hons, M.A, Post MA Dip, Post  MA
         Dip CB, CPsyhol., registered CBT specialist) dated 10 August  2020.
         Ms Atas-Kelly is a consultant clinical psychologist.  She  provides
         a  CV  setting  out  her  experience  and  includes   a   statement
         recognising her duty to the Tribunal and the need for impartiality.
          I am satisfied that I am able to give appropriate  weight  to  her
         views, based on her experience. The level of  weight  which  I  can
         give to the report however depends on a critical evaluation of  her
         evidence.

     66. Ms Atas-Kelly assessed the Appellant based on one remote video call
         on 21 July 2020.  There is nothing to suggest that she has  treated
         the  Appellant  for  his  mental  health  problems.   The   "online
         interview" was  conducted  over  95  minutes  and  supplemented  by
         psychological testing.  It was based on "an  extensive  exploration
         of historical and precipitating factors, perpetuating factors,  the
         client's presenting symptoms and difficulties (including non-verbal
         communication and presentation) and [her] knowledge and  experience
         working with  individuals  presenting  with  similar  psychological
         presentations".  Ms Atas-Kelly herself observes that  "due  to  the
         nature of the interview, expressions and emotional nuances  may  be
         more difficult to read and interpret".

     67. As appears from the foregoing, and the content of  the  report,  Ms
         Atas-Kelly has relied heavily if not entirely on what she was  told
         by the Appellant.  That includes  the  narrative  of  the  symptoms
         which Ms Atas-Kelly has used to score the Appellant in testing (see
         [5.3] of the report). Ms Atas-Kelly does not record  that  she  was
         provided  with  any  documents  in  relation  to  the   Appellant's
         immigration case or any medical history and I assume therefore that
         none were supplied.  Her  instructions  were  apparently  contained
         only in an e-mail from the Appellant's solicitors.   As  such,  she
         will be unaware for example that the Appellant's new claim to be at
         risk and under threat due to his sexuality is  a  very  recent  one
         which he has not mentioned previously (save what is said in the May
         2018 letter).  Nor will she have been aware of the evidence of  the
         Appellant and his witnesses as to his demeanour at other times  and
         his pastimes and activities.

     68.  Ms  Atas-Kelly  records  that  the  Appellant  reports  that  "his
         difficulties have led to a myriad  of  psychological  difficulties,
         which are predominantly centred on depression  and  anxiety".   The
         Appellant told Ms Atas-Kelly that he was,  at  the  time  of  their
         interview, taking anti-depressants and  sleeping  pills.   He  said
         that  he  used  to  take  medication  prescribed  by  a  doctor  in
         Bangladesh but was now (in July 2020) prescribed medication by  his
         GP in the UK.  He said that his  GP  had  already,  by  this  date,
         prescribed him medication and referred him to a psychologist ([5.3]
         of the report) but there is no other supporting  evidence  to  show
         that he was prescribed medication prior to August 2020 or  that  he
         has seen a treating psychologist then or since.

     69. Under the heading of "Background History", the  Appellant  told  Ms
         Atas-Kelly that he experienced problems in Bangladesh in 2006-7 due
         to his  political  affiliations.  This  is  not  mentioned  in  his
         statement written less than a month after this interview.  He  also
         said that he recognised his sexuality whilst in Bangladesh, aged 14
         years, when he was attracted to a  school  classmate  but  kept  it
         private.  This is not dealt with in his witness statement. In terms
         of the threats after the Facebook posts, he said that he  "received
         homophobic threats  and  comments  by  the  Muslim  extremists  and
         fundamentalists  in   Bangladesh",   that   "his   mother   stopped
         communicating with him and  he  is  currently  estranged  from  his
         family".  The Appellant said that  he  had  not  had  any  romantic
         relationships but "he dated a few men he met at gay pride and clubs
         in the UK".  He had not entered into any "serious relationship".

     70.  Ms  Atas-Kelly  observed  that  the  Appellant  cried  during  the
         interview and she also said  that  he  seemed  "neglected  in  some
         aspects of self-care".  She  said  that  he  "appeared  objectively
         worried and hopeless" and at times suffered some disturbed  memory.



     71.  Ms  Atas-Kelly  has  helpfully  included  the   results   of   her
         psychological testing and measurement.  She refers to the Appellant
         saying that he experiences low mood, spends "the  majority  of  his
         time at home in his room ruminating about his problems", is of "low
         energy and low motivation" and has  lost  weight.    He  says  that
         "insomnia was one  of  the  prominent  symptoms"  and  that  he  is
         lethargic as a result. Although he reported suicidal ideations  and
         said he had self-harmed, he denied any active plans.  The  incident
         of self-harm reported to Ms Atas-Kelly  is  not  mentioned  in  the
         Appellant's witness statement.  He  also  said  that  "there  is  a
         marked  decrease  in  his  desire  to  spend   time   engaging   in
         activities".

     72. As to the development of his symptoms, the Appellant attributes the
         onset of his mental health problems to the refusal of  his  Tier  2
         application, that is to say in October/November 2015. He says  that
         the problems "were  further  compounded"  when  his  sexuality  was
         revealed, and his family disowned him (apparently in around January
         2016).  Ms Atas-Kelly reports that the  Appellant  thereafter  said
         that "he gradually lost a sense of purpose and direction  in  life,
         which contributed to self-deprecation and perceiving himself  as  a
         failure".

     73. In terms of his "current life and health conditions", the Appellant
         reported that "he feels lonely in too many people or friends, can't
         do anything attentively, likes to spend time on his own,  likes  to
         spend time in dark and don't like to turn light on, sometimes cries
         for no reason, can't tolerate any  good  things  or  bad  of  other
         people, don't like to get in touch with other people, scared always
         if anyone asks him about his life and immigration  history,  always
         feels like he is fighting against himself, his mind  always  saying
         hm to stay away from crowd, unconscious mind saying to do suicide".

     74. Based on the brief  interview  and  her  assessment  based  on  the
         Appellant's self-report and testing,  Ms  Atas-Kelly  (tentatively)
         diagnoses a  "Major  Depressive  Disorder  with  anxious  distress,
         Severe".   She  says  that  the  Appellant  "is   presenting   with
         psychological  symptoms  that  are   strongly   suggestive   of   a
         psychological disorder".  She also says that the  Appellant  is  at
         moderate risk of suicide although has no  active  plan  or  intent.
         Although he claims to have self-harmed in the past and had suicidal
         thoughts, there has been no actual attempt.  She  notes  his  claim
         that he would attempt to end his life if returned to Bangladesh.

     75. Ms Atas-Kelly attributes the  Appellant's  problems  to  "long-term
         unemployment, discrimination and threats targeted at him because of
         his sexual orientation, and immigration problems."

     76. As to treatment, Ms Atas-Kelly says that the Appellant is  unlikely
         to recover without specialist treatment.  Although she  notes  that
         the  Appellant  is  receiving  medication,   she   advocates   more
         specialist intervention. She opines that his condition is likely to
         "inevitably  worsen  should  [he]  be  pressured   to   travel   to
         Bangladesh".  She  advises  against  removal  until  his   symptoms
         improve.

     77. Ms Atas-Kelly does not consider  whether  the  Appellant  could  be
         feigning his symptoms and presentation.

     78. The Appellant's bundle also contains GP prescriptions  for  various
         medication, dating back to the beginning of August 2020.

    The Appellant's Evidence

     79. The Appellant's most recent witness statement is  dated  18  August
         2020 and is at  [AB2/3-7].   That  is  mainly  concerned  with  the
         Appellant's  claimed  sexuality,  mental   health   problems,   and
         political affiliations.

     80. Dealing first with the Appellant's sexuality, he says that  he  did
         not disclose that in Bangladesh but, since being in the UK, he  has
         enjoyed his freedom to live "being around with many  LGBT  people".
         He says he has  "maintain[ed]  casual  partnership  with  many  gay
         people" but provides no details of any of those relationships.

     81. The Appellant repeats his account of the release  of  social  media
         posts following the Gay Pride march in 2015.  It was Mr  [AH]  (his
         witness at this hearing) who posted the  pictures.   The  Appellant
         says  that  after  this   he   "received   threats   from   unknown
         individuals".  He also says  that  his  family  members  and  other
         relatives in Bangladesh "prohibited me not to contact with them and
         do not want to keep relationship with me".

     82. The remainder of that part of the statement concerns the  treatment
         he might face if returned to Bangladesh as a gay man.  As a  result
         of Ms Everett's concession,  I  do  not  need  to  deal  with  this
         evidence.

     83. The Appellant attributes his mental health problems to his "current
         fear of persecution and uncertain  Immigration  Status".   He  says
         that he has "access to a strong support system in  the  UK  in  the
         shape of [his] homosexual friends as well as an  extensive  network
         of friends in the British LGBT community".   He  says  that  he  is
         "currently undergoing treatment" for  his  problems  but  does  not
         expand.

     84. The Appellant touches upon his political affiliations.   There  was
         no focus on this aspect of his evidence.  He does not claim in  his
         statement to have experienced any problems in  the  past  based  on
         these affiliations.  As I have already noted, his evidence in  this
         regard  differs  from  his  report  to  Ms  Atas-Kelly  that   "the
         opposition threatened and attempted to harm him in 2006-2007 due to
         his  political  affiliations  although  the  attempts   made   were
         unsuccessful".  He has not of course claimed asylum  based  on  any
         such risks.  In terms of the Appellant's association with  the  BNP
         he says that he joined the party in Bangladesh in 2002, was elected
         as sports secretary  whilst  at  college  in  2004-2006  and  joint
         secretary in  2006-2008.   He  does  not  claim  to  have  had  any
         involvement with the BNP since coming to the UK in 2008.

     85.  The  Appellant  finally  summarises  his  private  life  claim  as
         previously stated in the following terms:

             "26. The Home Office  also  refused  my  application  as  they
             believe I have not established a private life here in the  UK.
             However, I submit that I have a host  of  relatives  including
             cousins and friends in the  UK  whom  I  have  created  strong
             relationships with.  I have registered as a blood donor...  in
             the UK and I am a volunteer with The  Red  Cross  organisation
             where I have volunteered for 10 months.  I am also part of  my
             local cricket club and take part in the games  frequently.   I
             have been offered a job with the British Army however  due  to
             my leave I am unable to join the army.  Once I am  granted  my
             visa, I will be able to join and serve  the  British  Military
             Force... Subsequently, the Member of Parliament Mr Peter  Kyle
             has also expressed his support for me in making my  appeal  in
             hope to acquire indefinite leave to remain."

     86. In his oral evidence, the Appellant confirmed that his witnesses in
         the First-tier Tribunal appeal knew of his sexuality as  did  those
         who provided statements at the time of his error  of  law  hearing.
         He confirmed that this included  his  uncle.   The  Appellant  said
         however that his uncle took a different  view  of  the  Appellant's
         sexuality from that of the rest of his  family  because  his  uncle
         knew it was "normal".  He said  that  none  of  his  witnesses  had
         mentioned his sexuality because it had not "come up".

     87. In relation to his mental health, the  Appellant  said  he  started
         having problems after he became the victim of fraud.  He was unable
         to sleep and suffered nightmares.  He  became  unable  to  take  it
         anymore and spoke to a friend whose brother was a doctor and he was
         prescribed sleeping tablets.  He confirmed however that he had only
         sought out treatment in the UK from March when the pandemic  began.
         Before that he relied on friends coming from  Bangladesh  to  bring
         his medication.  He said that those  were  close  friends  and  not
         family.

     88. The Appellant asserted that he attended the Gay Pride march in  all
         years from 2014, since he has lived in Brighton but that he met  Mr
         [AH] there only in 2014 and 2015  and  not  after  that.   He  said
         however that he continues to see Mr [AH] regularly when  he  visits
         London.  He says that would be about once  per  month.  They  speak
         however once per week.

     89. The Appellant was asked a number of questions about his failure  to
         claim asylum based on his sexuality.  He confirmed that Mr [AH]  is
         a Bangladeshi national and that Mr [AH] had claimed asylum and  got
         leave by that route in 2018.    However, he then said that Mr  [AH]
         had not told him "fully" what application he had made in  order  to
         get leave; just that he had an  application  pending.   He  claimed
         that it was not until the March 2020 hearing when the issue of  the
         Appellant's sexuality was first raised that he  had  spoken  to  Mr
         [AH] and Mr [AH] had said that he could help.

     90. The Appellant said that he and Mr [AH] had spoken about the  plight
         of gay men in Bangladesh, that they were  good  friends  and  spoke
         often.  He said however that Mr [AH] had not told him that  he  had
         been  granted  asylum  based  on  his  sexuality.   The   Appellant
         confirmed that he was not asked  to  give  evidence  in  Mr  [AH]'s
         appeal.  The Appellant also confirmed that Mr [AH] had  known  that
         the Appellant did not have leave and also knew that  the  Appellant
         claimed to have been threatened following the Facebook posts (which
         posts were put on social media by Mr [AH]).  The Appellant insisted
         though that it was not until March 2020 that he had found out about
         the basis of Mr [AH]'s claim when the issue had arisen in  his  own
         appeal.

     91. In addition to confirming that  his  friends  and  family  who  had
         previously given evidence or provided letters of  support  knew  of
         his sexuality, the Appellant also said that his previous solicitors
         had known but that they said  there  was  no  need  to  revise  his
         statement to take  this  claim  into  account.   I  note  that  the
         Appellant  has  been  represented  by  no  less  than  five   legal
         representatives since June 2016 when he first made  an  application
         to remain based on his human rights or other compassionate factors.
          The 30 June 2016 application was made by SEB solicitors  who  also
         represented him in November 2017 when he sought to vary  his  human
         rights application to one for indefinite leave to remain which  led
         to the decision under  appeal.   When  he  made  the  human  rights
         application which he subsequently varied in November 2017, in  July
         2017, the Appellant was represented by Kingdom solicitors who  also
         lodged the appeal on his behalf in  June  2019  and  conducted  the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing of the appeal.  Kingdom solicitors also
         lodged  the  supplementary  bundle.    However,   thereafter,   the
         Appellant changed solicitors (to  Reiss  solicitors).   It  appears
         that, after the error of law  hearing,  the  Appellant  once  again
         changed solicitors to  Gulbenkian  Andonian  solicitors.   However,
         they informed the Tribunal that they were unable  to  make  contact
         with the Appellant.  The Appellant thereafter changed solicitors to
         City  Heights  solicitors  who,  it   appears,   had   successfully
         represented Mr [AH] in his appeal.

    Evidence of [AH]

     92. Mr [AH]'s statement is dated 24 August 2020 and appears at  [AB2/8-
         9].  He also gave oral evidence via Skype for Business before me.

     93. Mr [AH] confirms in his statement that he met the  Appellant  first
         at Gay Pride in Brighton in 2014 and they met again  in  2015.   He
         says that they "took many close pictures for  us  and  many  others
         together there".  He also confirmed that he had posted  and  shared
         the photographs on his Facebook page.  He had removed the posts  at
         the Appellant's request.  The remainder of Mr [AH]'s  statement  is
         largely concerned with treatment of gay men in  Bangladesh.   There
         is no confirmation of his own sexuality beyond mere  assertion  nor
         any particulars provided about his own claim for asylum.

     94. In his oral evidence, Mr [AH] confirmed that he had claimed asylum,
         he said in 2018 and  was  granted  asylum  in  November  2018.   He
         confirmed that he had been granted asylum following an  appeal  and
         said that the asylum claim was based on his sexuality, but  he  has
         provided no evidence that this is so.   This is not dealt  with  in
         his witness statement.

     95. Mr [AH] accepted that  if  the  Appellant  had  said  that  he  was
         returning to Bangladesh when he had no leave, he  would  have  been
         worried  about  his  safety   as   a   gay   man.    However,   and
         notwithstanding that the Appellant had no leave to remain in  2018,
         when Mr [AH] said he claimed asylum, he said he never talked  about
         his own asylum claim with  the  Appellant  nor  asked  whether  the
         Appellant intended to claim asylum based on his sexuality.  He said
         he had told the Appellant when he won his own case but not on  what
         ground because the Appellant at the time had  a  case  of  his  own
         pending.

     96. When asked why he would not have disclosed the reason for the grant
         of asylum given that he and the Appellant were  said  to  be  close
         friends, Mr [AH] said that it was a personal  circumstance  and  he
         also had mental depression so he did not share that information.

     97. Mr [AH] said that he and the Appellant met about once per month  or
         once every one to two months but then said that they talked or  met
         once  per  month.   He  was  last  in  Brighton  in  summer   2019.
         Notwithstanding that Mr [AH] confirmed that he  and  the  Appellant
         were good friends, he said that he had not been  asked  to  give  a
         statement in  the  Appellant's  first  hearing  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  He said that the Appellant had not told  him  about  the
         hearing.

    Other Evidence

     98. The Appellant's bundle of evidence for the hearing before  me  also
         contains a statement from Mr Muhammad Omar Gani who is said to have
         been "Co-operative Secretary London Mohanagar BNP" since 2016.   He
         says  that  he  was  President  of  Jaityatabadi  Chattradal  (JCD)
         Chittagong City College in 2000-2002 and knew the Appellant at  the
         time as the Appellant was involved with JCD at another  college  in
         the same city.  His evidence about the Appellant's appointments for
         the BNP in the period 2004-2008 is consistent with the  Appellant's
         own evidence.  He then goes into  a  detailed  explanation  of  the
         Appellant's involvement with the BNP since 2008 when he came to the
         UK.

     99. The Appellant has not produced any evidence of the  Facebook  posts
         said to have caused him problems in 2015.  I accept  that  Mr  [AH]
         says he deleted them from his account and  that  may  explain  this
         omission.  However, neither has the Appellant produced any evidence
         of the threat or threats he is said to  have  received  by  e-mail.
         There are no photographs of the Appellant at any Gay  Pride  event.
         The only evidence that the Appellant has ever  attended  Gay  Pride
         apart from his say so and that of Mr [AH] is a ticket  and  e  mail
         confirmation dated 29 July 2019, presumably the last time that  the
         event was held in Brighton due to this year's pandemic.

    100. The Appellant has produced some newspaper  articles  said  to  show
         that he and some friends attended a Gay Liberation Front  event  on
         27 June 2020.  This event is not  dealt  with  in  the  Appellant's
         evidence.  The attendance of the Appellant and his friends at  this
         event is perhaps somewhat surprising given that the  first  of  the
         photographs at  [AB2/53]  which  appears  in  an  internet  article
         describes it as "[t]welve of the last surviving activists from  the
         London Gay Liberation Front (GLF), 1970-74, some in their  70s  and
         80s, marched in London on Saturday, June 27 to celebrate  the  50th
         anniversary of GLF and to reclaim Pride  with  political  demands".
         It does not explain why there would  be  three  young  men  in  the
         background of the photograph in the  newspaper  article  holding  a
         "Gay Liberation Front  50  years  out"  banner  who  appear  to  be
         entirely divorced from the remainder of the photograph.

    101. It is not said that this event was a  wider  march  although  I  do
         accept that the veterans are said to have been supported  by  forty
         others.  It is suggested that the Appellant is one of  those  shown
         in the front row of one of the  other  photographs  (at  [AB2/55]).
         The quality of the photograph makes it difficult  to  ascertain  if
         that is indeed the Appellant.

    102. The Appellant has also produced other photographs at  [AB2/126-137]
         indicating that the Appellant was in London and  possibly  attended
         the march.  There is for example  a  photograph  of  the  Appellant
         wearing a "Pride in London Lockdown" at [AB2/137].  He  appears  to
         be standing with what may be one of the veteran marchers.

    103. The Appellant has also included a membership  card  for  the  Royal
         Vauxhall Tavern which is said to be a cabaret club.   He  has  also
         provided a number of photographs said to be  of  him  with  various
         "gay friends" (according to the annotations on some) which show two
         or more males having drinks  or  a  meal  together.   He  has  also
         produced screen shots said to be of a "virtual meeting with say  it
         loud club's members about managing anxiety".

    104. I do not need to deal with the remaining background evidence  about
         the plight of gay men in Bangladesh given Ms  Everett's  concession
         that the Appellant would be at risk on return as an openly gay  man
         who would not wish to behave discreetly on return if I  accept  the
         credibility of his new claim based on his sexuality.

    FINDINGS OF FACT

    105. I have  already  dealt  with  my  findings  about  the  Appellant's
         immigration history.  The issues concerning  the  strength  of  his
         private life in the UK are ones for assessment rather than  factual
         findings.  As Mr Malik accepted, therefore, the only issue on which
         factual findings are required are whether the Appellant's new claim
         based on his sexuality and political activities (so far as relevant
         to integration on return) is credible.

    106. I begin with the May 2018 letter which is the first  intimation  of
         the new claim based on the Appellant's sexuality.   I  accept  that
         the content of that letter is consistent with the Appellant's broad
         account that he received a threat or threats following the  posting
         on Facebook of some photographs of him attending Gay Pride in 2015.
          I also accept that the Appellant's evidence about the  posting  of
         such photographs and that the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  been
         threatened as a result is consistent with Mr [AH]'s evidence.

    107. However, I do not consider that the account given in the  May  2018
         letter is entirely consistent with the new claim for  two  reasons.
         First, the Appellant does not say in the May 2018  letter  that  he
         attended the Gay Pride march because he identified  as  homosexual.
         Consistently with the remainder of what is said  in  the  May  2018
         letters, he says only that Gay Pride is part of the Brighton social
         life which he enjoys. Of course, in cases such as this  that  might
         be attributable to an  unwillingness  to  disclose  his  sexuality.
         However, that is not this case.  The Appellant confirmed  that  his
         friends and family were aware of his sexuality so he would have had
         no reason to hide that in the May 2018 letter.  On a plain  reading
         of the May 2018 letter, the Appellant suggests only that it was his
         attendance  at  the  Gay  Pride  event  (and  therefore   perceived
         sexuality) which had led to threats from  one,  single,  identified
         source (an Islamic group).

    108. Second, the Appellant's account as to the threats he received as  a
         result of the Facebook posts has varied over time.  In the May 2018
         letter, he says that the threat came  from  a  particular  Islamist
         terrorist group. He refers only to one e-mail threat (which was not
         attached to the letter in the evidence).   The  Appellant  told  Ms
         Atas-Kelly that  he  received  "homophobic  threats  and  comments"
         (plural).  In his witness statement for this  hearing  (dated  less
         than a month after his interview with Ms Atas-Kelly), he said  that
         the threats came from "unknown individuals".  He has also  expanded
         upon his assertion that the threats arose only  from  the  Facebook
         posts in 2015 to a claim that there  were  Facebook  posts  of  him
         "attending various LGBT events".  None of these threats  appear  in
         the documentary evidence as one might expect them to  if  made  via
         social media or e- mail.

    109. The Appellant has also elaborated on  his  account  of  threats  by
         suggesting that his family in Bangladesh has  disowned  him.   That
         was not mentioned at all in the May 2018 letter.

    110. I accept that Ms Atas-Kelly's report provides some support for  the
         Appellant's claim based on his sexuality.   However,  as  would  be
         expected, that report is based on what the  psychologist  has  been
         told by the Appellant about his background,  the  reasons  for  his
         symptoms and even the symptoms themselves.

    111. I have already pointed out Ms Atas-Kelly's own  comment  about  the
         limitations of an interview conducted remotely.  She has only  seen
         the Appellant once via this medium.  She did  not  apparently  have
         any of the medical history confirmed by the Appellant's records nor
         any of the evidence from the appeal.

    112. This brings me on to my main  concern  about  the  content  of  the
         report and the weight I can give it in consequence.  Ms  Atas-Kelly
         paints a picture in her report, based on the Appellant's say-so, of
         a gentleman who lacks self-worth, is inactive, has few friends  and
         spends most of his  time  alone  at  home,  "ruminating  about  his
         problems".  I scarcely need to draw attention  to  the  significant
         difference between what is said in the report and what is  said  in
         the witness statements including the Appellant's own statement  for
         this hearing where  he  speaks  of  his  continuing  strong  social
         relationships with his friends and relatives,  frequent  activities
         for his cricket club, and voluntary work for the  Red  Cross.   The
         Appellant told Ms Atas-Kelly that his symptoms emerged in late 2015
         and yet the statements and letters of support  for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing, at the error of law stage and  even  now  do  not
         support the picture painted by the Appellant of his mental state to
         Ms Atas-Kelly.

    113. The Appellant  did  not  mention  any  mental  health  problems  or
         difficulties sleeping  in  his  previous  evidence.   In  spite  of
         mentioning, for example, the Appellant's financial  struggles,  the
         testimony of his witnesses as to his character and behaviour do not
         support an account of depression or other  mental  health  problems
         such as the Appellant has portrayed to Ms Atas-Kelly.

    114. The Appellant says that he sought help from his GP in the  UK  only
         after the start of  the  pandemic  as,  before  then,  he  obtained
         medication from Bangladesh.  I was not entirely clear whether  that
         was medication prescribed by a GP in Bangladesh remotely or whether
         it was ordered via the internet  and  brought  from  Bangladesh  by
         friends.  However that occurred, though, there is no documentary or
         witness evidence from those  friends  showing  that  the  Appellant
         sought help or medication  or  was  prescribed  any  prior  to  the
         prescriptions from a GP in the UK and letters from the  NHS,  which
         prescriptions and letters date back only to August 2020, around the
         time the Appellant obtained the psychologist's  report  and  indeed
         after his interview with Ms Atas-Kelly.  The incident of  self-harm
         which the Appellant reported to Ms Atas-Kelly is not  mentioned  in
         any of his witness statements and is not  supported  by  any  other
         independent evidence.

    115. For those reasons, whilst I  accept  that  Ms  Atas-Kelly  has  the
         appropriate qualifications to provide the report which she does and
         I do not question her objectivity, I can  give  her  report  little
         weight in support of the Appellant's new claim.  She relied largely
         if not entirely on what she was told by the Appellant including  as
         to his symptoms.  She did not consider whether the Appellant  might
         be feigning his symptoms. The self-reporting is not  borne  out  by
         and is inconsistent with the other evidence as to his behaviour and
         demeanour (and the Appellant's reporting is  also  inconsistent  on
         other aspects of the Appellant's case).

    116. Even if I accept that the Appellant has some mental health problems
         (which I do not), Ms Atas-Kelly can only rely on what she  is  told
         by the Appellant as to the causes of those problems.  The Appellant
         himself has indicated that part of  his  problems,  indeed  in  the
         early stages of his evidence the only problems, revolved around his
         immigration status and inability to remain in  the  UK.   Ms  Atas-
         Kelly was not apparently informed, for example, that the  Appellant
         has not claimed asylum in relation to the problems which he  claims
         to have attributable to his sexuality.  She was not therefore  able
         to assess what difference that might have made to her acceptance of
         the Appellant's account.

    117. Turning then to the other  evidence  produced  in  support  of  the
         Appellant's sexuality, I accept as credible that the Appellant  and
         Mr  [AH]  are  friends.   Although  they  gave  slightly  different
         accounts as to the extent of their relationship currently, I accept
         that they do continue to maintain contact as friends.

    118. I am also prepared to accept that they met at Gay Pride in Brighton
         in 2014 and 2015.  Their evidence in  this  regard  was  consistent
         although could of course have been rehearsed.   However,  this  and
         the account of the Facebook  posts  following  the  2015  event  is
         consistent with the May 2018 letter.  I accept therefore that there
         were posts on Facebook of the Appellant in attendance at Gay  Pride
         in 2015.  That was however some five years ago.  Even if  I  accept
         that the Appellant continues to attend that event,  that  does  not
         mean that he is gay.  As I have already  indicated,  the  Appellant
         did not actually go so far as to say that he was a gay man  in  the
         May 2018 letter.  The only evidence of the  Appellant's  attendance
         at Gay Pride, in any event, is a ticket receipt for the 2019 event.
         It is notable that the only evidence of attendance at an  event  in
         support of gay rights comes after  the  March  2020  hearing  (with
         which I deal below).

    119. I also do not accept as credible that the  Appellant  has  received
         threats as a result of the Facebook posts.  If he has,  those  were
         limited to the one incident reported in the  May  2018  letter;  in
         other words in August 2015 or possibly January 2016 (on one version
         of his evidence) he received threats  by  e-mail  from  one  single
         source based on his perceived sexuality arising from Facebook posts
         of his attendance at one Gay Pride event.

    120. Nor do  I  accept  as  credible  that  the  Appellant's  family  in
         Bangladesh has disowned him  following  the  Facebook  posts.   The
         Appellant's uncle, aunt and  grandmother  living  in  the  UK  have
         provided statements or letters in support in this appeal  and  none
         has  mentioned  any  family  rift  as  I   would   have   expected,
         particularly given the picture they paint of a young man  committed
         to his family.

    121. This brings me on to the second problem with  the  Appellant's  new
         claim when compared with the earlier evidence.  He said that all of
         his friends and family were aware of his sexuality.  It is  notable
         that, in relation to his new claim, he has not relied on any of the
         same witnesses as previously.  For that reason, none has produced a
         statement  affirming  that  they  were  aware  of  the  Appellant's
         sexuality and had simply  neglected  to  mention  it  for  whatever
         reason.  Several of  the  Appellant's  previous  witnesses  are  of
         Bangladeshi origin and would therefore, presumably, be aware of the
         problems faced by LGBT  individuals  in  Bangladesh  and  yet  none
         thought to mention this  as  a  difficulty  for  the  Appellant  on
         return.  I do not find it credible that none of them would think to
         mention it in their letters or statements.

    122. Turning then to the evidence which the Appellant produced for  this
         hearing, I found Mr [AH] an unimpressive  witness.   His  statement
         does not even deal with the basis on which he was  granted  asylum.
         His asylum claim was allowed on appeal  and  yet  no  copy  of  his
         appeal decision is  produced.   I  therefore  have  no  documentary
         evidence in support of his assertions (not covered in  his  witness
         statement)  that  he  was  indeed  granted  asylum  based  on   his
         sexuality.  For present purposes, I will  accept  that  to  be  the
         case.

    123. Even if it is the case that Mr [AH] succeeded in his claim based on
         his sexuality, due to the lack of evidence from him  (for  example,
         his appeal decision), I have not had the  opportunity  to  consider
         how closely the Appellant's claim (insinuated for the first time in
         May 2018 at a time when Mr [AH]  was  apparently  claiming  asylum)
         mirrors that of Mr [AH] and whether there are  any  inconsistencies
         in their accounts if this incident was part of Mr [AH]'s case.   In
         spite of the Appellant now saying that he was a close friend of  Mr
         [AH] and of the same sexuality, he was not called to give  evidence
         in Mr [AH]'s appeal.  Mr [AH] was not asked  to  give  evidence  or
         even give  a  statement  or  write  a  letter  of  support  in  the
         Appellant's appeal until now.

    124. Also of importance to my assessment of credibility is the assertion
         by Mr [AH] and the  Appellant  that  they  had  not  discussed  the
         reasons why Mr [AH] had claimed asylum  nor  whether  it  would  be
         beneficial to the Appellant to do so. The Appellant's  evidence  in
         this regard was not entirely clear.  He said at one point  that  Mr
         [AH] had told him about the basis of his own claim in 2018 but then
         said that he did not tell him "fully" and insisted thereafter  that
         he did not know until after the March 2020 hearing  that  he  could
         claim asylum.  Mr [AH] gave an  explanation  for  not  telling  the
         Appellant at the time which  was  wholly  unpersuasive.  I  do  not
         accept as credible that good friends who share nationality and  are
         said to share a common sexuality would not discuss such  things  as
         their claims to remain based on that sexuality, particularly  where
         it is Mr [AH]'s case as the Appellant's that both would be at  risk
         on return to Bangladesh.

    125. Nor do I accept the Appellant's evidence that he has  not  included
         details of his new claim previously nor claimed asylum due  to  the
         legal advice he has received.   If  he  is  to  be  believed,  five
         different firms of solicitors have failed to include in evidence or
         covering letters for applications details of a central facet of his
         private life in a claim to remain in the UK based on  that  private
         life.  That is simply not credible. I reiterate that this is not  a
         case where the Appellant says  that  he  has  been  concealing  his
         sexuality till now.

    126. Even now, when the Appellant has known since, at the  latest  March
         2020 of the option of claiming asylum based on  his  sexuality,  he
         has chosen not to do so. Even at the hearing before me, when  given
         the option to withdraw the appeal in order to claim asylum, he  has
         declined to do so.  That is seriously damaging to  his  credibility
         as it suggests to me that he does not wish  to  be  interviewed  in
         relation to the claim.

    127. The Appellant has provided some photographs and  other  documentary
         evidence said to support his claimed sexuality.  I  can  give  that
         evidence little weight for the following reasons.

    128.  I  have  concerns  that  the  photograph  at  [AB2/53]  has   been
         manipulated  as  the  presence  of  the  three  young  men  in  the
         background of that photograph appears entirely out  of  place  with
         the rest of the photograph which is clearly intended  to  show  the
         veteran element of the march.  The quality  of  the  photograph  at
         [AB2/55] makes it difficult to ascertain if the person indicated is
         indeed the Appellant.  Even if it is the case  that  the  Appellant
         was present  at  the  march  (which  may  be  so  given  the  other
         photographs), that does not mean that all those  who  attended  the
         march are homosexual rather than simply supportive of the cause  or
         there to enjoy the atmosphere (as at Gay Pride).

    129. I am prepared to accept that the bars shown in the  photographs  at
         [AB2/62-118] are establishments frequented by gay men and that  the
         Appellant is a member of the Vauxhall Tavern ([AB2/57]  -  although
         that membership card appears to have been issued only in July  2020
         assuming it is for one year).   However, the photographs show  only
         that a man who appears to be the Appellant  is  having  drinks  and
         meals with various other men between June 2017 and  February  2020.
         Some of the photographs are  annotated  as  showing  the  Appellant
         having drinks  or  meals  with  those  who  he  describes  as  "gay
         friends".  I do not understand why  the  Appellant  would  find  it
         necessary  to  refer  to  friends  as  "gay  friends"  as  if  that
         differentiated them from other friends but it may be that  this  is
         simply the way in which he has annotated the evidence in  order  to
         identify what he sees as the value of  such  photographs.   Leaving
         that aside, there is little  evidential  value.   Socialising  with
         "gay friends" does not lead to  any  evidential  inference  that  a
         person is gay.

    130. Similarly, the screen shots taken from a "virtual meeting with  say
         it loud club's  members  about  managing  anxiety"  are  valueless,
         particularly since there is no other  supporting  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's involvement with such groups.

    131. That brings me on to my final reason for rejecting the  Appellant's
         claim based on his sexuality and that is the  complete  absence  of
         any detail about how and when he became aware of his sexuality, his
         relationships or any evidence from those with whom he has had  such
         relationships or maintains friendships.  I have already pointed out
         that the Appellant does not mention in his witness  statement,  his
         attraction to a classmate which he discloses to Ms Atas-Kelly.    I
         accept that the Appellant says that he  has  not  had  any  serious
         relationships.  However, he does claim  to  have  had  some  casual
         relationships and yet provides no particulars such as names,  dates
         or lengths of such relationships.  In any event, with the exception
         of Mr [AH] who claims himself to be gay with limited evidence  that
         this is so, the Appellant has provided no supporting evidence  from
         others within his "extensive network of friends in the British LGBT
         community".

    132. For those reasons, I do not  accept  as  credible  the  Appellant's
         claim that he identifies as homosexual.  I am dealing with the  new
         claim at this stage only as part of a human rights claim due to  on
         the Appellant's own decision not to claim asylum.  The standard  of
         proof which the Appellant has to meet is therefore one  of  balance
         of probabilities.  However, for the reasons I have given  above,  I
         would have reached the same conclusion even on the  lower  standard
         which applies in protection appeals.

    133. As I have indicated previously, I do not  need  to  deal  with  the
         Appellant's new claim based on his  political  activities  for  the
         BNP.  However, since I have been given evidence in this  regard,  I
         deal with it to the extent of making a factual  finding  about  it.
         As I have already noted, the Appellant's  disclosure  to  Ms  Atas-
         Kelly of threats and attempts to  harm  him  in  2006-7  whilst  in
         Bangladesh due to his political activities finds no mention in  the
         Appellant's statement dealing with this aspect of his case ([21] to
         [25] of the statement at [AB2/5-6]).  Whilst, as I have  indicated,
         the Appellant and his  witness,  Mr  Gani,  have  given  consistent
         evidence as to the Appellant's participation  with  the  party  and
         appointments in the period 2002 to 2008, Mr Gani's  statement  goes
         further and says that the Appellant has been involved with the  BNP
         since he came to the UK in 2008.  His statement in this  regard  is
         very general (paragraphs [6] and [7] of his statement at [AB2/12]).
          However, there is no support for his account in this regard in the
         statement of the Appellant, either  for  this  hearing  or  earlier
         statements or letters.  In the May 2018 letter, the Appellant  says
         only that he was involved "in politics back home"

    134. Mr Gani was not called  to  give  oral  evidence  to  explain  this
         inconsistency.  I can place no weight on his evidence due  to  that
         inconsistency.  Whilst the Appellant may have had some  involvement
         with the BNP at college level in 2002 to 2008, therefore, before he
         came to the UK, I do not accept that he has  been  involved  since.
         Nor has the Appellant (or for that matter  Mr  Gani)  provided  any
         evidence that the Appellant is being targeted now as  a  result  of
         his historic participation in politics and the Appellant's  account
         to Ms Atas-Kelly of threats and  attempts  in  the  past  finds  no
         mention in his statement for this hearing.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    135. I therefore turn finally to draw together my factual  findings  and
         to assess the evidence as a whole.

    136. It follows from my factual findings that I do not accept that there
         are very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration  in
         Bangladesh based on his sexuality as I do not accept as a fact that
         he is homosexual.

    137. It follows that I  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  been
         disowned by his family.  His account in that regard  has  not  been
         internally consistent and has been an embellishment over time.  The
         Appellant himself said  in  evidence  that  he  continues  to  have
         friends in Bangladesh (in the context of his case that he has  been
         receiving medication brought in by friends).

    138. Even though I do not accept the Appellant's claim as to his  mental
         state for the reasons I have given, he continues  to  have  support
         available to him in Bangladesh even if he does have such  problems.
         On his  own  case,  he  was  previously  prescribed  medication  in
         Bangladesh which, on his own account, dealt with his mental  health
         problems from late 2015 until March 2020.  Even if I accepted  that
         the Appellant has  some  mental  health  problems  (which  for  the
         reasons I have given I do not), those problems do not present  very
         significant obstacles to his integration in Bangladesh.  He can  be
         treated for any mental health difficulties there as he has been (as
         he claims - albeit remotely) in the period 2015 to 2020.  In  fact,
         he would have better access to that treatment if he were physically
         in Bangladesh as he would not be reliant on  others  to  bring  his
         medication.

    139. The Appellant does not suggest that  he  is  unable  to  speak  his
         native language.  He was educated to college level  in  Bangladesh.
         He continues to have friends there.  According to  the  friends  he
         has in the UK and his family here who  are  mostly  of  Bangladeshi
         origin, the  Appellant  continues  to  participate  in  Bangladeshi
         cultural events and to mark religious festivals.

    140. There is no evidence before me that the Appellant would  be  unable
         to find employment in Bangladesh.  He has qualifications  from  the
         UK and from Bangladesh which will no doubt assist  him  in  finding
         work.   He has not been working in  the  UK  as  he  has  not  been
         permitted to do so since 2015 but there is  no  evidence  that  his
         qualifications will not assist him in spite of  his  lack  of  work
         experience.  He has also carried out some voluntary work.

    141. For all of those  reasons,  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.  I have already reached a finding  that
         the Appellant cannot meet paragraph 276B based  on  his  length  of
         lawful residence which is only of seven  years  duration  (or  nine
         years if I were  to  accept  the  Appellant's  case  which  I  have
         rejected).

    142. I turn then to the Appellant's case outside the Rules.  I accept in
         this regard that the Appellant has been in the UK for  over  twelve
         years.  However, he had leave only for seven years (or at  best  on
         his own case, nine years).  Whatever the position as to  length  of
         residence, the Appellant has overstayed for at  least  three  years
         and, based on my finding, for just over five  years.   Even  before
         that, his leave to remain was on a precarious basis, as a  student.
         The precariousness of his  position  after  his  studies  is  self-
         evident from his immigration history.

    143. The precarious or  unlawful  nature  of  his  period  of  residence
         impacts on the weight I can give to his private life.  Section 117B
         (4) and Section 117B (5) provide  that  I  can  give  only  limited
         weight.  I accept that this does not mean that I give it no weight,
         however,  and  much  depends  on  the  strength  of  private   life
         demonstrated by the evidence.   The  strength  of  the  Appellant's
         private life has to be balanced against the public interest.

    144. I do not repeat the  evidence  which  I  have  set  out  about  the
         Appellant's private life above.  I take into  account  all  of  the
         evidence in the initial bundle and the supplementary bundle and the
         relevant part of the Appellant's statement for this hearing.

    145. There has been no challenge to the evidence that the Appellant  has
         friends and relatives in  the  UK  with  whom  he  enjoys  a  close
         relationship.   I  accept  that  this  demonstrates  that  he   has
         integrated in the UK although of course his relatives and  to  some
         extent his friends are of Bangladeshi origin and it is  clear  that
         he also maintains his cultural and religious associations with  his
         home country as I have already found.

    146. I accept also that the Appellant has carried out voluntary work and
         has made some contribution to the community via, for example, blood
         donation and playing cricket for his local team.  It  may  well  be
         that the Appellant would have done more if he had  been  able.   He
         wanted to work but, I accept, was prevented from doing  so  because
         he became the victim of fraud.  He also wanted to join the  British
         Army and has demonstrated that the Army would have  progressed  his
         application if he had a visa.

    147. All of that is to the Appellant's credit.  I accept also  that  the
         Appellant speaks English.  He gave his evidence in English.  He  is
         not  currently  financially  self-sufficient.   For  example,   his
         evidence  indicates  that  he  had  to  "crowd  fund"  to  pay  his
         solicitors to continue this appeal.  However, there is no  evidence
         that he has depended on any public funds and he has given  evidence
         that he would like to work (whether for the Army or  otherwise)  if
         he was able to do so.  For those reasons, neither Section 117B  (2)
         or Section 117B (3) weigh against the Appellant.  Those are neutral
         factors.

    148. At the heart of the proportionality balance which I have to conduct
         is Section 117B (1).   The  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         control is an important public interest.  In this case, as  I  have
         found the Appellant cannot meet the Rules.  In the case of his Tier
         2 application, I accept that the Appellant was the victim of fraud.
          As Mr Malik pointed out, the Respondent must also accept  that  as
         she has not refused the current application on suitability grounds.
          However, that the Appellant cannot meet the Rules now  remains  an
         important consideration.  He has not  been  able  to  find  another
         sponsor either to continue his  studies  or  to  work  in  the  UK.
         Whatever sympathy may attach to the Appellant as a  result  of  the
         earlier fraud, that does not affect the  public  interest  in  this
         assessment.

    149. I also weigh in the balance that the Appellant has been prepared to
         remain in the UK unlawfully for  a  number  of  years,  seeking  to
         extend his visa via various means, including, most recently, making
         a new claim based on his sexuality which I have  found  not  to  be
         credible.  Whilst the Appellant's persistence in his aim to  remain
         might be said to be admirable, it has  led  on  my  findings  to  a
         willingness to make a false claim so as to be permitted  to  remain
         at any cost.

    150. Whilst I give the Appellant's private life some weight based on the
         evidence which he has provided as to his relationships with friends
         and family here and  community  engagement,  balanced  against  the
         public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective   immigration
         control,  I  conclude  that  the  removal  of  the   Appellant   is
         proportionate.  Indeed, Mr  Malik  did  not  seek  to  persuade  me
         otherwise as he  accepted  in  submissions  that  if  I  found  the
         Appellant's new claim as to his sexuality not to be  credible,  the
         Appellant would be unlikely to succeed overall.

    151. For the foregoing reasons, the removal  of  the  Appellant  is  not
         unlawful as contrary to section  6  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   The
         Appellant's appeal therefore fails.




    DECISION

    The removal of the Appellant is not unlawful as contrary to  section  6
    Human  Rights  Act  1998.   The  Appellant's  appeal   is   accordingly
    dismissed.




    Signed:  L K Smith     Dated: 1 December 2020





                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10241/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 10 March 2020             |                                     |
|                                     |...13 March 2020...............      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MOHAMMAD [U]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by Reiss
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,  I
    refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Respondent  appeals  against  the  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manuell promulgated on 8 August  2019  ("the  Decision")
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).  The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh aged 33  years.   His
    human rights claim is based on his private life  formed  here  and  the
    obstacles he says he would face on return.

 2. Before turning to the substance of the Decision  and  the  Respondent's
    grounds, it  is  necessary  to  say  something  about  the  Appellant's
    immigration history.  It is not disputed that he came here as a student
    on 18 April 2008 and that his leave was extended in that category to 16
    August 2015.  He made an application in time on 7 August 2015 to remain
    as a Tier 2 migrant, but that application was  refused  on  14  October
    2015 and that refusal was maintained following administrative review on
    16 November 2015.  The Appellant judicially reviewed that decision  but
    was refused permission to proceed on 6 June 2016.

 3. It is at this point that there is some confusion as to the  Appellant's
    status.   A  judicial  review  application  does  not   extend   leave.
    Accordingly, as  Mr  Whitwell  submitted,  it  would  appear  that  the
    Appellant's leave ended on 16 November 2015.  Mr Chakmakjian  submitted
    however that the Appellant's leave had been further extended by  reason
    of a letter from the Respondent dated 20 October  2016  which  followed
    the conclusion  of  the  judicial  review  ([AB/55]).   That  reads  as
    follows:

         "1.  On 18 May 2016 we sent you a letter which withdrew the finding
         of deception which was contained in the  original  decision  letter
         issued in respect of your application for leave to remain in the UK
         as a Tier 2 (General) migrant.

         2.   This letter is supplemental to, and should be read  alongside,
         the  original  decision  of  14  October  2015  and  the   previous
         supplementary letter.

         3.   In view of the circumstances of your case, any application for
         leave to remain that you make in the UK within 28 days of the  date
         you receive this letter will be treated as  if  it  had  been  made
         within 28 days of the expiry of your last grant of leave  and  will
         not be refused on the basis you are an overstayer.

         4.   If you leave the UK and then make  an  application  for  entry
         clearance, for the purposes of paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration
         Rules, the start date of any overstaying will  be  calculated  from
         the date you received this letter."

 4. Following the conclusion of the judicial review and before this letter,
    the Appellant made a further application on  30  June  2016  which  was
    refused on 28 June 2017 and the human rights  claim  was  certified  as
    clearly unfounded.  On any view, therefore, as Judge Manuell  found  to
    be the case, the Appellant's leave ended  on  that  date.   It  is  not
    however clear whether it had ended before then as  the  effect  of  the
    Respondent's letter is not entirely clear.  It  appears  to  have  been
    assumed by the writer of the Respondent's decision  under  appeal  that
    the effect was indeed to extend the period of leave.  I  am  not  clear
    how that can be done since leave can  only  be  extended  by  grant  or
    statute and the letter is not expressed as a grant of leave (unlike for
    example a "60 days letter" in cases of sponsor licence revocation).  It
    is an indication that a further application  would  be  treated  as  if
    leave continued until the date of receipt of the letter  but  that  may
    not be the same as an actual grant of leave.

 5. However, in light of the assumption on which  Judge  Manuell's  finding
    was based and since that finding was not expressly  challenged  by  the
    Respondent in her grounds of appeal to this Tribunal,  I  say  no  more
    about it at this stage.  It is  relevant  when  I  come  to  deal  with
    directions below.

 6. The hearing before me as before Judge Manuell  therefore  proceeded  on
    the basis that the Appellant had been lawfully present in  the  UK  for
    nine years and two months (albeit on a precarious basis).

 7. Judge  Manuell  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  there  were
    "significant obstacles" to reintegration in  Bangladesh  ([25]  of  the
    Decision) and in the alternative on the basis  that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate ([30]).

 8. The Respondent challenges the Judge's findings  on  both  counts.   She
    does so on the basis that the Judge  has  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for his findings and/or  that  he  has  materially  misdirected
    himself in law.  The Respondent goes so far as to say  that  the  Judge
    acted irrationally in allowing the appeal as he did. A  point  is  also
    taken about the Judge's finding  at  [21]  of  the  Decision  that  the
    Respondent's refusal based on  paragraph  322(13)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules") in relation to an outstanding litigation  debt  was
    "mistaken".

 9. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien
    on 24 December 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred  as  follows.  The
         Judge's finding that the Appellant faced very significant obstacles
         to reintegration into Bangladesh  were  inadequately  reasoned  and
         irrational.

         3.   Whilst perhaps  generous,  the  Judge  reached  an  unarguably
         adequately reasoned and permissible conclusion on 276ADE.   In  any
         event, the Judge's assessment of proportionality in the alternative
         was unarguably sustainable.

         4.   The grounds disclose no material arguable error of law."

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  on  24
    January 2020.  Although a lengthy decision, it  bears  setting  out  in
    full  as  it  neatly  summarises  the  basis  for  the   Decision   and
    encapsulates the difficulties with it.  As such, Mr Whitwell relied  on
    the reasons given by Judge Hanson in his submissions:

         "... The respondent asserts, inter alia, the Judge erred in law  in
         failing to provide adequate reasons for  why  the  appellant  would
         face significant obstacles on return to Bangladesh having spent his
         formative years in Bangladesh and having family members there  with
         whom he is in regular contact and who has  obtained  qualifications
         and experience in the United Kingdom which will enable him to  find
         employment on return to Bangladesh.  The grounds  argue  the  Judge
         fails  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the  finding  of   very
         significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  which  are  said  to  be
         irrational.  The grounds  also  assert  the  Judge  has  failed  to
         identify what exceptional circumstances exist  sufficient  to  make
         the decision disproportionate.

         The Judge notes the appellant is a Citizen of  Bangladesh  aged  33
         who entered the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  Student  after  which
         subsequent applications were made for further leave but refused. An
         application for leave on Compassionate grounds relying on length of
         residence under paragraph 276B of the  Rules  was  refused  as  the
         applicant had only  accrued  9  years  2  months  continual  lawful
         residence up to 28 June 2017.

         The Judge found the appellant reliable and truthful and accepted in
         full his evidence of his circumstances and the facts in the appeal.
          The Judge finds that the respondent's  decision  of  29  May  2018
         mistaken and based upon a material  misapprehension  of  the  facts
         which  the  Judge  finds  is  highly  relevant  to  proportionality
         pursuant to article 8  ECHR  as  the  applicant's  application  was
         considered on a false premise [21].  The Judge also refers to  what
         he considers to be a material misapprehension of fact in subsequent
         paragraphs before setting out the  'balance  sheet'  approach  from
         [27].  The Judge  finds  the  reference  to  paragraph  322(13)  is
         mistaken  and  that  when  balancing  up  the  competing  arguments
         together with section 117B the respondent had failed  to  establish
         that the decision is proportionate.

         It is arguable the Judge erred in law in concluding the refusal  on
         Suitability grounds pursuant to paragraph 322(13) in relation to  a
         litigation debt was mistaken when at the date of the application  a
         litigation debt was outstanding, even if it had  been  subsequently
         repaid by the appellant through his obtaining a loan.

         The Judge noted the length of time the appellant had  been  in  the
         United Kingdom and that he had remained lawfully  albeit  that  his
         immigration status was precarious.  The fact the  appellant  speaks
         English and is self-supporting is a neutral factor and  whilst  the
         Judge was not required to place no weight  upon  the  private  life
         established  whilst  the  appellant's  status  is  precarious,  the
         Judge's conclusion the public interest in removing the appellant is
         small, possibly negligible, arguably devalues the important  public
         interest in immigration control.   As  matters  identified  by  the
         Judge did not arguably amount to exceptional circumstances or  very
         significant obstacles to reintegration there is arguable  merit  in
         the respondent's submission that this aspect of the appeal has been
         inadequately reasoned.  The Judge at [25] finds the appellant  will
         face very significant obstacles  but  does  not  explain  why  this
         should be in light of the acceptance  of  his  education  and  work
         experience coupled with time he  spent  in  Bangladesh  and  family
         contact there.

         The First-tier Tribunal Judge refusing permission described this as
         a generous decision.  The difficulty at  this  stage  is  that  the
         Judge's analysis of the Immigration Rules is infected  by  arguable
         legal error  as  set  out  in  the  respondent's  grounds  and  the
         assessment of the merits of  the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules is arguably infected by legal error in  failing  to  properly
         identify  exceptional  circumstances  sufficient  to  override  the
         public interest.

         I find the alleged errors material as it is not clear that the same
         decision will be arrived at if the assessment of  the  appeal  both
         within  and  outside  the  immigration  rules  is   undertaken   in
         accordance with relevant authorities."

11. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains a
    material error of law and, if it does, to re-make the decision or remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.   At  the  end  of  the
    hearing, I indicated that I found there to be an error of law and  that
    I would provide my reasons in writing which I now turn to do.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

12. It is appropriate to deal  with  the  Respondent's  grounds  under  the
    separate headings within the Rules and outside them.

    PARAGRAPH 276ADE(1)(vi): VERY SIGNIFICANT OBSTACLES

13. The Judge set out his findings in this regard at [25] of  the  Decision
    as follows:

         "Turning  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  exactly  how  readily  the
         Appellant could reintegrate into Bangladeshi society without facing
         significant obstacles (as the Respondent contends) is not clear cut
         on the facts of this appeal.  The Appellant has spent some  of  the
         most important years of his life in the  United  Kingdom,  reaching
         maturity.  He has completed his higher education here  successfully
         and was on the point of embarking on  his  career  in  the  British
         Army, using those qualifications.  He has become  accustomed  to  a
         free, cosmopolitan society.  He has never worked in Bangladesh.  He
         has of course demonstrated determination and character  in  various
         ways, but the tribunal considers that he would not find it easy  to
         reintegrate in terms of employment, given his  age,  long  absence,
         lack of past experience of work  in  Bangladesh  and  his  lack  of
         useful personal  connections  which  tend  to  count  for  much  in
         developing societies.  It would be an expensive setback  and  scant
         rewards for his efforts to date.  It is perhaps finely balanced but
         the tribunal  considers  in  sum  that  the  Appellant  would  face
         significant obstacles which meet  the  high  threshold  applicable.
         The appeal would therefore succeed because  the  Immigration  Rules
         are met."

14. There is a very obvious error  in  that  passage  which,  although  not
    clearly identified by the Respondent in the grounds  or  Judge  Hanson,
    nonetheless in my view is sufficient in and of  itself  to  render  the
    finding unsustainable and that is the test applied.   The  Judge  twice
    makes reference to "significant obstacles".  That is not the test;  the
    test is one of "very significant obstacles".  That finding is not saved
    by the Judge's reference to the test earlier in the Decision  (at  [5])
    when setting out  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  because  he
    repeats the same error.  Nor is it rescued by the  reference  to  "high
    threshold  applicable".   There  is  a  marked  difference  between   a
    threshold  of  significant  obstacles  and  one  of  very   significant
    obstacles. One is clearly on its face of a higher  magnitude  than  the
    other.  I note also the Judge's reference to the Appellant not  finding
    it easy to reintegrate but that is not the test.  For  that  reason,  I
    would have found an error of law in this finding for that reason alone.



15. I also accept Mr Whitwell's submission that much of  what  is  said  at
    [25] of the Decision is directed not at the obstacles to integration in
    Bangladesh but to the interference with the Appellant's life in the UK.
     It is not relevant for example that the Appellant has spent  years  in
    the UK studying and wanted to join the British army save to the  extent
    that this might impact on his ability to find work in Bangladesh.

16. It is also difficult to reconcile some of what is there said  with  the
    facts of this case and the Judge's earlier recording of  the  evidence.
    For example, it is suggested that the Appellant has spent "some of  the
    most important years of  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  reaching
    maturity". Whilst I do not doubt that maturity does not start  suddenly
    on a person's eighteenth birthday, that sentence implies a  person  who
    has grown up in a country.  However, the  Appellant  was  already  aged
    twenty-two years when he came  to  the  UK.   He  therefore  spent  his
    formative years and most of his life in Bangladesh.  It is said that he
    has  no  "useful  personal  connections"  in  Bangladesh  and  yet  the
    Appellant's own evidence indicates that he has family there.

17. That brings me on to  Mr  Chakmakjian's  submission  that  the  Judge's
    findings have to be read in the context of the evidence.   He  drew  my
    attention first to paragraphs [9] to [15] of  the  Decision  where  the
    Judge summarises the  Appellant's  evidence.   The  only  paragraph  of
    moment on this issue is [13] which reads as follows:

         "The Appellant was cross-examined and the tribunal has kept a  full
         note.  He named his family in Bangladesh.  He had never  worked  in
         Bangladesh and felt it would be difficult  to  find  a  job  there.
         Currently he was living with a friend in Brighton, rent free.   His
         uncle in the United Kingdom gave him some help.  The Appellant  had
         never returned to Bangladesh and  felt  integrated  in  the  United
         Kingdom.   He  gave  examples  of  his  social   life   and   local
         connections."

18. The highest point of that evidence is that the Appellant is assimilated
    to UK culture and that he does not "feel" that he would find a  job  in
    Bangladesh because he has never worked there.   However,  there  is  no
    evidence recorded in support of any submission that  work  is  hard  to
    come by in Bangladesh,  particularly  for  someone  with  some  (albeit
    limited) work experience and education  in  the  UK.   It  is  for  the
    Appellant to establish that there are very significant obstacles on the
    balance of probabilities.

19. Further, the Judge fails to consider the way  in  which  the  test  was
    explained in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a  broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a Court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."

    The Judge has not taken into account the facts that the Appellant  grew
    up in Bangladesh and still has family there.  He  was  educated  there.
    There is no reason given  by  the  Judge  why  on  that  analysis,  the
    Appellant  would  face  even  significant  obstacles  let  alone   very
    significant ones.

20. Mr Chakmakjian also drew my attention to the underlying evidence of the
    Appellant contained in a witness statement dated 17 July  2019  ([AB/1-
    5]).  However, that does not add to the summary  given  by  the  Judge.
    Most if not all is directed at his immigration history and life in  the
    UK.  Although I do not have regard  to  the  Appellant's  supplementary
    statement for these purposes, I note that this does not expand  on  any
    obstacles to integration in Bangladesh either.

21. The high point of Mr Chakmakjian's submission in  this  regard  is  the
    reference to  a  letter  written  by  the  Appellant  on  18  May  2018
    apparently in support of his application for leave asking to  be  given
    the opportunity to join the British army by the  grant  of  leave.   As
    such, most of the letter is directed  once  again  at  his  immigration
    history save for the following paragraph:

         "... I cannot imagine a day without Brighton.  My favourite time is
         in Brighton gay pride season in August every year.  I never  missed
         it.  I think few years ago, me and my friend were enjoying  in  gay
         pride.  One of my friends he put those pictures in social media and
         it's gone to viral.  After that I got a death threat by email  from
         an Islamist terrorist group called Harkatul Jihad  from  Bangladesh
         (please see attached that email) [this is not  in  the  Appellant's
         bundle].  Since that time I am really scared to go back home.  I am
         also scared to go back home as our opposition party is in power  in
         Bangladesh.  Because I was involved in politics back home."

22. Mr Chakmakjian said that the Respondent had not disputed  that  account
    and that it showed that there were very significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's return to Bangladesh.  There are several difficulties  with
    that submission. First, although it appears  that  the  Respondent  had
    this letter  when  making  the  decision  under  appeal,  there  is  no
    reference to this aspect of the 18 May letter,  no  doubt  because  the
    passage cited is buried  in  a  three-page  letter  directed  at  other
    matters.  There is no acceptance, implicit or express,  that  there  is
    any risk to the Appellant on return.  Second, there is no reference  to
    any of this in the Appellant's statement of  additional  grounds  dated
    less than one month earlier. Third, it is not mentioned at all  in  the
    grounds of appeal against the Respondent's decision.  Fourth, it is not
    mentioned  in  the  Appellant's   witness   statement   (nor   in   his
    supplementary statement).  Fifth,  and  most  importantly,  it  is  not
    mentioned by the Judge as being a reason why he found there to be  very
    significant obstacles to  integration  in  Bangladesh  and  nor  is  it
    recorded as part of the summary of evidence.

23. For all of those reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of  law
    in the Judge's finding that the Appellant meets paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Rules.  The Judge has materially misdirected himself in  law  as
    to the test which applies.  On the evidence which the Judge  took  into
    account and the reasons he gave, his  finding  is  either  inadequately
    reasoned or is not one which  he  could  reach  on  that  evidence,  in
    particular having taken into account  factors  which  were  largely  or
    entirely irrelevant to his consideration of the relevant test.







    ARTICLE 8 ECHR

24. That is though not the end of the  matter  as  the  Judge  went  on  to
    consider in  the  alternative  whether  the  Appellant  should  succeed
    outside the Rules on the  basis  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was
    disproportionate.   That  leaves  out  of  account  the  finding   that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is met although, for reasons I will come to, my
    conclusion that this  finding  is  erroneous  in  law  is  relevant  to
    proportionality.

25. The Judge's findings in this regard are at [26] to [30] of the Decision
    as follows:

         "26. But even if the tribunal were considered  too  generous  here,
         the tribunal would still allow this appeal on its wider analysis.

         27.  On a 'balance sheet' approach, the following are positives:

             (a)  The nature and strength of the Appellant's  private  life
             (see above);

             (b)  The unusually high degree of the Appellant's  integration
             into British society over the past 11 years;

             (c)  The Appellant has  always  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
             lawfully and remained in close contact with the  Home  Office.
             The only gap in leave is 5 days at most and  insignificant  is
             not de minimis.  There are no immigration control issues;

             (d)  The Appellant  is  of  good  character  and  has  made  a
             contribution to society; and

             (e)  The Appellant speaks English and is self-supporting.

         28.  As for negatives, the only specific negative identified in the
         reasons for refusal letter, the paragraph 322(13) refusal, has been
         found mistaken by the tribunal.

         29.  Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002 requires
         attention.  It is the case that the Appellant's  private  life  has
         been established while the Appellant's immigration status has  been
         precarious, however as already noted the Appellant has at all times
         complied with the law and the small overstay was  inadvertent.   He
         speaks English and has never been a burden on  public  funds.   The
         public interest  in  removing  this  Appellant  is  the  tribunal's
         estimation small, probably negligible.

         30.  Taking all of the Appellant's  particular  circumstances  into
         account, the tribunal finds that his removal would serve no  useful
         purpose, and indeed would deprive the United Kingdom of an  usually
         [sic]  strong  integrated  individual  of  good   character.    The
         proportionality balance under Article 8 ECHR favours  allowing  his
         appeal."

26. Although that passage  contains  errors  of  law  irrespective  of  the
    underlying findings as I will come  to,  it  is  first  appropriate  to
    record the Judge's finding as to the paragraph  322(13)  reference  and
    also as to the Appellant's private life.

27. At [21] of the Decision, the Judge says the following:

         "The tribunal finds that the refusal of the Appellant's application
         as varied on 8 November 2017 on Suitability grounds by reference to
         paragraph 322(13)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  mistaken.   The
         relevant decision and choice of whether  or  not  to  exercise  any
         discretion was based on a material misapprehension of  fact.   That
         is highly relevant to proportionality for Article 8 ECHR  purposes,
         because the Appellant's  application  was  considered  on  a  false
         premise.  There were also other material misapprehensions of  fact,
         which will be considered below."

28. The litigation debt relates to the  judicial  review  application.   In
    fact, the litigation debt  consists  of  two  debts  both  relating  to
    judicial reviews.  The first is for 581 as contained in an order of  6
    June 2016.  The second is for 1231 as contained in an  order  dated  1
    May 2017.  So far as I can see, neither party has  produced  copies  of
    those orders and so I cannot tell  whether  they  relate  to  the  same
    judicial review or a different one nor do I know the substance of  what
    was decided by that judicial review which may have  some  relevance  to
    the immigration history issue which I have identified above.

29. The Appellant's evidence in relation to the litigation debt is that  he
    had, via his solicitors, asked the Home Office to  waive  payment.   He
    says that those requests were made on 1 September 2016  and  21  August
    2018 and that he received a response from the debt company on 22 August
    2018 to say that they had referred back to the Home Office.  He says in
    his statement dated 17 July 2019 that he has "now managed" to  pay  but
    does not say when that was done.  I do not understand him to  say  that
    he had made payment prior to the Respondent's refusal letter.  However,
    although the debts were therefore probably  still  outstanding  at  the
    date of that decision and to that extent the Respondent was entitled to
    say that they had not been paid, it was probably erroneous to say  that
    the Appellant had "made no attempt to offer any recompense to the  Home
    Office with regard to these awarded costs".  Although it might be  said
    that a request for a waiver does not indicate a willingness to pay, the
    Judge was entitled to note at [19] of the Decision that "the  Appellant
    has never sought to avoid payment".  That was relevant to discretion.

30. The Respondent says  that  the  Judge  erred  in  that  regard  because
    paragraph 322(13) relates to the date of decision not hearing.  That is
    perhaps correct but the only  issue  for  the  Judge  was  whether  the
    Respondent's decision breaches the Appellant's human rights as at  date
    of hearing and the fact that he had paid the debt by then was  relevant
    to proportionality.  Any error in that regard, therefore, would not  be
    material.

31. As to the Appellant's private life, I have read the evidence  on  which
    the Judge's assessment is based as set out in the  Judge's  summary  of
    the evidence at [9] to [15] of the Decision.   I  have  also  read  the
    Appellant's statement in this regard.  I do not need to  set  out  that
    evidence in full as the Judge has provided a  summary  of  the  factors
    which he considered to be relevant at [24] of the Decision as follows:

         "The tribunal's only power is to determine  whether  the  resulting
         interference with the Appellant's private life under Article 8 ECHR
         is proportionate and hence justified.  The tribunal considers  that
         the  Appellant's  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  well
         developed.  He has completed two degrees in the United Kingdom with
         creditable  results.   Those  qualifications  are   of   practical,
         vocational value.  He is an  active  player  member  of  his  local
         cricket club.  He is a blood donor and a  past  volunteer  for  Red
         Cross.  His last  employer  would  reemploy  him  tomorrow  if  the
         Appellant had the right to work.  The Appellant produced letters of
         support from a  wide  range  of  people,  showing  friendships  and
         connections  of  substance.   The  Appellant  passed  the  rigorous
         selection process to  be  offered  conditional  employment  by  the
         British Army.  The Appellant passed the  KoLL  test  several  years
         ago.  None of these  important  facts,  all  deserving  of  weight,
         received sufficient attention from the Respondent when deciding the
         Appellant's application.  The tribunal so finds."

32. I begin by making the assumption that by the final sentence, the  Judge
    was indicating that he considered that weight should be  given  to  the
    Appellant's private life and not, as appears on one reading,  that  the
    Respondent had failed to give sufficient  attention  to  those  weighty
    factors.  That is not of course relevant.  This is not a review of  the
    Respondent's decision. It is for the Judge to determine the  weight  to
    be given.  However, I am satisfied that the Judge meant to say that  he
    was giving those factors weight himself by reason of what  he  says  in
    the first sentence.

33. I do not seek to downplay the factors which weigh  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  He has integrated well into British  society  as  the  Judge's
    summary and his own evidence shows.  I also accept that the  weight  to
    be given to private life depends on the strength of that  private  life
    as disclosed by the evidence.  However, whilst the factors there  taken
    into account are unobjectionable, it is far from clear to me why any of
    them whether taken severally or cumulatively are particularly  weighty.
    They amount to having studied and obtained qualifications in the UK (as
    would be expected of someone here with leave as a student), having been
    a good worker (when permitted to work), having  played  cricket  for  a
    local cricket club, having been a blood donor and carried out voluntary
    work and to have made a lot of friends.  It is  difficult  to  see  how
    that differs from very many cases of people who come to the UK to study
    or work.

34. Whilst it is  no  doubt  admirable  that  the  Appellant  felt  such  a
    connection to the UK that he wished  to  join  the  British  army,  the
    reason that he was unable to do so, as I understand it, is because  his
    immigration status was not regularised at the relevant time.   Although
    I  have  no  evidence  about  this,  it  is  my  understanding  that  a
    Commonwealth Citizen can join the British  army  (if  it  is  accepting
    applications from those persons at the relevant time)  and  can  do  so
    even from abroad.  However, as the letter  from  the  Army  at  [AB/84]
    makes clear, the Appellant could not be offered employment  as  at  the
    date of that letter (13 April 2018) because he no longer had  leave  to
    be in the UK.

35. That brings me on to the central difficulty with the Judge's  analysis.
    The Judge has failed to factor in the Appellant's immigration status at
    all times whilst he has been in the UK.  Whilst I accept  that  "little
    weight" for the  purposes  of  Section  117B(4)  and  (5)  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("Section  117B")  does  not  mean  no
    weight and that it is for the Judge to assess the  appropriate  weight,
    there needed to be some recognition that the Appellant's  private  life
    was formed whilst he was here on a precarious basis and for part of the
    time unlawfully.

36. Insofar as it might be said that the Judge has taken that into  account
    when balancing the  interference  with  the  Appellant's  private  life
    against the public interest, that brings me back to the passage of  the
    Decision which I set out at [25] above.  The Judge there  repeats  that
    the nature and strength of the Appellant's private life is relevant  as
    previously assessed.  That is undoubtedly correct.  It may even be that
    the Judge is entitled to  say  that  integration  is  "unusually  high"
    although as I have already recorded, it is difficult  to  see  what  is
    different in this case from many others and therefore what it is  which
    characterises it as such.

37. However, there is an error in what is said at [27(c)] of the  Decision.
    Leaving aside the point I made earlier about the correct classification
    of the Appellant's status at all relevant times and accepting that  his
    leave may not have ended until June 2017, it cannot be  said  that  the
    gap in leave is "5 days at most".  At the  date  of  the  hearing,  the
    Appellant had no leave for over two years.  Whilst, as the Judge  noted
    at [22] of the Decision, it had  been  thought  before  the  Tribunal's
    decision in Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department  ([2019]
    UKUT 00010(IAC)) that the overlooking of a short gap in leave  had  the
    effect of rendering status lawful, that is now confirmed to be wrong in
    law.  Accordingly, the Appellant's leave ended on  any  view  when  his
    claim was refused and certified in June 2017.  The  fact  that  he  was
    later given a right of appeal in-country does not resurrect that leave.



38. Furthermore, there is no recognition that, even when he had leave,  the
    Appellant's status was precarious and therefore  deserving  of  "little
    weight" under Section 117B.  As a student, the Appellant  was  expected
    to return to his home country  following  completion  of  his  studies.
    Although the precarious nature of status is mentioned  in  the  Judge's
    reference to Section  117B  at  [29]  of  the  Decision,  there  is  no
    indication that the Judge has understood that this status alone makes a
    difference to weight.  The Judge points to  the  unlawfulness  of  stay
    being minimal and inadvertent but that is irrelevant to the  effect  of
    precarious status in and of itself.  Further, I do not fully understand
    the reference to overstaying being "inadvertent" on the facts here;  in
    any event the Judge leaves out of account the lack  of  leave  for  two
    years out of the eleven that the Appellant has spent here.

39. That then brings me on to  the  more  obvious  errors  in  the  Judge's
    analysis.  First, it is not right to say that "there are no immigration
    control issues".  As I have already pointed out,  as  someone  who  had
    precarious status and who can no longer meet any of the Rules to permit
    him to remain, the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is
    clearly relevant.  That is clearly stated to be in the public  interest
    by Section 117B.  There is no recognition of that factor.

40. Second, the Judge has weighed in the balance as  a  positive  that  the
    Appellant speaks English and is self-supporting ([27] of the Decision).
     The Respondent does not apparently dispute that this  is  an  accurate
    statement of fact, but those factors can only be  neutral  (Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58).   In  spite
    of Mr Chakmakjian's endeavours, he was unable to persuade me  that  the
    words "the following are positives" at the beginning  of  [27]  of  the
    Decision can mean other than  that  the  Judge  has  accorded  positive
    weight to those factors.

41. Finally, and returning to the point of the weight to be  given  to  the
    public interest, in finding that this was "small, probably  negligible"
    the Judge's assessment flies in the face of case-law  As  was  said  in
    the headnote of this Tribunal's  decision  in   KF  and  others  (entry
    clearance, relatives of refugees) Syria [2019] UKUT 413 (IAC) "[a]s was
    made clear in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 the purpose of the  Immigration
    Rules is  to  enable  decision  makers  to  understand  and  apply  the
    appropriate weight to be  given  to  the  public  interest.  That  the
    appellants in an application  for  entry  clearance  do  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules is an  adverse  factor"  (and  see  [18(d)]  of  that
    decision from where that is taken).  That guidance cross-refers to what
    is said in Agyarko and another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11 (see in  particular  [51]  to  [57]  of  that
    judgment).

42. Whilst those decisions are in the context of  entry  clearance  in  the
    first and family life in the second, that does not affect  the  general
    point that the Rules demonstrate the Respondent's view as to the public
    interest so that, if a person is unable to meet the Rules in  order  to
    enter or remain in the UK, that  is  a  weighty  consideration  in  the
    public interest.  As was said in Agyarko:

         "57. That approach is also appropriate when a Court or tribunal  is
         considering whether a refusal of leave to remain is compatible with
         article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately,  it
         has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is  proportionate  in   the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the removal of  the  person  in  question  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control."

    Although  relating  to  family  life,  there  is  nothing  there  which
    indicates that any different test is to  apply  to  private  life.   If
    anything, a family life claim is likely to be stronger as it often also
    involves the rights of a British citizen or settled person.

43. For all of those reasons, I am satisfied that the  Judge's  conclusions
    in the Appellant's favour as to proportionality  of  removal  are  also
    founded on legal error.  The Judge has  failed  to  accord  appropriate
    weight to the public interest  having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's immigration status and has  failed  adequately  to  explain
    what it is in this case that is "very strong or compelling"  so  as  to
    outweigh that public interest.  As also noted, the Judge has  erred  in
    giving positive weight to factors which, according to binding case law,
    are only neutral.

44. I therefore set the Decision aside.  I  do  not  preserve  any  of  the
    findings for reasons which follow.

    NEXT STEPS

45. I indicated at the hearing that I proposed to retain the appeal for re-
    making in this Tribunal.  Although, having set aside the Decision, this
    will involve some fact finding, that is not of such magnitude that  the
    appeal needs to be remitted.

46. I might have been in a position to re-make the decision immediately  at
    the hearing, having found an error of law.   However,  there  were  two
    reasons why I did not do so.

47. First, as I have identified, there is need for clarification as to  the
    Respondent's position about the Appellant's immigration status  between
    November 2015 and June 2017.  As Mr Whitwell submitted  and  I  accept,
    whilst the Appellant's status after June 2017 is as  an  overstayer  on
    any view, the length and reasons for  his  overstaying  may  have  some
    relevance to the proportionality assessment.  Although the Respondent's
    grounds do make mention of the  Appellant  having  no  valid  leave  to
    remain after 2015, they do not grapple with the chronology in this case
    nor do they directly challenge the Judge's finding in this  regard.   I
    did not consider it fair for the Appellant to have to  deal  with  this
    issue "on the hoof", particularly having  regard  to  the  Respondent's
    decision under appeal which appears to have led to the Judge's finding.

48. Second, having taken instructions from his client  and  notwithstanding
    the lack of any mention of this in the grounds of appeal or any witness
    statement  (including   the   recent   supplementary   statement),   Mr
    Chakmakjian indicated that the Appellant did wish to rely  on  what  is
    said in the 18 May 2018 letter as regards what may  happen  to  him  on
    return.  I pointed out to Mr Chakmakjian that this may well amount to a
    new matter as it appears to amount to a protection claim.  He said that
    this was not so as the Appellant prayed the position in aid of his case
    that there are very significant obstacles to integration in Bangladesh.
     With respect to Mr Chakmakjian, I find that difficult to  accept.   If
    the Appellant is saying that he is at risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh,
    that is a protection claim however the Appellant seeks to argue it.  As
    such, it would be a new matter.  Since the issues are not to  be  found
    in either the grounds of appeal or any  witness  statement,  though,  I
    reserve my conclusion in that regard.  It will be for the Respondent in
    the first place to consider whether what is now raised is a new  matter
    and if so, what is the consequence.

49. In that regard, although  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    should claim asylum and be interviewed in that regard (or otherwise  be
    prepared for inferences to be drawn as to why he has not done so), I do
    not need to deal with that submission.  It will be for  the  Respondent
    to decide whether to consent to a new matter being raised  and  if  she
    refuses to do so (with reasons), the Appellant  will  not  be  able  to
    raise it unless he successfully applies  for  judicial  review  of  the
    refusal of consent.  It is not appropriate  however  to  pre-judge  the
    Respondent's position which will itself depend on what is said  by  the
    Appellant.

50. Mr Chakmakjian asked that I deal at this hearing with the evidence from
    the other witnesses who had provided supplementary statements  and  had
    attended to be cross-examined if  necessary.   Particularly  since  the
    Appellant's case  is  not  fully  formulated  and  that  he  could  not
    therefore be cross-examined at this hearing, I did not consider that to
    be an appropriate course.  However, I have made a  direction  below  to
    require the Respondent to indicate whether she wishes to  cross-examine
    any or all of those witnesses  in  order  potentially  to  spare  their
    further attendance.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the decision of  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Manuell promulgated on 8 August 2019 discloses  an  error  of  law.   I  set
aside that  decision.   I  make  the  following  directions  for  a  resumed
hearing:

 1. By 4pm on Tuesday 24 March 2020, the Respondent  shall  file  with  the
    Tribunal and serve on the Appellant her position statement setting  out
    her views concerning the Appellant's immigration history  (see  [1]  to
    [4] and [47] above);

 2. By 4pm on Tuesday 7 April 2020,  the  Appellant  shall  file  with  the
    Tribunal and serve on the Respondent  his  response  to  that  position
    statement by written submissions and/or a further witness statement  of
    the Appellant as appropriate.  The further witness statement shall also
    deal with his claim that he is unable to return to  Bangladesh  due  to
    events he says have occurred in the UK and/or based  on  the  political
    situation there (see [21], [22], [48] and [49] above);

 3. By 4pm on Tuesday 28 April 2020, the Respondent is to file  submissions
    in response to the Appellant's further witness statement, indicating in
    particular whether she considers that the evidence therein  constitutes
    a "new matter" and, if it  does,  whether  she  consents  to  it  being
    determined in this appeal;

 4. The Respondent is to indicate to the Appellant and the  Tribunal,  also
    by 4pm on Tuesday 28 April 2020 whether she requires  to  cross-examine
    any  of  the  witnesses  (apart  from  the  Appellant  himself)   whose
    statements have been filed and served in this appeal and, if so,  which
    of those witnesses.

 5. The resumed hearing is to be relisted before me on the first  available
    date after 31 May 2020 with a time estimate of  day.   No  interpreter
    is required. If any issues arise from the above  directions  which  are
    not capable of being resolved prior to that  date,  the  parties  shall
    inform the Tribunal  accordingly  and  may  request  that  the  resumed
    hearing be converted to a CMR.


[pic]
Signed:  Dated: 13 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
