
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10840/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2017                     |On 30 November 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     smt
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel instructed by Hameed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    who was born on [ ] 2003.  On 4  August  2015  she  applied  for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules as the child of
    a parent who had been granted refugee status in the United Kingdom.


 3. The appellant had made a previous application  dependent  on  the  same
    Rules which was refused on 25 February 2014.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated  on  2  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Flower
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.


 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused her application for entry by way of
    a decision made on 1 October 2015.  She appealed against that  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In a decision promulgated on 1 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fenoughty dismissed the appellant's appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    352D of the Immigration Rules although as  set  out  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 46 it was not open to the appellant to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the decision was not  made  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge set out that the ability to satisfy the Rules may  be
    taken into account in assessing the proportionality of the decision  to
    refuse her application.   The  Tribunal  considered  the  matter  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and found that any
    interference with the family life of the appellant and the sponsor  was
    proportionate to the decision to refuse entry clearance.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and on 4 September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Black granted permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 7. In the grounds of appeal, four separate  grounds  have  been  set  out,
    however, at the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Malik accepted
    that the first ground of appeal must fall away  because  the  appellant
    had no right of appeal against the decision under paragraph 352D of the
    Immigration Rules.  The remaining grounds assert that the judge -

      a) failed to engaged with the material evidence;

      b)  approached  the  question  of  proportionality  under  Article   8
         incorrectly, and

      c) failed to  have  proper  regard  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 8. It is asserted that whilst there has been a previous  appeal  and  that
    that is the starting point this is by no means the ending point for the
    purposes of the instant appeal.  The judge appears to have placed undue
    reliance on the  previous  decision.   The  previous  judge  failed  to
    consider the relevant guidance.  The appellant's circumstances were now
    different.  The approach of the judge to the  evidence  demonstrated  a
    failure to properly assess all the relevant evidence.  The judge  found
    that the authors of at least two of the letters lived in the UK and had
    not come to the Tribunal to give evidence in person.   It  is  asserted
    that this finding is based on presumption and that this was not put  to
    the sponsor during his evidence.  Therefore this is procedurally unfair
    and contrary to the common law duty of fairness.

 9. The judge's approach to the question of proportionality under Article 8
    is flawed because the judge applied  too  high  a  threshold  requiring
    significant family life, the test is simply family life.  There  is  no
    presumption that family life does or does not exist.

10. It is submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  carry  out  an  adequate
    assessment of the best interests of the child  and  therefore  has  not
    engaged with the duties under Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  In oral submissions Mr Malik submitted  that
    there was evidence before the judge regarding the  appellant's  medical
    condition referring to page 21 in the appellant's bundle.  He  asserted
    that this was relevant to the best interests' analysis  of  the  child.
    He referred to  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  which  set  out  at
    paragraphs 15, 18 and 19 that the general situation in the DRC made  it
    unsafe for the appellant to live there.  The general security situation
    was relevant to the best interests of the child.  The  judge  ought  to
    have looked at the situation in the country when considering  her  best
    interests.  I asked Mr Malik if there was any  evidence  of  a  medical
    condition apart from the one incident relating to being treated and for
    exposure to tear gas.  He indicated that there  was  no  other  medical
    evidence.

11. He referred to paragraph 8 of the decision where the judge set out  the
    sponsor's evidence that he visited  the  appellant  on  five  occasions
    whereas at paragraph 59 the judge indicates that the appellant  visited
    on only two occasions.  He submitted that that is a factual  error  and
    that that is material because it infected the judge's analysis  of  the
    level of family  life  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   He
    referred to the sponsor's witness statement at paragraph  18  where  he
    stated that he had visited in 2016.  There was  no  reference  to  this
    visit in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

12. He submitted that there was no reference anywhere in  the  decision  to
    Section 55 of the Citizenship Act.   Initially  Mr  Malik  appeared  to
    submit that a failure to refer to this section was of itself a material
    error of law.  However, after  clarification,  he  indicated  that  the
    issue was that the judge had not undertaken an adequate  assessment  of
    the child's best interests.  He submitted that the relationship was not
    disputed and therefore the judge had applied too high  a  threshold  by
    requiring there to be a significant family life rather  than  simply  a
    family life.  He referred to paragraph 59 of the decision and submitted
    that the judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  evidence  before  her
    regarding the death certificate and the letter from the  church.   With
    regard to the proportionality assessment  this  was  a  case  that  the
    appellant was part of a family unit prior to the sponsor's flight  from
    the UK.  The judge  had  made  insufficient  findings  with  regard  to
    whether or not the appellant formed part of that pre-flight family  and
    failed to give  adequate  reasons.   With  regard  to  this  submission
    however Mr Malik agreed that as he had conceded that the appeal on  any
    finding under the Immigration Rules cannot be mounted he did not  press
    this matter any further.

13. Mr Nath submitted that the judge did in fact give due consideration  to
    all the documents.  He referred to page 21 of the bundle.  This  was  a
    temporary condition that the appellant had suffered  from.   There  was
    nothing to indicate that there was any medical condition that the judge
    ought to have taken into account when  assessing  her  best  interests.
    This was a one off occurrence.  With regard to the  documents  referred
    to by Mr Malik he submitted that the documents do not take matters  any
    further.  The medical report at page 23 of the bundle does not  concern
    the appellant, and is not therefore relevant  to  her  best  interests.
    With regard to the document at page 25 of the bundle he submitted  that
    this document indicates the general situation in the DRC.  There is  no
    indication that the judge did not take all this evidence into  account.
    The judge does not have to  mention  every  single  piece  of  evidence
    before her.

14. Regarding best interests at paragraphs 55 and  59  in  particular,  the
    judge does go through what the best interests  of  the  child  are.   A
    judge does not need to specifically mention Section 55.  What the judge
    does need to do is apply the law and the judge had done that  in  those
    paragraphs.  The judge did consider the risks in the DRC and took  into
    account the letter from the church and other documents  when  assessing
    the best interests of the child.  At paragraph 59 the judge  summarises
    the best interests' points.  With regard to the judge's use of the word
    'significant' with reference to family life he submitted this  must  be
    looked at in the round.  Paragraphs 44 to 56 set out the  factors  that
    the judge has taken into account. At the end of paragraph 54 the  judge
    refers to the very limited contact, the child's  attendance  at  school
    etc. and at paragraph 56 when looking at  family  life,  and  analysing
    that life, the word 'significant' does not  detract  from  the  judge's
    findings overall. It is necessary to read the findings on Article 8  as
    a whole, not look in isolation at what is said in one paragraph.  There
    is nothing in the decision that  would  indicate  that  the  judge  was
    applying or requiring a higher standard than that there be family  life
    between the parties.  The  judge  did  not  have  to  accept  that  the
    appellant's grandmother had died  as,  when  looking  at  the  evidence
    submitted as a whole, no originals had been supplied and no explanation
    given that was accepted  by  the  judge.   This  was  a  very  detailed
    decision.   The  judge  clearly   analysed   the   evidence   and   the
    circumstances at the time of  the  hearing  of  the  application.   The
    conclusions at paragraphs 59 and 60 were ones that were clearly open to
    the judge.

15. Mr Malik in reply submitted that  apart  from  paragraph  57  the  word
    'significant' appears in paragraph  54  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  In paragraph  57  the  judge  refers  to  the  decision  not
    interfering significantly with existing family life.   He  submitted  a
    high  threshold  test  was  clearly  applied.   With  regard   to   the
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor  and  the  level  of
    contact he submitted that  this  was  based  on  an  incorrect  factual
    finding regarding the  number  of  occasions  the  appellant  had  been
    visited by the sponsor.

16. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.   I  indicated
    to the parties that the Tribunal file  did  not  have  a  copy  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  of  5  December  2014.   Mr  Malik
    indicated that his instructing solicitors  did  have  a  copy  of  that
    decision.  I directed that he send a  copy  of  that  decision  to  the
    Tribunal.  Both parties indicated that there would be no necessity  for
    any further submissions as a result of me taking into consideration the
    initial First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   I  received  a  copy  of  the
    decision shortly after the hearing.

Discussion

17. The judge set out in some detail the evidence in this case.  The  judge
    indicated that she took into account the findings from the appeal heard
    on 5 December 2014 and set out in  brief  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flower.

18. The judge set out in paragraphs 17 to 31  in  considerable  detail  the
    evidence presented in written form and the evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    oral evidence at the hearing.  From  paragraph  37  onwards  the  judge
    assessed that evidence and made findings on the evidence. At  paragraph
    43 the judge set out:

         "43. The tribunal found the sponsor's evidence to be vague.  He did
             not satisfactorily explain why it was only at the hearing that
             he gave evidence about the unwillingness  of  people  to  look
             after the appellant, and their perception that she was  cursed
             because her mother died when she was a baby, and she had lived
             with her grandmother and would therefore  be  perceived  as  a
             witch.  No supporting evidence had been provided  in  relation
             to this claim, and it was not mentioned in any of the  letters
             or documents in support.  The  sponsor  did  not  explain  why
             there were only two photographs of him and the appellant,  and
             no evidence of their telephone contact.

         44.  The tribunal did not  accept  the  sponsor's  explanation  for
             failing to produce the original death  certificates  and  more
             extensive photographs of his visits to the appellant.  He said
             he had them at home, and could have brought them,  if  he  had
             been asked.  However, he had been represented  throughout  the
             proceedings, and  the  tribunal  which  refused  his  previous
             appeal made it  clear  that  the  evidence  produced  on  that
             occasion was insufficient.

         45.  In all the circumstances, the tribunal did not feel  it  could
             place significant weight on the sponsor's evidence,  which  it
             found to be inconsistent, unreliable and lacking credibility."

19. With regard to the submission that the Tribunal Judge had  not  put  to
    the appellant or sponsor that the authors of the two letters  lived  in
    the UK and had not attended the Tribunal, this goes to the point as  to
    whether or not the  appellant  satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules.   As
    accepted by the appellant's representative this ground of appeal  could
    not be pursued as the appellant had no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision that she did not meet the Immigration Rules, therefore this is
    not relevant even if it were a material error of law.

20. Ground 1 asserts that the judge  did  not  consider  all  the  material
    evidence. The judge  did  engage  fully  with  the  evidence  providing
    adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  certain  aspects  of  it.   Specific
    reference by Mr Malik was made to the death certificate, the number  of
    occasions the sponsor had visited and the letter from the church.

21. As set out above the judge did not  place  significant  weight  on  the
    death certificate explaining that she  did  not  accept  the  sponsor's
    explanation for failing to produce the original. The judge set  out  at
    paragraph 42:

         'The  Tribunal  had  been  presented  with  photocopies  of   death
         certificates in respect of the appellant's mother and  grandmother.
         It was unclear why  the  originals  of  these  documents  were  not
         provided, and the tribunal considered the lack of documentation  to
         lessen the weight it could place on these documents...'

22. The judge did clearly consider this evidence fully. It was open to  the
    judge to place little weight on this evidence in the circumstances.

23. With regard to the asserted mistake of fact about the number of  visits
    made the judge set out at paragraph 56:

         '...Insofar as there is any family life between the  appellant  and
         the sponsor, it is of a limited  nature,  as  they  have  lived  in
         different countries for her entire  life,  during  which  time  the
         tribunal accepted, from the findings of  the  last  tribunal,  that
         sponsor had visited her twice.'

24. Given the  finding  of  the  judge  that  the  sponsor's  evidence  was
    'inconsistent,  unreliable  and  lacking  credibility'  the  judge  was
    entitled to reject the sponsor's evidence of  having  visited  on  more
    than 2 occasions and to accept only,  as  per  the  findings  of  Judge
    Flower, that he had visited on  2  occasions.  The  judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 42:

         '...No travel documents were provided to evidence the  trips  which
         the sponsor claimed to have made to visit  the  appellant,  and  no
         copy of his passport was produced.'

25. The finding of the judge was  not  a  factual  error  as  she  had  not
    accepted this evidence.

26. At paragraph 21 the judge set out the detail contained  in  the  letter
    from the church and at paragraph 55 said, 'Notwithstanding  the  letter
    from the  church,  there  was  no  independent  evidence  or  objective
    evidence to support the sponsor's  claim  that  the  appellant  was  in
    danger...'

27. The judge fully took into consideration the letter from the church. She
    considered all the material evidence which  she  found  to  be  lacking
    either by its absence, by lacking detail, or was inconsistent vague and
    incomplete. It  had  previously  been  brought  to  the  appellant  and
    sponsor's attention by Judge Flower that any evidence  put  forward  to
    support a further claim would need to be more detailed and specific.

28. The second ground of appeal is that the proportionality assessment  was
    flawed  as  the  judge  imposed  too  high  a  threshold  requiring   a
    'significant' family life. With regard to the analysis of  family  life
    the First-tier Tribunal set out:

         "53. The appellant and the sponsor had never  lived  together,  and
             although the sponsor said he had visited her, there  was  very
             limited evidence of any such visits.  The  sponsor's  evidence
             of the arrangements for caring for the appellant was vague and
             inconsistent.  He said he  was  worried  about  her,  but,  in
             contrast, he had said that he  did  not  wish  to  uproot  her
             whilst she was being cared for by her grandmother.  He said he
             sent money to her, but the evidence  of  this  was  the  money
             transfer receipts to three different people, only one of  whom
             had given written evidence, more than 18  months  earlier,  to
             confirm this.  She was the person who the sponsor  said  lived
             with the appellant's grandmother, not someone who had  assumed
             responsibility   for   the   appellant's   care.     In    the
             circumstances, the tribunal was unable to ascertain the extent
             to which the sponsor was supporting the appellant, although it
             accepted that he may have made some financial contribution.

         54.  In view of the lack of  evidence,  other  than  the  sponsor's
             assertions, to support the appellant's claim, the tribunal did
             not  consider  that  she  had  demonstrated  that  there   was
             significant family life.  There was insufficient  evidence  to
             support the sponsor's assertion that this was  so,  there  was
             very limited evidence of any contact  between  them,  and  the
             appellant was continuing to attend school,  and  to  be  cared
             for.

29. It is clear that the judge is not imposing any higher standard  but  is
    referring to  the  evidence  about  the  nature  and  strength  of  the
    relationship as asserted by the sponsor  and  the  appellant.  This  is
    demonstrated further in the following paragraphs:

         56.  The sponsor said he telephoned  the  appellant  five  times  a
             week, but the tribunal had not  accepted  this,  as  the  very
             limited evidence did not support his claim, and there  was  no
             evidence from the appellant, who is  now  13  years  old,  and
             could have been expected to provide a statement to support her
             claim.  Insofar as  there  is  any  family  life  between  the
             appellant and the sponsor, it is of a limited nature, as  they
             have lived in different countries for her entire life,  during
             which time the tribunal accepted, from  the  findings  of  the
             last tribunal, that sponsor had visited her twice.

         57.   In  this  case,  the  decision  to  refuse  the   appellant's
             application did not change the existing nature of  any  family
             life which existed, and it did not create  separation  between
             the sponsor and the appellant, although it may have the effect
             of continuing it.  The respondent's decision made no change to
             the appellant's existing situation, which  was  that  she  was
             living  in  her  country  of  birth,  with  a  friend  of  her
             grandmother's, so the decision did not interfere significantly
             with existing family life.

30. The judge accepted that there is family life and  was  considering  the
    extent of the interference with  that  family  life.  This  is  further
    evidenced at paragraph 60 below by the reference  to  'an  interference
    with any family life'.

31. Ground 3 concerns s55 and the best interests of the appellant. In  oral
    submissions reference was made specifically to a  failure  to  consider
    the medical evidence and the general security situation.  The  tribunal
    set out:

         55.  With regard to the appellant's best  interests,  the  tribunal
             did not  consider  that  it  had  been  shown  that  her  best
             interests would be  served  by  her  leaving  her  home.   The
             sponsor said she was studying, and was living  with  different
             people in an area where she had lived  for  her  entire  life.
             Notwithstanding the letter  from  the  church,  there  was  no
             independent evidence or  objective  evidence  to  support  the
             sponsor's claim that the appellant  was  in  danger,  and  the
             tribunal was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  showed  her
             interests were harmed by remaining in Kinshasa.

         ..

         59.  The tribunal considered the best interests of  the  appellant,
             who is now  13  years  old.   It  is  generally  in  the  best
             interests of children to be with their parents, and a  child's
             interests are a primary consideration.  However, the appellant
             had never lived with the sponsor, he had only  visited  twice,
             and there was minimal evidence that they were in contact.  The
             tribunal was not satisfied from the evidence that the  current
             arrangements are not in her best interests.  The tribunal  was
             not satisfied that the current arrangements would come  to  an
             end in the immediate future.

         60.  The tribunal balanced the factors pointing to an  interference
             with any family life of the appellant and the sponsor  against
             the public  interest  importance  in  maintaining  immigration
             controls.  Whilst it accepted that the sponsor's life  is  now
             established in the UK, it did not consider  the  circumstances
             of this case to be so compelling as  to  outweigh  the  public
             interest considerations.  It found that the decision,  in  all
             the circumstances, insofar as it amounts  to  an  interference
             with the family life of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  is
             proportionate to the consequences of the decision."

32. Although brief the judge has  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant. The judge had set out earlier in the decision  the  evidence
    and  her  analysis  of  that  evidence  and  made  findings  that  were
    adequately reasoned. Having undertaken that task this was the  starting
    point for considering the best interests of the  appellant.  The  judge
    dealt with the assertion that the appellant was in danger rejecting the
    sponsor's assertions. It was not therefore an error  to  fail  to  take
    this into account in assessing best interests  as  the  judge  had  not
    accepted this. The medial evidence referred to was a single  occurrence
    of the need for medical treatment following exposure  to  tear  gas  in
    September 2016. There was no evidence that there had been  any  ongoing
    issues and Mr Malik confirmed at the hearing that there  was  no  other
    medical evidence. There was therefore  no  ongoing  medical  conditions
    that the judge ought to have considered in  assessing  the  appellant's
    best interests. It was open to the judge in the circumstances  of  this
    case to reach the findings  she  did  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant.

33. There were no material errors of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that it should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                    Date 29 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

