
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10140/2018
                                                               hu/10395/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 11 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MUHAMMAD [F] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         IRAM [S] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny
For the Respondents:   Ms S Iengar, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S C Clarke allowing  the  appeals
    of the respondents on human rights grounds.



2.   The respondents will from now on be referred to as applicants for  ease
    of reference.

3.   The applicants are citizens of  Pakistan.  The  first  appellant  whose
    date of birth is  24  February  1979  is  the  husband  of  the  second
    appellant, Mrs Iram [S] whose date of birth is 15  August  1984.   They
    have a daughter called [SS] born in the United Kingdom on  9  September
    2013.

4.   The first applicant entered the UK  on  5  September  2006  with  entry
    clearance valid from 4 September 2006 to 30 November 2007.  He  made  a
    number of successful in time applications for leave to  remain  in  the
    UK.  On 24 June 2016 the first applicant applied for a  T1  HS  General
    Migrant  Visa  and  on  5  May  2017  varied  that  application  to  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  ten  years'
    lawful residence in the UK.  This application was refused on  18  April
    2018.

5.   The second applicant was granted leave to  enter  the  UK  as  the  PBS
    dependent spouse of the first applicant on 10 February 2012 valid until
    25 May 2013 and on 2 July 2013, valid until 2 July 2016.  She  made  an
    application for leave to remain on 13 June 2017 which was refused on 30
    April 2018.  It is their  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusals that were allowed by FtTJ Clarke.

6.   The Secretary of State refused the first  applicant's  application  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276B(ii)(c)   of   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that his conduct fell for refusal  under
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules as  a  general  discretionary
    ground for refusal.  It was stated that the first  applicant  had  been
    dishonest or deceitful in his dealings with HMRC/UKVI.

7.   The  judge  found  otherwise.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  no
    persuasive or cogent evidence before her that the first  applicant  had
    been either deceitful or dishonest in his tax dealings.  The mere  fact
    that the first applicant is responsible for his own tax affairs,  which
    have  required  some  amendment,  does  not  lead  to  the   inexorable
    conclusion that he has been dishonest.  The judge therefore found  that
    the first applicant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

8.   With regard to the second applicant's application which the judge  said
    was made for leave to remain on the basis that  the  first  applicant's
    application would be successful, the judge found that there  was  ample
    evidence that the second applicant met  the  financial  requirement  of
    Appendix FMSE and that evidence was before the respondent.

9.   However, the judge found that the second applicant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because  she  did  not  meet  the
    English language requirement, although that was through no fault of her
    own.  The respondent refused to release her passport to  undertake  the
    relevant test and the test provider refused  to  accept  the  certified
    copy of the passport provided by the Home Office.

10.  On the evidence before her the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  there
    would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  second  applicant  being
    reintegrated  into  her  country  of  origin.   Therefore,  the  second
    applicant  did  not  qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under   paragraph
    276ADE(vi).

11.  As the judge did not find  that  the  second  applicant  qualified  for
    leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  considered
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules as to whether  there  were  any
    compelling circumstances in this case.

12.  The judge accepted that the applicants have a private and  family  life
    together with their daughter in the UK.   In  these  circumstances  the
    decision of the Secretary of State amounted to an interference with the
    applicants' right to respect for family and private  life.   The  judge
    was also satisfied that such interference would  have  consequences  of
    such gravity to engage the operation of Article 8.

13.  The judge considered whether such  interference  was  proportionate  to
    the legitimate public end  sought  to  be  achieved,  namely  effective
    immigration controls.  Having conducted a balancing exercise  with  the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration  control,  the  judge
    found that the Secretary of State's decision was not proportionate  and
    therefore not a  justified  interference  with  the  first  and  second
    applicants' family and private life.

14.  The judge's reasons were that the first applicant met the  requirements
    of the relevant Immigration Rules  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision and continued to do so.  Both first and second applicants have
    complied with the Immigration Rules since their respective  entry  into
    the UK.  They are not a burden to the tax payer.

15.  The judge found that both applicants speak  good  English.   The  first
    applicant studied at De Montfort University.  Having accepted that  the
    second applicant does not meet the English  language  requirement,  the
    judge noted that the second applicant had passed the IELT test  to  the
    required standard in 2011, the life in the UK test in May 2017 and  she
    gave  her  evidence  during  the  hearing  without  the  need  for   an
    interpreter.

16.  The judge noted that the first applicant works in the UK  and  earns  a
    good income to support his family.  She accepted that  the  applicants'
    private life in the UK was established at a time when their immigration
    status was precarious.  However, the judge balanced that with the  fact
    that the majority of the applicants' relationship with each  other  was
    formed when they were  lawfully  living  in  the  UK.   They  are  both
    Pakistani nationals who have spent their formative years  in  Pakistan.
    However, the first applicant  has  lived  lawfully  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of ten years.  He has set up a business  and  has  an
    income, family and friends and a home in the UK.

17.  The judge considered the provisions  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and  the  guidance  given  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, which is that the welfare of  a  child
    is a primary consideration.

18.  The judge found that the applicants and their  daughter  form  a  tight
    family unit which is fully integrated into the local community.   Their
    daughter is now 5 years of age and has lived in the  UK.   She  suffers
    from undiagnosed  genetic  condition.   The  judge  said  there  was  a
    considerable number of letters from Consultants in Oxford,  Slough  and
    Leicester Hospitals confirming the  investigations  that  have  already
    taken place.  They are in the first applicant's bundle at pages 141  to
    174.  The judge said that their daughter has  been  accepted  onto  the
    100,000 genomes project at the  department  of  genetics  in  Leicester
    which will require several years of tests involving both the applicants
    and [SS] and follow up investigations.  The programme is not  available
    in Pakistan.

19.  In all the circumstances the judge found that it  was  in  [SS]'s  best
    interests to remain in the UK and be supported by both parents.

20.  Permission to appeal the judge's decision  was  granted  by  Designated
    Judge McClure of the First-tier Tribunal.  To the argument put  forward
    by the Secretary of State that the judge has  wrongly  determined  that
    the applicants had not acted dishonestly, Judge McClure held  that  the
    judge carefully analysed the facts in paragraph 18 and 19 and found  in
    paragraph 20  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  applicant  being
    dishonest.

21.  I found that Judge McClure had determined the first complaint  made  by
    the Secretary of State.  Both parties agreed that in the light  of  the
    fact that the Secretary of State had conceded that the first  applicant
    has ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    coupled with the finding made by Judge  McClure,  the  first  applicant
    succeeds in his application for indefinite leave to remain.  This means
    that the first applicant is entitled to indefinite leave to remain.

22.  I now turn to the second applicant.  Ms Kenny submitted that the  judge
    had found that the second applicant does not meet the  requirements  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  but  she  argued  that  there  was  no  proper
    assessment by the judge of the family remaining in the UK.   The  judge
    did not conduct an adequate assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  The judge did not consider any factors other than the child was
    participating in a genome programme.  There was no undisclosed  medical
    diagnosis of the child's medical condition.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge's decision lacked a proportionality assessment  which  considered
    all the factors.

23.   The  judge  found  that  the  second  applicant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules through no fault of her own.  She
    had previously passed the IELT test to the required standard  in  2011.
    That test had expired.  The relevant test centre would not  accept  the
    certified copy  of  the  passport  provided  by  the  Home  Office  and
    consequently she has been unable to retake the English  language  test.
    Despite this, the judge found that the second applicant had passed  the
    life in the UK test in May 2017  and  had  given  evidence  during  the
    hearing without the need for an interpreter.  I find that this is  good
    evidence that she is able to speak English to the required standard.

24.  It has been accepted that the first applicant succeeds in  his  appeal.
    He, therefore, has acquired indefinite leave to  remain  following  ten
    years' lawful residence in the UK.  I  accept  Ms  Iengar's  submission
    that in accordance with Agyarko (paragraph 54) no public interest  will
    be required in the second applicant having to leave the UK and make  an
    entry clearance application to join her husband in the  UK.   The  only
    obstacle to her appeal succeeding is the English language test.

25.  I accept Ms Iengar's submission that paragraph EX.1 which  applies  the
    insurmountable obstacle test, rescues the second applicant  because  of
    her daughter's profound  medical  needs.    The  judge  said  that  the
    daughter suffers from an undisclosed genetic  condition.   Evidence  of
    the daughter's medical condition is contained in a considerable  number
    of letters from consultants in Oxford, Slough and  Leicester  Hospitals
    confirming the investigations that have already taken  place.   Indeed,
    the medical evidence states that the daughter presents with a  clinical
    picture of diplegic cerebral palsy.  There is medical evidence that the
    daughter has been accepted onto the  100,000  genomes  project  at  the
    department of genetics in Leicester which will require several years of
    tests  involving  both  the  applicants  and   [SS]   and   follow   up
    investigations.    I find that the second applicant will need to be  in
    the UK to support her daughter.

26.  I find that  the  judge  properly  conducted  an  Article  8  balancing
    exercise,  balancing  the  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of
    immigration control against the circumstances of the family.  The judge
    also gave full consideration to Section 55.  I find  that  the  judge's
    finding that it is in [SS]'s best interests to remain in the UK and  be
    supported by both parents discloses an arguable error of law.

27.   Accordingly,  the  judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeals  of   the
    applicants on human rights grounds shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  7 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
