
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10134/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2016                            |On 24 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        reda salman fadeel al bodour
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Reda Salman Fadeel Al Bodour, in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision and reasons statement of  FtT  Judge  Barrowclough
    that was promulgated on 30 December 2015.

 2. After discussing the issues with Ms Aboni and Dr Al Badour,  I  decided
    that there was legal error in Judge Barrowclough's decision in that  he
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the  Home  Office  had
    acted with "bureaucratic ineptitude"  in  rejecting  and  refusing  the
    earlier applications made by Dr Al Badour.

 3. I begin by explaining that although the Home Office reasons for refusal
    letter dated  19  October  2015  refers  to  Dr  Al  Badour's  previous
    applications when describing his immigration history, neither party has
    provided  copies  of  the  earlier  correspondence.   Therefore,  Judge
    Barrowclough could not assess for himself  the  reasons  why  the  Home
    Office rejected and refused those applications, which according to  the
    Home Office broke the continuity of Dr Al Badour's residence in the UK.

 4. Compounding this problem is the fact the appeal was dealt with "without
    a hearing".  Judge Barrowclough  had  no  evidence  that  all  relevant
    papers had been served on the Home Office.  It may be that Dr Al Badour
    sent the relevant papers to the Home Office well before the appeal  was
    decided in the First-tier Tribunal but he did not provide evidence that
    such documents had been delivered to the Home Office in accordance with
    directions issued on 19 November 2015.  As a result, Judge Barrowclough
    could not assume they had been served on the Home Office.

 5. Ms Aboni advised me that the Home Office did  not  have  the  documents
    referred to  in  the  decision  and  reasons  statement.   This  raises
    concerns regarding fairness because I can only conclude that  the  Home
    Office was not been given an opportunity to respond to Dr  Al  Badour's
    allegations  regarding  the  treatment  of  his  previous  applications
    because the Home Office was unaware of the allegations.

 6. As a result of the above conclusions, I have decided to set aside Judge
    Barrowclough's decision and order that the appeal is reheard afresh  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Nothing  is  preserved  from  the  earlier
    decision and reasons statement; the findings made cannot be  maintained
    if the First-tier Tribunal  concludes  that  the  Home  Office  wrongly
    rejected the earlier applications because if  that  is  the  case  then
    there will have been no break in the period of residence.

 7. I give the following direction for the remitted hearing.

        a. The appeal is to be heard and decided de novo.

        b. The appeal is to be decided at a hearing and not on papers.   As
           this is directed by me as being necessary in  the  interests  of
           justice, there is no additional appeal fee.

        c. The appeal is to be heard by me in the First-tier Tribunal.

        d. It is to be listed on the first available date after four weeks.

        e. The parties must provide and exchange  any  documents  on  which
           they seek to rely at least 14 calendar days before the  remitted
           appeal  is  heard.   This  includes  copies  of  all   documents
           previously submitted to the Tribunal.   Failure  to  comply  may
           result in the First-tier Tribunal excluding late evidence.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Barrowclough contains  an  error
on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



                               Signed                 Date 24 October 2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
