
                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/10341/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 February 2019 and 9 May 2019       | On 22 May 2019                     |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                         FLOR ZULEIMA ROJAS QUILINDO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, counsel (7 February 2019).
      Ms E Lagunju, counsel (7 May 2019).
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dated 19 July 2018  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 31 August 2017 refusing her leave to remain on
    human rights grounds.

Background.


2.    The appellant is a citizen of Colombia born on 4  October  1969.   She
    first entered the UK on 4 May 2000 and claimed asylum.  Her application
    was refused in February 2001 on non-compliance  grounds.   In  December
    2006 she applied for an EEA residence  card  and  her  application  was
    refused on 7 September 2010.  In March  2011  she  was  served  with  a
    notice informing her of her liability to detention and removal  and  on
    20 September 2011 she applied for leave to remain  outside  the  Rules.
    There were a number of further unsuccessful applications and,  finally,
    on 5 June 2017, the appellant made her present claim  on  human  rights
    grounds.


3.    The basis of her claim can briefly be described as follows. She  seeks
    to remain in  the  UK  because  she  is  receiving  specialist  medical
    treatment for a rare condition, immune  thrombocytopenia  (ITP),  which
    can lead her to bleed uncontrollably.  The bleeding may  be  caused  by
    various different things such as knocks or sometimes internal  bleeding
    with no obvious cause which does not stop and  as  a  result  could  be
    fatal. It was also claimed that as the appellant has been in the UK for
    17 years, it would be a breach of article 8 by  reason  of  her  family
    life with her relations for her to be returned to  Colombia  where  for
    medical reasons she would have severe difficulty in reintegrating  away
    from her family in the UK.


4.    The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules or that there were exceptional  circumstances
    justifying the grant of leave outside the Rules.   He  found  that  the
    appellant's medical condition did not reach the high threshold set  out
    in D v  UK  [1997]  24  EHRR  423  and  N  v  UK  (2008)  26565/05  and
    accordingly, removal would not be in breach of article 3.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    In his decision the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's  case  and  the
    arguments in support at [16]-[42] and the respondent's  case  at  [43]-
    [54].  His findings and conclusions  are  set  out  at  [55]-[86].   He
    accepted that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  ITP  and  had  been
    receiving treatment in this country  since  2008.   He  referred  to  a
    letter of 13 April 2018 from a consultant haematologist at Guy's and St
    Thomas' describing the appellant's condition as  being  challenging  to
    manage and refractory to multiple medications.  The appellant had had a
    minor injury in 2015 but due  to  her  low  platelet  count,  this  had
    developed into a significant clinical problem complicated by a bleed in
    the joint, which  left  the  appellant  debilitated.   The  appellant's
    condition was being managed  with  a  combination  of  romiplostim  and
    azathioprine and has required specialist haematology input on a  weekly
    basis for several months  as  she  remains  symptomatic  with  bleeding
    symptoms and platelet counts falling to single figures.


6.    The judge said that, as he understood the medical evidence, there  was
    no suggestion that the appellant was currently in  imminent  danger  of
    death although it was clear that were  her  condition  to  deteriorate,
    death was likely to be an outcome at some point. He found that  it  was
    clear from the statement (1A155A) from Dr Bernal, a doctor in Colombia,
    that there was treatment for her condition there.   He  commented  that
    the doctors in the UK could speak to the doctors in Colombia about  the
    treatment the appellant was receiving and it seemed to him  that  there
    was no obvious reason why the appellant could not pass the  information
    in the report he had been provided with to  the  doctors  in  Colombia.
    The judge  found  there  was  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  was
    currently "a deathbed case" and, on that basis, she did  not  begin  to
    meet the requirements of D or N.  He added that, even if he were  bound
    by Paposhvili [2017] Imm AR 867, it  did  not  appear  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence to show that  she  could  meet  the  test  in  that
    judgment.  He was also not satisfied that the facts were such that  the
    appellant was entitled to leave to remain under article 8  outside  the
    Rules.


7.    At [83] the judge said that for the reasons he had given  he  did  not
    find that the appellant's medical condition was such  that  removal  to
    Colombia would be in breach of the appellant's rights under  article  3
    or article 8 in relation to her physical and  moral  integrity  because
    treatment was available in Colombia and  there  was  funding  available
    from her family in this country, which  could  be  used  for  treatment
    there.  For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds and Submissions.

8.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law by failing to grasp the factual matrix of the case, making
    errors of  fact  particularly  on  the  medical  evidence,  failing  to
    consider all the material evidence and, finally,  by  failing  to  make
    necessary findings on all aspects of the claim.


9.    Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted on renewal by the Upper Tribunal.   When  granting  permission,
    UTJ Jackson identified the issues as follows:


         "It is not arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  fails
         to make necessary findings on all aspects of the appellant's claim,
         particularly in relation to article  8,  nor  that  the  judge  had
         failed to grasp the factual  matrix  of  the  case.   The  decision
         contains  a  very  detailed  consideration   of   the   appellant's
         circumstances and medical condition, which accurately describes how
         rare  her  medical  condition  is,  what  treatment  is   currently
         available in Colombia and the  treatment  currently  and  for  what
         reasons in the United Kingdom.  The examples of errors of fact  are
         not generally arguably either  errors  of  fact  and/or  could  not
         amount to a subsequent error of law which  could  have  a  material
         difference on the outcome of the appeal period


         The only point in the grounds which has any arguable merit is  that
         the First-tier Tribunal appears to assume the  appellant's  medical
         records can be transferred to Colombia and as  such  the  treatment
         that she is currently provided could then be made available to  her
         there.  It is arguable that there is no evidential basis that  such
         treatment is likely to be available in Colombia.  The  evidence  is
         that it is currently not available.   Even  in  the  absence  of  a
         detailed  prognosis  if   the   specific   current   treatment   is
         discontinued,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  recognises  the   likely,
         possibly  fatal  consequences  of   uncontrollable   bleeding   and
         acknowledged that the appellant was  resistant  to  treatment  with
         steroids, which was available in Colombia. The findings on  article
         3 and article 8 are arguably affected by this point.


         I do not restrict the grant of permission to the specific ground of
         appeal which I found to be arguable, however, the appellant  should
         consider the comments above as to what  is  properly  arguable  and
         pursued in this case."

10.   In her submissions, Ms Nnamani adopted her grounds, arguing  that  the
    judge had not  properly  understood  the  reality  of  the  appellant's
    condition.  She was  receiving  treatment  in  the  UK  which  was  not
    available in Colombia.  The judge failed, so  she  argued,  to  make  a
    clear  assessment  of  what  treatment  was  available  there  and   in
    particular had failed to take proper  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's doctors in the UK had found a mode of treatment  which  was
    effective.


11.   Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had assessed the evidence with  care
    and reached findings properly open to  him.   The  fact  remained  that
    treatment was available in Colombia even if not the same as in the  UK.
    The fact that a  different  standard  of  treatment  was  available  in
    different countries was not a relevant factor  to  be  considered  when
    assessing  article  8.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  properly
    considered issues of private and family life and was entitled  to  find
    that removal would not be in breach of either article 3 or 8.


Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law.


12.   I agree with UTJ Jackson that many of the grounds  do  not  raise  any
    properly  arguable  point  of  law.   There  is  no  substance  in  the
    submission that the judge failed to grasp the  factual  matrix  of  the
    case or that  he  did  not  properly  understand  the  reality  of  the
    appellant's condition.


13.   I also agree that the only arguable point is that  identified  in  the
    grant of permission relating to the assumption that the judge proceeded
    on the basis that medical records could be sent to doctors in  Colombia
    and that the treatment the appellant is currently  receiving  would  be
    available there.  The appellant's  case,  in  substance,  is  that  her
    condition is being kept under control by her current medical team using
    various combinations and doses of drugs  to  keep  her  platelet  level
    normal.  The bleeding is currently being managed  by  romiplostim,  she
    requires specialist haematology input weekly and has been  hospitalised
    frequently.  In Colombia there appears to be only steroid treatment  or
    removal of the spleen.  There was some evidence before the  judge  that
    the treatment currently being received in the UK was not  available  in
    Colombia.

14.   For these reasons I am satisfied  that  the  judge  proceeded  on  the
    erroneous assumption that her current treatment  in  the  UK  could  be
    continued and maintained in Colombia when the albeit  limited  evidence
    on this issue suggested that this was not the case.  To this extent,  I
    am satisfied that the judge erred in law in his assessment  of  whether
    the appellant was able to meet the high threshold of article 3  and  in
    his consideration of article 8.


15.   It was submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  if  there  was  an
    error of law, the proper course would be for the matter to be  remitted
    for a full rehearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  Mr  Tufan
    submitted that the right course would be for the appeal to be  retained
    in the Upper Tribunal.  On this issue I agree with Mr Tufan.  There  is
    no justification for a full rehearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is an appropriate case for the  appeal  to  remain  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade.


Further evidence.


16.   At the conclusion of the error of law hearing  I  gave  the  appellant
    permission to rely on the medical evidence annexed to the  letter  from
    her solicitors dated 4 February 2019 indexed and paginated 1-7, subject
    to it being served on the respondent.  I also gave permission to either
    party to file further documentary  evidence  relating  to  the  medical
    issues under articles 3 and 8.  The appellant  has  filed  two  further
    documents attached to a letter from her solicitors dated 30 April  2019
    indexed and paginated 1-3.

17.   The relevant documentary evidence is  therefore  original  appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (1A), indexed  and  paginated  1-
    155A, the documents submitted with the letter of February  2019,  (2A1-
    7), the documents with the letter of 30 April 2019 (3A1-3), the letters
    from Guy's and St Thomas's NHS dated 15 March 2018 (4A)  and  13  April
    2018 (5A) and the respondent's appeal bundle.


Further submissions.


18.   Ms Lagunju, whilst accepting that this was not a case where death  was
    imminent, submitted that it was a case  where  the  appellant  suffered
    from a condition where intense suffering and death would follow from  a
    lack of treatment.  The appellant had suffered from  ITP  for  some  11
    years and a number of treatments had been  tried  but  she  had  become
    resistant  to  steroid  treatment  and  was  now  being  treated   with
    romiplostim injections on a regular  basis.   She  submitted  that  the
    evidence showed that  she  would  not  be  able  to  receive  the  same
    treatment on return to Colombia and that the only treatments  available
    there, steroids or removal of the spleen would not be effective.

19.   She referred in particular to the letter of 5 March  2019  (3A2)  from
    Dr Lopez, a haematologist in Colombia,  that  the  treatment  available
    there would  not  be  effective  nor  would  it  control  the  symptoms
    presented  when  the  appellant's  platelets  were  low.   The  medical
    evidence in the letter dated 15 March 2018 from Guy's  and  St  Thomas'
    (4A) was that the appellant would not be able to stop her medication in
    the near future and that she would  need  to  remain  under  the  close
    supervision of a specialist haematologist.

20.   She argued that even  if  the  appellant  could  not  reach  the  high
    threshold under article 3, she would meet the test in Paposhvili.  This
    should be taken into account when considering article 8.  She submitted
    that article 8 was engaged  as  the  appellant  had  an  emotional  and
    financial dependency on her family in this  country  and,  taking  into
    account the length of her  residence  with  the  dire  consequences  of
    coming off her current medication, removal would be disproportionate.


21.   Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  reach  the  high
    threshold for engaging article 3 in the light of N.   The  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 64 confirmed that N was still binding and  any  adjustment  to  the
    article 3 threshold in Paposhvili did not form part of English law.  In
    any event, the appellant's circumstances, so he argued, would not reach
    the Paposhvili threshold.  He further submitted that the appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of article 8.  Even assuming evidence  of  an
    absence of some treatment in Colombia, that would not in itself  engage
    article 8.


Assessment of the issues.


22.   The first issue in this appeal  is  whether  the  appellant's  medical
    condition is such that she is able to meet the high threshold  set  out
    in N. Article 3 is only engaged in very  exceptional  healthcare  cases
    involving  removal  to  another  country  with  an  absence  or  lesser
    standards of healthcare in "deathbed" cases, circumstances in which the
    death of the applicant would be imminent if removed.  As Lord Hope said
    at [50] of N, for the circumstances to be  very  exceptional  it  would
    need to be shown that the appellant's  medical  condition  had  reached
    such a critical stage that there were compelling  humanitarian  grounds
    for not removing him or her to a place which  lacked  the  medical  and
    social services needed to prevent acute suffering when dying.

23.   The judgment in Paposhvili, which  extended  the  threshold  to  cases
    where there was an imminence of intense suffering or death which  might
    only occur through the absence of treatment  previously  available  was
    considered by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM  (Zimbabwe).   The  Court
    confirmed that all courts below the Supreme Court  were  bound  by  the
    judgment in N and that, in any event, the effect  of  the  judgment  in
    Paposhvili was that it relaxed the test for a violation of article 3 in
    medical cases but only to a very modest extent: per Sales LJ at [37].


24.   The second issue is whether, even if article 3  is  not  engaged,  the
    appellant is able to rely on article 8.  The law on this issue has been
    considered by the Court of Appeal in GS (India) v  Secretary  of  State
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and recently reaffirmed by the Court of Appeal in SL
    (Saint Lucia) v Secrearary of State [2018] EWCA 1894.


25.   In GS India, Underhill LJ said at [111]:


         "First the absence or inadequacy of medical  treatment,  even  life
         preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on
         at all as a fact engaging article 8: if that is all there  is,  the
         claim must fail.  Secondly, where article 8  is  engaged  by  other
         factors, the fact that the claimant is receiving medical  treatment
         in this country which may or may not be available in the country of
         return may be a factor in the proportionality  exercise;  but  that
         factor cannot be treated as by itself giving rise to a breach since
         that would contravene the no obligation to treat principle."


26.   In SL (Saint Lucia), the Court considered whether Paposhvili  had  any
    impact  on  the  approach  to  article  8  claims  but  rejected   that
    submission.  At [27], Hickinbottom LJ said:


      "... As I have indicated and as GS India emphasises, article 8 claims
         have a different  focus  and  are  based  upon  entirely  different
         criteria.  In particular, article 8 is not article 3 with merely  a
         lower threshold: it does not provide some sort of safety net  where
         a medical case fails to satisfy the article 3 criteria.  An absence
         of medical treatment in the country of return will  not  in  itself
         engage article 8.  The only relevance  to  article  8  of  such  an
         absence will be where that is an additional factor in  the  balance
         with other factors which themselves engage article 8...".

27.   It is clear from the medical evidence and was accepted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the appellant is  suffering  from  ITP.  This  is  a
    condition where patients have a decreased number of platelets in  their
    blood due to immune destruction and altered  reduction  in  their  bone
    marrow and, in consequence, they can be at  a  significantly  increased
    risk of spontaneous bleeding  complications.   It  is  clear  from  the
    letter of 13 April 2018 (5A) that this has been a challenging condition
    to manage and has been resistant to a number of medications.

28.   I also note from this  letter  that  the  appellant  was  offered  the
    option of  abdominal  surgery  to  remove  her  spleen,  which  can  be
    effective in some patients with a 50% risk of failure, but she declined
    after reviewing pros and cons of  the  procedure.   According  to  this
    report, splenectomy is considered as third line  treatment  and  before
    proceeding to a splenectomy there would be a ferrous scan to  determine
    if the platelet destruction is predominantly  in  the  spleen  as  this
    would increase the chances of success to up to 70%.  This was not  done
    as the appellant did not wish to have a splenectomy due to the risk  of
    bleeding whilst other options were available.


29.   It is clear from the medical evidence that  high  dose  steroids  have
    not  worked  by  themselves  and  that  the  appellant's  condition  is
    currently being managed with injections of  romiplostim.   The  medical
    report from Guy's and St Thomas' dated 2  January  2019  [2A6-7]  shows
    that the appellant had completed four doses  of  rituximab  in  October
    2018 but since then she has had two relapses  of  her  ITP,  the  first
    associated with gum bleeding, requiring a short course of steroids  and
    the last with a platelet count of 12 but no  bleeding.   She  last  had
    romiplostim two weeks previously and the platelet counters increased to
    850 and 650  at  the  date  of  examination  on  31  December  2018  so
    romiplostim was held off on that appointment. The most  recent  medical
    evidence, the appointment letter from Guy's dated 24 April  2019  (3A1)
    confirms that the appellant is still attending as an outpatient.


30.   In the letter of 13 April  2018,  the  consultant,  referring  to  the
    current management as a combination of romiplostim and azathioprine and
    to  regaining  control  whilst  she  is   on   romiplostim,   expressed
    uncertainty about whether this treatment was available in Colombia. The
    evidence from the Colombian doctors supports the submission that it  is
    not.  The letter from Dr Cubillos dated 30 January  2019  (2A1)  simply
    says that treatment is limited in Colombia.  The letter of  24  January
    2019 from Dr Velez (2A4) is more  specific  saying  that  currently  in
    Colombia the drug use and management of this disease are oral doses  of
    steroids, then azatriopina (which I assume is the same as azathioprine)
    and if there is no platelet increase maintained over time, the  patient
    is offered the option of removal of the spleen but  a  splenectomy  did
    not ensure the disappearance of the disease and symptoms  may  reappear
    after that intervention.  The only treatment not said to  be  available
    is romiplostim.

 31.  Serious as the appellant's condition is, it does not  reach  the  high
    threshold for engaging article 3 nor the modestly enlarged threshold in
    Paposhvili.   There  is  treatment  available  from  haematologists  in
    Columbia. If it does not include romiplostim, it does  cover  treatment
    by steroids and removal of the spleen. The evidence does not satisfy me
    that there is an imminent  threat  of  death  or  of  imminent  intense
    suffering arising from a lack of treatment in Colombia.

32.   I now turn to the question of article 8.  I am not satisfied that  the
    appellant's family life is sufficient to engage article  8.   I  accept
    that she has relatives in this  country  and  gets  on  well  with  her
    nephews and nieces, but I am not satisfied that this amounts to  family
    life within article 8.  However, the length of her residence in the UK,
    now some 19 years, does engage  private  life.   It  appears  from  the
    evidence that the appellant is not able to speak English fluently.   As
    the  First-tier  judge  noted  at  [84]  of  his  decision,  a  Spanish
    interpreter was needed at the First-tier Tribunal and that although the
    appellant could speak  some  English,  no  English  test  of  the  type
    normally undertaken by those wishing to stay had been taken or  passed.
    She does not therefore benefit from s.117B(2).

33.   The appellant was largely if not wholly financially dependent  on  her
    family and  is  therefore  financially  independent  (s.117B(3)).   She
    relies on private life but  s.  117B(4)  provides  that  little  weight
    should be given to private life established when in the UK  unlawfully.
    The appellant's presence in the UK has been substantially unlawful  and
    precarious (s.117B(5)).  In  assessing  proportionality,  I  take  into
    account that the medical treatment of ITP in Colombia is  more  limited
    but, as already set out,  treatment  is  available  by  steroids  or  a
    splenectomy, which has at least reasonable prospects  of  success  even
    though the appellant, perhaps for understandable  reasons,  has  chosen
    not to proceed with this in this country in the light of the  treatment
    she is currently now receiving.

34.   When the various factors are looked at as  a  whole,  I  am  satisfied
    that removal would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.  The  evidence
    about the appellant's medical condition and treatment does not outweigh
    the public interest in maintaining immigration control. To give it such
    weight in the present case would in substance be to elevate  article  8
    to be a safety net where the appellant's  medical  condition  fails  to
    satisfy the article 3 criteria.

35.   Cases involving serious medical issues such as the  appellant's,  with
    the attendant risks to health, inevitably attract sympathy.  However, I
    am not satisfied for the reasons I have given that  the  appellant  can
    meet the requirements for a grant of leave either under  article  3  or
    article 8.


Decision.

36.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal under both article 3 and
    article 8.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
             Dated: 20 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
