
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10558/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On 14 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                               MD Ibrahim [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Taj Solicitors (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  3  February
    1981.

 2. The appellant appeals, with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge M Robertson), against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shamash) which dismissed the appellant's appeal relying on Art 8
    of the ECHR against the respondent's decision taken on 6 June  2019  to
    refuse to grant the appellant Indefinite Leave to Remain ("ILR")  based
    upon 'long residence' under para 276B of the Immigration Rules (HC  395
    as amended).

 3. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Lindsley)
    issued directions on  23  June  2020  stating  that  it  was  the  UT's
    provisional view that it would be appropriate to determine whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and, if so, whether to set that decision aside without a hearing.   The
    parties were invited to make written  submissions  on  the  substantive
    issues in the appeal  and  also,  no  later  than  21  days  after  the
    directions were sent, to indicate whether a hearing was necessary.

 4. In response to those directions, both parties made written submissions.
     In a  skeleton  argument  (sent  on  8  July  2020),  the  appellant's
    representatives made written submissions on the substance of the appeal
    but did not seek an oral hearing.  On 1 July 2020, the respondent  also
    made written submissions on the substance of the appeal  and  indicated
    that it was the respondent's view that an oral hearing was  unnecessary
    to determine the error of law issue.

 5. In the light of those submissions, and having regard to the  nature  of
    the issues raised in the appeal, I am  satisfied  that  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice to determine the error of law issue under rule  34
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as
    amended) without a hearing.

The Appellant's Immigration History

 6. The appellant's immigration history  is  helpfully  set  out  by  Judge
    Shamash at paras 3-15 of his  determination  from  which  I  gratefully
    borrow.  It is not without complexity.

 7. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 27 March  2008  with  entry
    clearance as a student valid until 31 March 2010.  Thereafter, a number
    of applications for further leave as a student were  made  and  granted
    such that the appellant was eventually granted leave to remain until 22
    August 2014.

 8. On 22 August 2014, he applied for further leave to remain as a  Tier  2
    Dependent Partner of his wife which was granted until 3 November  2019.



 9. On 21 September 2014, the licence of the  sponsor  of  the  appellant's
    wife was revoked.  As a result, on  22  October  2015  the  appellant's
    leave was curtailed  to  27  December  2015.   Following  a  pre-action
    Protocol letter challenging that decision,  on  27  November  2015  the
    respondent maintained her decision to curtail the appellant's leave.

10. On 26 November 2015, the appellant  submitted  a  pre-action  Protocol
    letter challenging the respondent's decision.  On 27 November 2015, the
    respondent maintained that decision.

11. On 29 December 2015, according  to  the  respondent's  chronology,  the
    appellant applied for further leave to remain  which  was  refused  and
    certified as clearly unfounded on 8 June 2016.  That  would  have  made
    the  application  out  of  time.   The  appellant  contended  that  the
    application was made in-time on 27 December 2015, the date to which his
    leave was curtailed, when the application was posted.   The  judge  did
    not question the appellant's position and no point is now taken on this
    matter and it should now be accepted.

12. On 23 June 2016, the appellant applied  for  further  leave  to  remain
    relying upon his private and family life in the UK.   That  application
    was refused on 1 December 2017 without a right of appeal.  Following  a
    pre-action Protocol letter, on 5 January 2018 the respondent  undertook
    to reconsider that decision.   As  a  result,  on  7  March  2018,  the
    Secretary of State again refused the appellant's application.

13. On 16 March 2018, the appellant submitted an application for ILR  based
    upon ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK under  para  276B
    of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

14.  On  3  April  2018,  a  pre-action  Protocol  letter  challenged   the
    respondent's earlier reconsideration and refusal of the appellant's Art
    8 claim on 7 March 2018.  On 17 April 2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
    agreed to reconsider that decision.  It was  subsequently  reconsidered
    and, on 22 June 2018, the appellant's application for leave  to  remain
    based upon his private and family life was again refused.

15. On 23 July 2018, the respondent refused the appellant  application  for
    ILR made on 16 March 2018.  A pre-action  Protocol  letter  challenging
    the decision of 23 July 2018 was received  on  23 August  2018.   That
    decision was maintained by the respondent on 28 August 2018.

16. On 5 September  2018,  the  appellant  lodged  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of 22 June 2018 refusing (on reconsideration) his Art 8 claim.
    That appeal was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  19  November
    2018 and permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal on  12  February  2019  and  1  April  2019
    respectively.

17. Following the commencement  of  a  judicial  review  challenge  to  the
    refusal of ILR on 23 July 2018 (maintained on 23 August  2018),  on  25
    March 2019 the respondent agreed to reconsider  that  decision.   On  6
    June 2019, the respondent again refused the appellant's application for
    ILR which the  appellant  unsuccessfully  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and  against  which  he  now  appeals  against  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

18. The principal issue before Judge  Shamash  was  whether  the  appellant
    could establish ten years' lawful continuous residence in the UK  since
    he first arrived on 27 March 2008.  It was contended by the  respondent
    that the appellant's leave expired on 8 June 2016 when his  application
    for leave, made on 29 December  2015,  was  refused  and  certified  as
    clearly unfounded.  That decision was not  challenged.   The  appellant
    could, therefore, only establish a little over 8  years  and  2  months
    continuous lawful residence.

19. The appellant contended that he had  made  a  further  application  for
    leave within 14 days on 23 June 2016 which, applying para  39E  of  the
    Immigration Rules, meant that the subsequent period during which he had
    no leave should not be regarded as such in calculating whether  he  had
    acquired the required ten years' continuous lawful residence.  He  had,
    therefore, established 10 years' continuous lawful residence.

20. In his decision, Judge Shamash rejected the appellant's argument which,
    the judge concluded, was contrary to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in R (Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070.

The Grounds of Appeal

21. The appellant's grounds of appeal, as supplemented  by  the  subsequent
    written submissions, raise four points.

22. First, it is contended that  the  appellant  was,  notwithstanding  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Ahmed entitled to rely upon para 39E  and
    that the period of overstaying since 8 June 2016 could count as part of
    a  period  of  continuous  lawful  leave  in  order  to   satisfy   the
    requirements of para 276B(i)(a) ("Ground 1").

23. Secondly, it is contended that the Secretary of State's guidance as set
    out in her guidance "Applications from overstayers (non family routes)"
    (Version 7.0) (24 November 2016) provides that the Secretary  of  State
    will disregard any period between the expiry of an  individual's  leave
    and a current application if the latter is made within 14 days ("Ground
    2").

24.  Thirdly,  it  is  contended  that  the  appellant  has  a   legitimate
    expectation, based upon longstanding practice of the  respondent,  that
    individuals will be granted ILR despite short gaps between  periods  of
    lawful residence ("Ground 3").

25. Finally, it is submitted that the judge failed to consider properly Art
    8 of the ECHR on the basis of the appellant's private and  family  life
    in the UK, including the best interests of his two  children  who  were
    born in the UK ("Ground 4").

Discussion

26. The relevant Immigration Rule upon which the appellant relies  is  para
    276B which, so far as relevant provides as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
         remain on the grounds of long residence in the United  Kingdom  are
         that:

         (i)  (a) he has had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence
                  in the United Kingdom.

         ....

         (v)  The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
             laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies,
             any current period of overstaying will  be  disregarded.   Any
             previous period of overstaying between periods of  leave  will
             also be disregarded where -

             (a)  the further application was made before 24 November  2016
                  and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or

             (b)  the further application was made on or after 24  November
                  2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied."

27. Paragraph 39E provides as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where:

         (1)  the application was made within 14  days  of  the  applicant's
             leave expiring and the Secretary of State considers that there
             was a good reason beyond the control of the applicant or their
             representative, provided in or with the application,  why  the
             application could not be made in-time; or

         (2)  the application was made:

             (a)  following the refusal of a previous application for leave
                  which was made in-time and

             (b)  within fourteen days of:

                  (i)  the refusal of previous application for leave; or

                  (ii) the expiry of any leave extended by Section 3C of the
                      Immigration Act 1971; or

                  (iii)    the expiry of the time-limit for  making  an  in-
                      time application for administrative review or  appeal
                      (where applicable); or

                  (iv) any administrative review or appeal being  concluded,
                      withdrawn or abandoned or lapsing."

    Ground 1

28. The appellant relies upon para 276B(v) and para 39E(2)  read  together.
    His submission is that he made an application within fourteen  days  of
    the refusal of his previous application  on  8  June  2016  and,  as  a
    consequence, para 39E applied and para 276B(v) therefore requires  that
    his period of overstaying since 8 June 2016 should be  disregarded  and
    counted as lawful residence for the purposes of calculating whether  or
    not he can establish ten years' continuous lawful residence.

29. There are a number  of  insuperable  difficulties  in  sustaining  this
    submission.

30. First, it is far from clear  that  the  appellant,  in  fact,  made  an
    application "within fourteen days" of the expiry of his leave on 8 June
    2016.  His application for further  leave  to  remain  based  upon  his
    private and family life under Art 8  was,  it  would  appear  from  the
    respondent's decision letter, made on 23 June 2016.   This  is  fifteen
    days after the expiry of his leave on 8 June 2016.

31. Secondly, the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Ahmed  is  wholly
    inconsistent with this submission and that  decision  is  binding  both
    upon the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  Ahmed,  the
    Court of Appeal rejected  the  very  submission  relied  upon  in  this
    appeal.  At [14]-[15], the Court of Appeal (Floyd and Haddon-Cave  LJJ)
    said this:

         "14. The point which arises is a short point of  construction.  The
             issue on this application for PTA is whether  it  is  arguable
             that paragraph 276B(v) operates so as  to  cure  short  'gaps'
             between periods of LTR so as to entitle persons  such  as  the
             Applicant in the present case to claim  "10  years  continuous
             lawful residence" under paragraph 276B(i)(a).

          1. In our view, the wording of paragraph 276B is clear:

                  (1)  First, the provisions of  paragraph  276B(i)-(v)  are
                  separate, freestanding provisions each of which has to  be
                  met in order to for an applicant to be entitled claim  "10
                  years continuous lawful residence"  under  paragraph  276B
                  (see paragraph 276C).

                  (2)  Second,  sub-paragraph  (v)  is  not  drafted  as  an
                  exception to sub-paragraph (i)(a) and makes  no  reference
                  to it. There are no words which cross-refer or  link  sub-
                  paragraph (v)  to  sub-paragraph  (i)(a),  or  vice-versa,
                  whether expressly or inferentially.

                  (3)  Third, there is no difficulty in giving sub-paragraph
                  (v)  a  self-contained  meaning.  It  makes  use  of   the
                  provisions of paragraph 39E of the Rules. Paragraph 39E is
                  the  'exceptions  for  overstayers  provision'  which,  in
                  effect, grants a 14-day period of 'grace'  in  respect  of
                  the lodging of LTR applications in certain  circumstances.
                  Under sub-paragraph (v), where paragraph 39E applies,  any
                  current period of overstaying  as  well  as  any  previous
                  period of overstaying after the advent of the amendment to
                  the rules on 24th November 2016 will be "disregarded".  In
                  addition, periods of overstaying  of  less  than  28  days
                  before that date are also disregarded.  The  reference  to
                  previous  periods  means  that,  in  requiring  that   the
                  applicant should not "be in the United Kingdom  in  breach
                  of immigration laws", the  sub-paragraph  is  not  looking
                  simply at the  applicant's  status  at  the  date  of  the
                  application, but also looks back in time to  his  previous
                  immigration status. Mr  Sarker  confirmed  that  the  sub-
                  paragraph referred to all previous periods of overstaying.
                  This  is,  of  course,  subject  to  the  SSHD's  residual
                  discretion.

                  (4)  The  critical  point  is  that  the  disregarding  of
                  current or previous short periods of overstaying  for  the
                  purposes  of  sub-paragraph  (v)  does  not  convert  such
                  periods into periods of lawful LTR; still  less  are  such
                  periods to be "disregarded" when it comes  to  considering
                  whether  an   applicant   has   fulfilled   the   separate
                  requirement of establishing "10  years  continuous  lawful
                  residence" under sub-paragraph (i)(a).

                  (5)  Fourth, there is a marked contrast in the drafting of
                  the definitions  of  "continuous  residence"  and  "lawful
                  residence" in paragraph 276A sub-paragraphs  (a)  and  (b)
                  respectively.  In  respect  of  continuous  residence,  in
                  addition to defining it as an unbroken  period,  the  sub-
                  paragraph goes on to deem that it "shall not be considered
                  to be broken" by certain periods of absence from  the  UK.
                  Lawful residence, on the other hand, is simply required to
                  be  continuous  residence  (i.e.  unbroken)  pursuant   to
                  certain types of leave, temporary  admission,  immigration
                  bail or exemption from immigration  control.  Unlike  sub-
                  paragraph  (a),  in  sub-paragraph   (b)   there   is   no
                  corresponding provision which allows  residence  which  is
                  not continuously lawful to be deemed unbroken. It is  here
                  that one  would  expect  to  find  the  saving  which  the
                  Applicant incorrectly contends  is  created  by  paragraph
                  276B(v), and one does not. We consider that to be a  clear
                  indication that the  lawfulness  of  continuous  residence
                  must be unbroken.

                  (6)  Fifth, by contrast, there are examples  elsewhere  in
                  the Rules expressly providing that "continuous periods" of
                  lawful residence in the UK shall be considered "unbroken",
                  notwithstanding periods of  overstaying,  where  paragraph
                  39E applies. There are to be found in specific areas where
                  such an exception was clearly intended, e.g. Appendix ECAA
                  relating to ECAA Nationals and settlement and e.g. Part 6A
                  of the Rules in relation to the Points Based System.  Part
                  6A provides as follows (emphasis added):

                      "Part 6A

                      Points-based system

                      245AAA. General requirements for indefinite leave  to
                      remain

                      The following rules apply  to  all  requirements  for
                      indefinite leave to remain in Part 6A and Appendix A:

                      (a) References to a "continuous period" "lawfully  in
                      the UK" means, subject to paragraph (e), residence in
                      the UK for an unbroken period with valid  leave,  and
                      for these  purposes  a  period  shall  be  considered
                      unbroken where:

                      ...

                           (iv) the applicant has  any  previous  period  of
                           overstaying between periods of leave  disregarded
                           where: the further application was made before 24
                           November 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of
                           leave; or the further application was made on  or
                           after 24 November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these
                           Rules applied. ..." (emphasis added)

                  (7)   Sixth,  applying   ordinary   rules   of   statutory
                  construction  and  the  presumption  of  ideal,   rational
                  legislation, these differences in drafting should  not  be
                  read  as  accidental  or  unintended  (c.f.   Bennion   on
                  Statutory Construction, section 9.3).

                  (8)  If and insofar as reliance is placed  on  the  SSHD's
                  "Long Residence" Guidance (Version 15.0) published on  3rd
                  April 2017, this does not avail  the  Appellant.  We  note
                  that "Example 1"  and  "Example  2"  on  page  16  of  the
                  Guidance say  that  "gaps  in  lawful  residence"  can  be
                  disregarded because "the  rules  allow  for  a  period  of
                  overstaying of 28 days  or  less  when  that  period  ends
                  before 24 November 2016". This does not  accord  with  the
                  true construction of paragraph  276B  as  set  out  above,
                  although it may reflect a  policy  adopted  by  the  SSHD.
                  However, it is axiomatic that the intention of  the  Rules
                  is to be discerned "objectively from  the  language  used"
                  not from e.g. guidance documents (per Lord Brown in  Mahad
                  (Ethiopia) v. Entry Clearance  Officer  [2010]  1  WLR  48
                  (2009) at paragraph 10). The SSHD may wish to  look  again
                  at the Guidance to ensure that it does not go any  further
                  than a statement of policy."

32. At [16]-[17], the Court of Appeal set out its conclusion:

         "16. It will  be  apparent,  therefore,  that  we  agree  with  the
             decision and reasoning of Sweeney J in Juned Ahmed (supra). As
             Sweeney  J  correctly  held,  paragraph  276B(v)  involves   a
             freestanding and additional requirement  over  and  above  the
             requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a).

          1. In summary, it is clear as a matter  of  construction  of  the
             Immigration Rules that an applicant cannot rely  on  paragraph
             276B(v) to argue that any  period  of  overstaying  should  be
             disregarded  for  the  purposes  of  establishing  "10   years
             continuous lawful residence" under paragraph 276B(i)(a)."

33. It is clear that the Court of Appeal rejected the  argument  that  para
    39E of the Immigration Rules  has  the  effect,  when  read  with  para
    276B(v), of allowing current or previous periods of overstaying  to  be
    disregarded and treated, in effect,  as  periods  of  lawful  leave  in
    determining  whether  an  individual  meets  the  requirement  in  para
    276B(i)(a) of "ten years' continuous lawful residence".  The  Court  of
    Appeal concluded that was not the effect of  para  39E.   Consequently,
    even if the appellant's application on 23 June 2016 was within fourteen
    days of the expiry of his leave on 8 June 2016, from that  latter  date
    the appellant had no  lawful  leave  and,  applying  Ahmed,  he  cannot
    establish ten years' continuous lawful residence from his date of entry
    on 27 March 2008.

34. The judge was correct to reach  that  conclusion  in  para  24  of  his
    determination in accordance with the binding authority of the Court  of
    Appeal in Ahmed.

    Ground 2

35. The appellant's second argument seeks to  rely  upon  the  respondent's
    guidance in relation to  overstaying  ("Applications  from  overstayers
    (non family routes)" (version 7.0) (24 November 2016).   That  provides
    as follows:

         "The Immigration Rules were amended with effect  from  24  November
         2016 to abolish the 28 day grace period, under  which  applications
         for leave to remain were not refused on the basis of overstaying if
         made within 28 days of the expiry of leave.  The Immigration  Rules
         now provide for current overstaying to be disregarded in a  limited
         number of scenarios but otherwise it is now a ground for refusal.

         First, overstaying will be disregarded if the  Secretary  of  State
         considers that there is good  reason  beyond  the  control  of  the
         applicant  or  their  representative,  provided  in  or  with   the
         application, why it could not be made in-time,  provided  that  the
         application is made within 14 days of the expiry of leave.

         Second,  overstaying  will  be  disregarded  where  the   applicant
         previously made an in-time application,  or  an  application  which
         fell within the first exception above, which was  refused  and  the
         current application was made within 14 days of:

         .    the refusal of previous application for leave;

         .    the expiry of any leave extended by 3C of the Immigration  Act
             1971;

         .    the expiry of the time-limit for making an in-time application
             for  administrative  review  or  appeal  (where   applicable);



         .    any administrative review or appeal being concluded, withdrawn
             or abandoned or lapsing."

36. The guidance is not concerned  specifically  with  para  276B  and,  in
    particular, the application of para 276B(v) (but see guidance  referred
    to in Ahmed at [15(8)]).

37. As is plain from reading this guidance together with para  39E  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it is merely seeking to set out the  terms  of  para
    39E and its application.  The guidance itself  states  at  the  outset:
    "This guidance is based on the Immigration  Rules".   At  its  highest,
    therefore, this guidance recites the Secretary of State's understanding
    of how para 39E applies and, for the present purposes, I will assume as
    applied in respect of  para  276B.   Even  if  it  were  applicable  to
    applications for ILR under para 276B, the interpretation  and  reliance
    placed upon it by the appellant would  be  contrary  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's interpretation of para 276B, in particular  para  276B(v),  in
    Ahmed.

38. In my judgement, the Secretary of State was not purporting to set out a
    policy beyond the terms of  para  276B.   Applied  to  para  276B,  the
    guidance is inconsistent with the law as to the proper  application  of
    that provision.  I see no proper basis upon  which  the  appellant  can
    rely upon this  erroneous  interpretation  of  para  276B  when  it  is
    inconsistent with the correct meaning and application of that provision
    as set out in Ahmed  either  as  a  policy  or  so  as  to  create  any
    legitimate  expectation  that  the  respondent  will  apply   guidance,
    applicable to para 276B, which sets out an erroneous interpretation  of
    that provision.

    Ground 3

39. To the extent that  it  is  now  asserted  that  the  appellant  has  a
    legitimate expectation that the respondent  will  condone  "short  gaps
    between periods of  lawful  residence"  based  upon  "a  promise  or  a
    longstanding practice", the appellant offers no factual basis for  that
    assertion.  In any event, even taken at face value, this is not a  case
    where the respondent is being asked  to  condone  "short  gaps  between
    periods of lawful residence".  The appellant has simply not  had  leave
    since 8 June 2016.  He still does not have lawful leave and so, this is
    not  a  case  falling  within  the  appellant's  claimed  "longstanding
    practice" in any event.

40. For these reasons, the appellant has failed to establish Grounds  1,  2
    and 3 and to establish that the judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  his
    finding  that  the  appellant  could  not  establish  the  ten   years'
    continuous lawful residence and,  therefore,  his  entitlement  to  ILR
    under para 276B of the Immigration Rules.

    Ground 4

41. That then leaves the final ground of appeal which  is  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the appellant's Art 8 claim in  a  broader  context,
    beyond the terms of para 276B, taking into account his residence in the
    UK over a twelve  year  period  and  the  best  interests  of  his  two
    children, both of whom were born in the UK and one of whom  is  aged  6
    years old.

42. It is self-evident from reading the determination that  the  judge  did
    not consider the appellant's claim either under para 276ADE or  outside
    the Rules under Art 8.  It is clear, however, that the appellant raised
    the broader application of Art 8 to his circumstances in the grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  There is supporting material in the
    appellant's bundle that was before the judge.

43. The judge's determination gives no indication that this aspect  of  his
    Art 8 claim was not pursued at the hearing.  The judge makes  reference
    to written post-hearing submissions  made  by  the  parties  but  those
    submissions are not contained within the Tribunal file.  It may well be
    that the focus of the hearing was on para 276B and the establishment of
    ten years' continuous lawful residence but, as I have  said,  there  is
    nothing to indicate in the decision that the wider application of Art 8
    was not pursued or was abandoned  by  the  appellant's  representative.
    The Tribunal file also provides no indication that it was not  pursued.
    The respondent's written submissions to  the  UT  go  no  further  than
    stating that the Art 8 claim had no "prospect of success" given that it
    had already been rejected by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  earlier
    appeal on 15 August 2019 and that that might explain as  "unsurprising"
    that the focus of the judge in this appeal was on para 276B.  In  their
    present submissions, the broader Art 8 claim has been  put  forward  by
    the appellant's solicitors.  If, in fact, the  broader  claim  had  not
    been pursued before the judge it would be misleading to now state  that
    it was a "live issue".  I am not prepared to infer that the appellant's
    legal representatives would act in this way.  I accept Art  8,  in  its
    broader application, was a "live issue" at the hearing.  The judge was,
    therefore, required to consider this aspect of  the  appellant's  claim
    and he wrongly failed to do so.

44. Given that the appellant has lived in  the  UK  for  more  than  twelve
    years, and that his two children were born in the UK  in  January  2014
    and October 2017, I am unpersuaded that the Art 8 claim had no prospect
    of success even if it may ultimately not succeed.

45. Consequently, I accept Ground 4.   In my judgment, the judge materially
    erred in law by failing to consider the broader aspects of Art 8  under
    para 276ADE and outside the Rules, in particular  taking  into  account
    the best interests of the appellant's  two  children  and  the  overall
    circumstances of the family.





Decision

46. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law and that decision is set aside.

47. Given the scope and nature of the  fact-finding  required,  and  having
    regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, I have
    concluded that the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the
    First-tier Tribunal in order to remake the decision under Art  8.   The
    appellant's broader Art 8 claim has not been  considered  at  all.   No
    factual findings have been made in relation to the circumstances of the
    appellant and his family beyond a finding  as  to  the  period  of  his
    lawful residence in the UK.  It may be that the appellant will wish  to
    rely upon oral  and  other  evidence  concerning,  in  particular,  his
    children.

48. In reaching a decision in relation to Art 8, Judge  Shamash's  findings
    in respect of para 276B are preserved.  The appellant cannot  establish
    that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  para  276B  based  upon   'long
    residence'.

49. Consequently, I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in order to
    remake the decision under Art 8 to the extent  that  I  have  indicated
    above.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            8 September 2020


