
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10347/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 26 November 2018                  |On 21 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Paramjit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Barr, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S P Fox promulgated on 12 February 2018, dismissing
    her appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  made  on  30
    March 2016 to refuse her further leave to  remain  and  to  refuse  her
    human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who entered the United  Kingdom  on
    24 January 2014 with leave as a Tier 4 Student.  Leave in that capacity
    was later extended until 31 December 2015 and, on the day before  that,
    she applied for further leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    human rights basis using form FLR.

 3. The appellant's case is that she is married to an Indian  national  and
    that they have a child.  The application was put forward on  a  private
    life basis and that removal would be in breach of her Article 8 rights.



 4. The Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  was  married
    although noted that no evidence of marriage had been  provided  and  in
    any event her claimed partner was neither a British citizen nor settled
    and accordingly she did not meet  the  requirements  of  E-LTRP.1.2  of
    Appendix FM.

 5. The Secretary of State considered  also  that  the  appellant  did  not
    fulfil  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  given  the  absence  of
    obstacles to family  life  continuing  overseas  or  of  insurmountable
    obstacles that the family would face in continuing family life  outside
    the United Kingdom in India.

 6. The respondent considered also that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules given  her
    age and the short length of time she had spent in the  United  Kingdom.
    He was not satisfied either that there were very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into India to where she would have to go
    if she left the United Kingdom, noting that her parents lived there and
    she had lived most of her life there.

 7. The respondent stated also that there were not in this case exceptional
    circumstances, there being no reason for her partner who does not  have
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom could not return  to  India  with
    her and their son.

 8. By the time the appeal was heard the  appellant's  child  had  acquired
    Irish nationality.  Proof of that was  supplied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It was also drawn to the Secretary of  State's  attention  that
    the appellant's  husband  had  on  24  November  2017  been  refused  a
    derivative residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 on the basis that the appellant and her  husband
    were the primary carers of an EEA national child.  That refusal was  on
    the basis that the child was not sufficient that there was a  right  of
    appeal against that decision.  A further point raised  was  that  leave
    had been granted outside the Rules to avoid a conflict with  the  terms
    of the Good Friday Agreement as otherwise there would be conflict  with
    the terms of the Good Friday Agreement and  discrimination  against  an
    Irish national child born in comparison to  a  British  born  child  in
    Northern Ireland.

 9. When  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    concluded [8], [9], and [12] that  this  was  a  new  matter  and  that
    consent of the Secretary of State was required before he could consider
    it.  The Secretary of State refused consent  as  is  confirmed  in  the
    decision at [18].

10. The judge then considered the position with regard to Article 8  noting
    that the appellant's husband did not have legal status  in  the  United
    Kingdom and, it appeared, that an appeal had not  been  lodged  against
    the decision refusing him (and for that matter the appellant) had  been
    brought against the decision of  November  2017  to  refuse  derivative
    residence cards.

11. The judge found that:

      i) the best interests of the child would be considered first and are a
         primary considerations [23];  that the child has not  been  in  the
         United Kingdom for a significant period and any rights he may  have
         should be exercised in the  country  of  his  nationality,  or  the
         Republic of Ireland;  his  parents  are  responsible  for  all  the
         decisions relating to his life and he was of an age  where  he  had
         not been separated from his parents, the primary  remedy  being  an
         application to the Irish authorities and it  was  significant  that
         the child's father did not come forward to give evidence;

     ii) the appellant had overstayed, she was not aware  that  her  husband
         did not have legal status when they married [24];

    iii) there were no insurmountable obstacles or exceptional circumstances
         and  having  had  regards  to  Section  117  of  the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (sic) [33] the need to control  the
         entry  of  non-nationals  into  the  territory,  of   removal   was
         proportionate.

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in failing to have regard to Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971
         plus failing to note that the appellant's presence  in  the  United
         Kingdom was lawful;

     ii)  in  wrongly  stating  [11]  that  the  refusal  of  the  husband's
         application had not been appealed; and [19] failing  to  note  that
         the appellant's husband had permission to work; and  [23]   wrongly
         stating that the appellant  had  no  legal  status  in  the  United
         Kingdom nor could she establish any;

    iii) the repeated failure by the judge to assess the appellant's correct
         lawful status in the United Kingdom tainted the decision to such an
         extent that he had failed to carry out a proper assessment  of  the
         Article 8 position.

13. On 3 May 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

14. On 19 October 2018 I issued directions stating as follows:-

         "It  appears  that  the  issue  of  the  child  now  holding  Irish
         Citizenship may have been a "new  matter"  within  the  meaning  of
         section 85 (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
         (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014), irrespective  of  whether
         the First-tier Tribunal erred in refusing to accept evidence as  to
         that citizenship.


         The parties are directed to provide skeleton  arguments  addressing
         this issue and whether it falls within the grounds of appeal."


15. In response to that both parties had provided  skeleton  arguments  for
    which I am grateful.

16. Mr Barr submitted that in response to Mr Duffy's observation  that  the
    judge had made a number of errors, that these were  in  fact  material.
    He sought permission to amend his grounds to  include  a  challenge  to
    that the child's Irish nationality was "a new  matter".   He  submitted
    also that it would not be possible for the family  to  go  to  live  in
    India as the child would not be an Indian citizen in the light of MK (a
    child by her litigation friend CAE) v SSHD [2017] EWHC 1365.

17. Mr Duffy accepted that had the judge erred with respect to  whether  or
    not the child's Irish nationality amounted to a "new matter", then  the
    matter would need to be remitted  to  the  First-tier.   He  submitted,
    however, that the judge had been correct to conclude that  this  was  a
    new matter and the errors were therefore not  material.   He  submitted
    further that it had not been put to the judge there  were  difficulties
    over the child acquiring Indian nationality.

18. I turn first to the issue of the late request to amend the grounds.   I
    am, however, under the particular circumstances of this  case  prepared
    to admit this as a new ground given that, as Mr Duffy said, he was  not
    taken by surprise this  matter  having  been  dealt  with  in  skeleton
    arguments.

19. I do not, however, consider that the judge erred in concluding that the
    new contentions of the child was an Irish  citizen  and  the  arguments
    that flowed from that including the submission  that  the  child  faced
    discrimination in that he would be treated differently from  a  British
    citizen child born in Northern Ireland, could not be raised.

20. I am satisfied that the judge was correct to describe  the  acquisition
    of Irish nationality as being a new matter given that, following Mahmud
    (S.85 NIAA 2002 - "new  matters":  Iran)  [2017]  UKUT  488,  this  was
    clearly a new factual matrix as the facts  of  Irish  nationality  gave
    rise to a number of issues including a discrimination  claim  based  on
    the Good Friday  Agreement  and  different  treatment  from  a  British
    citizen child; it also gave rise to matters which form the  subject  of
    the appeal brought by the appellant's father on the basis of him  being
    a derivative child.  Further, the issue of the child's nationality does
    go to the issue of proportionality.

21. That said, it does not appear to have been  raised  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the child was not in fact an Indian citizen,  as  appears
    from MK to be the case, this was not put to the judge.  Whether or  not
    the child is an Indian citizen is a matter of foreign law and therefore
    a question of fact.  It cannot therefore have been  in  error  for  the
    judge not to take that into account nor is it possible  to  raise  this
    issue now on appeal.  The basic factual matrix has been known for  some
    time and there was no attempt by Mr Barr to address the tests  set  out
    in Ladd v Marshall as to why, exceptionally, this  material  should  be
    admitted in an appeal.  There was no explanation as to why  this  could
    not have been done with proper diligence prior to the appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal nor is there evidence that the child would  not  be
    able to go and live in India with his parents.  In that sense it cannot
    be said to be material.  Further, unlike in MK, the child here  is  not
    stateless.

22. It cannot be argued, as Mr Barr sought to submit, that the  judge  took
    into account the new matter only in an EEA Regulations sense as opposed
    to an Article 8 sense.  The issue of new matter is  not  qualified;  as
    noted in Mahmud it is simply a factual matrix.   That  is  not  a  test
    circumscribed either by whether it goes to an Article 8 ground  or  for
    that matter a European Economic Area ground.

23. I do, however, note that the judge appears to have considered that  the
    child is an Irish national when assessing  proportionality.   That  was
    clearly in error.  Having concluded that the Irish  nationality  was  a
    new matter, this should simply not have been factored into account.

24. Pausing there, I conclude that although the grounds should be  amended,
    on further consideration it cannot be said that the judge erred in  law
    in concluding that this was a  new  matter.   As  was  pointed  out  in
    Quaidoo (new matter: procedure/process) Ghana [2018] UKUT 87 (IAC), the
    means for challenging a decision of the respondent not to consent to  a
    new matter is by way of bringing an action for judicial review.

25. Returning to the errors made by the judge, I accept that he  failed  to
    note that the appellant does in fact have leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom and she benefits from  the  operation  of  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  That was, however just one factor which a  judge
    took into account.  The appellant's presence is clearly precarious (see
    Ruppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58).  The  judge  clearly  directed  himself
    properly that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  were  the  primary
    consideration and a matter to which he turned first.

26. Further, there is no challenge to the judge's finding that the  child's
    best interests were served by  being  with  his  parents  but  that  is
    expressed in terms of the child, as an Irish national, seeking to  have
    indicated status there.   At  [30]  the  judge  contemplates  that  the
    appellant should be removed and would be able to be in contact with her
    husband  and,  unfortunately,  her  child  using   "modern   means   of
    communication".  That is not a material consideration,  but  the  judge
    also found, for adequate and sustainable reasons that he had considered
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the child going to  live
    in India and at [30] that there was no basis on which the family  could
    not all return to India.  That was a decision properly open to  him  on
    the evidence, and thus, any error in concluding that the  mother  could
    return alone was not material.

27. Taking all of these factors into account I conclude that  although  the
    judge erred, it was not material.  The error was only as to the  length
    of time that the appellant had spent in the United Kingdom with  leave.
    Given that her leave had been here precarious, little weight could have
    been attached to it in any  event.   Bearing  in  mind  the  restricted
    evidence which the judge could have taken into account  and  given  the
    absence of evidence relating to the difficulties they  would  face  the
    appellant and her child on return to India, I conclude that  the  error
    was not such as to affect the outcome of her decision given that  there
    was only one answer to which the judge could have come and that was  to
    dismiss the appeal.

28. For these reasons, I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


