
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10766/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 23 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                               Urvashiben [p]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of  India  born  on  3  October  1986.  She
    appeals against the decision of the respondent dated 11 September  2017
    refusing her application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    dated 25 November 2016 on human rights grounds.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    in a decision dated 11 February 2019.  Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 17 April 2019 granted permission  to
    the appellant  to  appeal  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    stating that it is arguable that the judge failed properly  to  analyse
    the impact of the appellant's removal in  the  context  of  her  family
    dynamic. The judge found that it is arguable that  the  respondent  did
    not consider the right of residence of the appellant's  children  whose
    father is a dependent of his EEA national wife and  that  they  have  a
    right of residence in the United Kingdom and  the  appellant  is  their
    main carer.

3.   At the hearing it was agreed by consent that there is a material  error
    of law in the decision of the first-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  find  that
    there is a material error of law in the decision because the judge  has
    not  considered  all  the  evidence,  including  the  fact   that   the
    appellant's children are EEA  nationals  and  the  appellant  is  their
    carer.

Notice of Decision

4.   In the circumstances I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal and be placed before any judge other than Judge Anstis to
    be heard de novo  and  evidence  provided  as  to  the  status  of  the
    children.  The decision of Judge Anstis is set aside in its entirety.

5.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated this 21st day of May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

