
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10315/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Iac (Priory      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Courts)                              |                                     |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 15th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Ms Amanpreet Kaur
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr I  Ali,  Counsel  instructed  by  One  Immigration
(Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India, date  of  birth  14  January  1997,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated  18  April  2018,  to
    refuse leave to remain on humanitarian grounds.  The appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge I F Taylor, who on 17 October 2018  dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds relating to human rights issues.   Permission
    to appeal that decision was given on 13 November 2018.

2.   The basis on which permission was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  E
    M  Simpson.   Judge  Simpson  concluded  that  the  decision   arguably
    disclosed the judge had erred in  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    dependency and whether it was more than the usual  emotional  ties  had
    been evidenced between the Appellant and her siblings.   Secondly,  she
    concluded that the judge had failed to  proper  address  the  issue  of
    gender based violence against the Appellant, in the light of  the  CPIN
    in relation to  'India:  Women  fearing  gender  based  violence  (July
    2018)'.

3.   When the matter came before me the argument, particularly from Mr  Ali,
    were that there was substance in the point that, at the date of hearing
    before the judge, all  of  the  Appellant's  immediate  family  members
    including her parents and three siblings, now aged 19, 16 and  8  years
    of age, had leave to remain (LTR) in the UK with the  youngest  sibling
    being a British national.  The family members had been granted  further
    LTR and it could not be argued that the future of the  family  did  not
    lie in the UK.

4.   It was argued that the judge erred in law by overlooking the fact  that
    two of the Appellant's siblings were minors and ignoring  the  evidence
    of her active involvement in their lives meant that the  Appellant  was
    actively enjoying family life with her siblings as well as other family
    members.  Thus it was said the judge erred  in  failing  to  find  that
    family life existed between the  Appellant  and  family  members  which
    required proper weight to be attached to it when considering the public
    interest question more widely.  As a matter of fact the judge  appeared
    to have made an error of fact in concluding that the basis of residence
    for  other  members  of  the  Appellant's  family  was   unlawful   and
    precarious, whereas it no longer was.  To what extent  that  played  in
    the decision was difficult to discern, given the reasons provided.

5.   It was plain that, when the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  as
    a minor, she could not really be held responsible for  her  immigration
    status or the basis on which entry had been effected and she  remained.
    It was argued that the Appellant was a young adult and remained a child
    of the family which the judge had failed to properly consider.

6.   Much of the general argument turned on a correct assessment overall  of
    the relationship between the Appellant and other family members and the
    impact upon her of removal, in terms of the interference in the  family
    life which they have enjoyed.

7.   On the face of it the Appellant had not become independent as  to  have
    effectively left the family. It  seemed  to  me  that  there  was  some
    substance in those matters being looked at in the round.  Accordingly I
    find the judge in the assessment of the family life issues had  made  a
    material error of law in assessing the family relationships and  impact
    in the Article 8ECHR claim. I do not express any view  whether  or  not
    the effects of separation will have the degree  of  harsh  consequences
    needed to succeed in the claim.

8.   As to the issue of gender based violence the  weight  to  be  given  to
    that point was not  entirely  dictated  by  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant's evidence had or had not effectively  addressed  the  issue.
    Whether or not there was such real risk to the Appellant, if the  claim
    in other respects fails,  then  if  pursued  the  matter  will  require
    evidence and submissions on the remaking of the case.

DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is to be remade  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

1.   No findings of fact to stand.

2.   All issues to be addressed  that  are  currently  relied  upon  by  the
Appellant.

3.   A Punjabi interpreter is required.

4.   Time estimate is two hours.

5.   Two witnesses. Any others to be notified to the Respondent  with  their
nationality and statements.

6.   Any additional documents relied to be served not  less  than  10  clear
working days before the further hearing

7.   To be heard at Nottingham Hearing  Centre  but  not  before  First-tier
Tribunal Judge I F Taylor.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was sought nor was one required.

FEE AWARD

No fee award is appropriate at this stage in the process.



[pic]
Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

