
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10118/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 10 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SAMSON ABIOLA JAGUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jacobs


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Samson Abiola Jagun, was born on 3  November
    1980 and he appeals against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  7
    April 2016 to make an automatic deportation order against him under the
    UK Borders Act 2007, Section 32(5).   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hodgkinson) in a decision promulgated on 17 February 2017  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was convicted following a not guilty plea of offences  of
    fraud at Gloucester  Crown  Court  in  April  2012.   He  had  previous
    convictions, the details of which appear  at  [11]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.  The appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship (which is not disputed by the Secretary of State) with  K-
    A, who is also a Jamaican citizen  and  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant,  who  claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in 1998  and  remained  without
    leave, commenced a relationship with K-A in  or  around  2002  and  the
    couple have three children who are all British citizens; S1, S2 and S3.
     Judge Hodgkinson found that it would be unduly harsh for the  children
    to live in Nigeria and for the children to live in the  United  Kingdom
    without the appellant [63].  In reaching that decision, he  had  regard
    to HC 395 (as amended), in particular paragraphs  399(a)  and  (b)  and
    399A.

 3. The Secretary of State relies upon the decision of AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1012, in particular [17]:

         These cases show that it will be rare for the best interests of the
         children to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation from  a
         parent is required, even though such separation is  detrimental  to
         the  child's  best  interests.  That  is  commonplace  and  not   a
         compelling circumstance. Neither is it looking at  the  concept  of
         exceptional circumstances  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. It would undermine the specific exceptions in the  Rules  if
         the interests of the children in maintaining a close and  immediate
         relationship with the deported parent were as a matter of course to
         trump the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule  399(a)
         identifies the particular circumstances where it is  accepted  that
         the interests of the child will outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation. The conditions are onerous and will only rarely arise.
         They include the requirement that it would not  be  reasonable  for
         the child to leave the UK and that no other family member  is  able
         to look after the child in the UK. In  many,  if  not  most,  cases
         where this exception is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be  the
         normal relationship of love and affection between parent and  child
         and it is virtually always in the best interests of the  child  for
         that relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the rule of any practical significance. It  would  mean
         that deportation would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
         with private life in the ordinary run of cases where  children  are
         adversely affected and the  carefully  framed  conditions  in  rule
         399(a) would be largely  otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very
         compelling justification overriding the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation, there must be  some  additional  feature  or  features
         affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take  the
         case out of the ordinary.

 4. Mrs Fijiwala, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State,  acknowledged
    that the court in AJ (Zimbabwe) was considering an earlier  version  of
    paragraph 399(a) which required that no other adult  was  available  in
    the United Kingdom  to  look  after  a  child  in  the  event  that  an
    individual was deported; that provision has now been dropped.  However,
    she argued that the principle in the case  remained  the  same,  namely
    that the best interests of the children and their  understandable  wish
    to remain living with both parents were simply insufficient to  justify
    a grant of leave under Article 8 ECHR; something additional had  to  be
    present which would establish a "very compelling justification" for  an
    overriding the "high public interest concerned with deportation".

 5. Both parties accept that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with K-A and the  children.   Granting  permission,  Judge
    O'Connor wrote:

         It is arguable that there  is  an  absence  of  law  for  reasoning
         capable of supporting the FtT's conclusion [63] that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the children to  live  in  the  UK  and  that  the
         appellant, particularly in light of  the  earlier  conclusion  [46]
         (albeit one not determinative of the aforementioned issue) that the
         evidence falls short of establishing that the  appellant's  absence
         would be disastrous for the children.

 6. The grant of permission needs to be put in the context of  the  judge's
    decision.  At [46], Judge Hodgkinson wrote:

         In terms of what is in the best  interests  of  the  children,  the
         available evidence most clearly establishes that it is in the  best
         interests of all the children for the appellant to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom, living in the household in which the entire  family
         unit resides.  Such is, I find, a longstanding  arrangement  and  a
         relatively stable one.  The  evidence  before  me  falls  short  of
         indicating that the appellant's absence would be disastrous for the
         children, despite Miss Smith's [the social worker who gave evidence
         in the case] suggestion otherwise, but his  continued  presence  in
         their lives, on a daily basis, is most clearly in their  interests.
         Of  course,  their  interests  are  a  primary  and  very   weighty
         consideration.  Having concluded this thus, I proceed  to  consider
         other issues of relevance to Article 8  and  to  my  assessment  of
         proportionality.

 7. If Judge O'Connor's grant of permission may be taken as some indication
    of a possible inconsistency in the judge's reasoning, I find that  none
    exists on this particular point.  The  judge  has  found  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to be separated from the appellant but  I
    find that the judge has not  been  inconsistent  in  finding  that  the
    social worker had overstated the case by  saying  that  the  separation
    would for the children be "disastrous".  In other words, a  result  may
    be  legitimately  described  as  unduly  harsh   whilst   it   is   not
    "disastrous".  To that extent, nothing turns on the judge's observation
    regarding the social worker evidence.

 8. Mr Jacobs sought to persuade me that the judge's analysis  referred  to
    circumstances which were manifestly  out  of  the  ordinary  and  which
    provide evidence of the sort of  factors  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    indicated in AJ (Zimbabwe) should  exist  for  an  appeal  to  succeed.
    These include the behaviour problems [45] of two of the  children,  the
    fact that the index offences took place in 2009 and the  indication  in
    the evidence that the appellant has reformed.  Mr Jacobs also  referred
    to the Secretary of State's delay in seeking to  deport  the  appellant
    although he acknowledged that that delay could not be determinative.

 9. The question on which this appeal  turns,  therefore,  is  whether  the
    judge has done  enough  to  show  that  there  would  be  unduly  harsh
    consequences for the children if they were to  be  separated  from  the
    appellant.  I consider that  Mrs  Fijiwala  is  correct  to  say  that,
    although AJ (Zimbabwe) dealt with an earlier version of the Immigration
    Rule, the principle enunciated in AJ (Zimbabwe) remains valid.

10. I do not dispute the judge's finding at [58] that  to  argue  that  the
    entire family should uproot itself and return to Nigeria together is  a
    contention "wholly lacking in merit".  Indeed,  Mrs  Fijiwala  did  not
    seek to persuade me otherwise.  The crux of the decision, therefore, is
    what the judge  says  regarding  the  consequences  of  separating  the
    children (who will remain in the United  Kingdom  with  K-A)  from  the
    appellant who will be deported to Nigeria.  That  analysis  appears  at
    [60-63].  Interestingly,  the  first  point  raised  by  the  judge  in
    addressing paragraph 399(a) is that the appellant  "has  not  lived  in
    Nigeria for approaching eighteen years, since he was  a  teenager.   He
    has nobody to support him there and no  immediate  means  of  financial
    support there.  He has  no  accommodation  there".   As  AJ  (Zimbabwe)
    shows, commonplace inconveniences resulting from  deportation  are  not
    enough.  The appellant is a resourceful man in apparently good  health.
    None of the  circumstances  at  [60]  are  capable  of  being  properly
    described as additional factors over and above the ordinary.   If  they
    played a part in the judge's decision that the separation of the family
    would be unduly harsh then, in my opinion, they should  not  have  done
    so; they may be serious potential inconveniences but they  are  nothing
    more than that.  At [61], the judge moves on to consider the fact  that
    the appellant "clearly holds a primary care function in relation to the
    children and there is clearly a significant  bond  and  interdependence
    between him, the children and K-A".   Here,  the  judge  is  describing
    nothing  more  than  the  maintenance  of  a   "close   and   immediate
    relationship with the deported parent" such  as  is  described  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AJ (Zimbabwe) at [17].  The Court of Appeal has held
    that a "close and  immediate  relationship"  between  a  parent  to  be
    deported and his children in the United Kingdom will not be  enough  to
    justify his remaining in the country.   I  take  that  relationship  to
    include those activities and duties as a parent which  would  naturally
    flow from a "close and  immediate  relationship"  such  as  "holding  a
    primary care function", as described by Judge Hodgkinson.  Likewise, it
    is difficult to see how a "significant bond of interdependence" between
    the appellant, the children and K-A is anything more than  another  way
    of  describing  a  "close  and  immediate  relationship"  of  the  kind
    considered in AJ to be inadequate.

11. At [62] the judge refers again to the best interests  of  the  children
    and refers also "to the interests of the appellant and the interests of
    K-A, together with my conclusion regarding his lack  of  propensity  to
    offend which is linked to the length of time which  has  elapsed  since
    his last offending".  Once  again,  the  judge's  analysis  is  lacking
    detail.  Moreover, none of these factors are out of the  ordinary  and,
    as the Court of  Appeal  observed,  "if  they  were  enough  to  render
    deportation a disproportionate interference with family life, it  would
    drain the Rule of any practical significance".  The judge  goes  on  to
    state that "of course, the interests of  the  children  are  a  primary
    consideration and I find that the evidence before me  falls  materially
    short of  establishing  that  there  are  any  factors,  either  viewed
    singularly or cumulatively, which outweigh those interests".  But  that
    statement appears to be at odds with the Court of Appeal  in  AJ  which
    observed that, "these cases show that it would be  rare  for  the  best
    interests of the children to outweigh the  strong  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals.  Something more than a lengthy  separation
    from a parent is required even though such separation is detrimental to
    the child's best interests.  That is a commonplace and not a compelling
    circumstance".  I acknowledge  that  the  judge  has  referred  to  the
    appellant's criminal history and to the public interest concerned  with
    deportation.  The problem is that he does not appear to agree with  the
    Court of Appeal that, in the vast majority of cases, the best interests
    of the children will be outweighed by  the  public  interest  concerned
    with deportation of foreign criminals.

12. I fully acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal is required  to  carry
    out a robust assessment of the facts and will exercise  its  discretion
    within the margin permitted by law.  In many cases, the Upper Tribunal,
    even when it may, on the same facts, have reached a different  decision
    from the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  should  refrain  from  interfering
    with a conclusion properly reached and  supported  by  cogent  reasons.
    However, I have struggled to identify anything in this case which would
    lift it beyond the range of commonplace cases which the Court of Appeal
    has indicated in AJ (Zimbabwe) would not give rise to a grant of  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  Mrs Fijiwala drew my attention to the
    recent case of WZ (China) [2017] EWCA Civ 795, in particular at [14]:

         In my judgment, the Upper Tribunal  was  right  to  set  aside  the
         determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.  Quite  apart  from  the
         reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal, I cannot see how  a  tribunal
         properly applying the law as it  was  at  the  date  it  heard  the
         Appellant's  appeal,  and  giving  the  public  interest   in   the
         deportation of a person sentenced  to  2  years'  imprisonment  the
         weight that was appropriate, could have allowed his appeal. I  take
         into account that until he committed his offence  he  had  been  of
         good character, and that the reports  before  the  Tribunal  showed
         that he was unlikely to reoffend. I bear in mind  that  he  has  an
         established family life  in  this  country,  that  his  family  and
         children have UK nationality, and that his wife would have to  give
         up work to look after the children if he were removed and they were
         to remain in this country. However, none of these facts  takes  his
         case out of the ordinary. Deportation necessarily  results  in  the
         break-up of the deportee's family if they remain  in  this  country
         after his removal.

13. I have sought to extract principles of law from that  authority;  I  am
    not attempting to compare the factual matrices of  that  case  and  the
    present appeal.  It is apparent that, when necessary, it is  right  for
    the Upper Tribunal to interfere with the conclusions of the  First-tier
    Tribunal where those cannot be supported by a proper application of the
    law.  Whilst I do not suggest at all  that  Judge  Hodgkinson  has  not
    produced a thorough and carefully considered decision,  ultimately  the
    reasons for the outcome which he gives at [60-63] cannot lift this case
    out of the ordinary.  I have no doubt that  he  had  sympathy  for  the
    children of the appellant, as  do  I,  but,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal
    observed in WZ, "deportation necessarily results in the break-up of the
    deportee's family if they remain in this country  after  his  removal".
    Such a break-up will occur in the vast majority of cases and  does  not
    in itself render the separation  unduly  harsh.   Of  the  factors  put
    forward by Mr Jacobs as exceptional in this case,  only,  perhaps,  the
    behavioural problems of the  children  can  properly  be  described  as
    unusual but, in my opinion, even that factor is not enough.   A  casual
    observer might think it outrageous that a stable family in  which  both
    natural parents share the care of their children should be broken up in
    this way but that, sadly, is exactly what deportation does.

14. For the reasons I have stated above, I find that Judge Hodgkinson erred
    in law such that his decision falls to be set aside.   I  have  re-made
    the  decision.   I  have  had  regard  to  the  submissions   of   both
    representatives as regards the appropriate manner of disposing of  this
    appeal.  However, in light of  the  fact  that  neither  representative
    indicated that the facts as considered by the First-tier Tribunal  have
    altered or added to in any significant way with the passage of time,  I
    can see no alternative, in the light of what I have said above, than to
    dismiss the appeal of the appellant against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  17
    February 2017  is  set  aside.   I  have  re-made  the  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 7 April
    2016 is dismissed.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

