
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10248/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th January 2018                          |On 9th February 2017         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 [J Hamzie]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: No representation

The sponsor Mr J.A.K. [H] (in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" and "the  Claimant".
     This is an error of law hearing to consider whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Amin) ("FTT") promulgated on 28th June 2017, in  which  the  Claimant's
    appeal against a refusal of entry clearance for settlement  in  the  UK
    with his father, was allowed on human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The Claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and is  now  aged  16  years.
    He applied for entry clearance in 2015 on the grounds that  his  mother
    had died in 2011 and that his grandparents were no longer able to  look
    after him.  His father was his sole surviving parent and/or he had sole
    responsibility for him.

3.   The Secretary of State refused  the  application  because  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was evidence to show the  cause  of  his  mother's
    death in 2011, as no cause  was  recorded  in  the  death  certificate.
    Further the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  sponsor  was
    related as claimed in the absence of DNA evidence.

FTT decision

4.   The FTT found sufficient evidence to find that  the  claimant's  mother
    was dead and that he had been looked after by his grandparents for  the
    last 4-5 years and that his grandmother  could  no  longer  look  after
    him.  Although there was no  DNA  evidence  the  FTT  found  sufficient
    evidence to show the relationship was established [25].   The  sponsor,
    who was  found  to  be  a  reliable  witness  [22],  provided  a  birth
    certificate, marriage certificate, evidence of contact  and  visits  to
    Sierra Leone in 2008 and 2010, the death certificate for the mother and
    evidence of financial support.  The FTT found that the sponsor had been
    involved in all decision making including choice of  school,  religion,
    medical care and had paid for school fees and other living expenses [24
    & 28]. The FTT found that the absence of cause of death  in  the  death
    certificate was not evidence that the mother was not dead. The  sponsor
    gave evidence that she had died of the Ebola virus [29] which  the  FTT
    accepted. The FTT accepted the letter from the  Claimant's  grandmother
    as reliable evidence to show that she was no longer able to look  after
    him [27].

Application for permission to appeal

5.   In grounds it was contended that the FTT had erred in fact because  the
    first reported outbreak of Ebola was not until 2014  according  to  the
    WHO report (2017).  The FTT failed to give sufficient scrutiny  to  the
    cause of death. The lack of DNA evidence together with the  uncertainty
    about the cause of death of the mother were factors that the FTT  ought
    to have given greater scrutiny.

Permission grant

6.   Permission was granted  by  FTJ  Brunnen  who  found  that  there  were
    arguable grounds that the  FTT  erred  to  the  extent  that  where  an
    objectively demonstrable error of  fact  occurred  it  was  capable  of
    amounting to an error in law, and that was capable of  undermining  the
    credibility of the evidence of paternity and sole responsibility.

7.   There was no Rule 24 notice produced.

Submissions

8.   Mr Nath outlined the grounds for the application and made  submissions.
    The sponsor attended the hearing in person and opposed the application.
     He confirmed that he understood the issues raised by the Secretary  of
    State with reference to the decision and reasons of the FTT.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   I heard the submissions made by Mr Nath and  from  Mr  [H].  I  decided
    that the Secretary of State failed to make out the grounds of appeal in
    terms of showing a material error of law.  The finding made by the  FTT
    that the Claimant's mother had died and this was supported by  a  death
    certificate was open to the FTT on the evidence before  it.  There  was
    evidence to show that the Claimant was looked after by his  grandmother
    since 2011 and considerable documentary evidence of the sponsor's input
    and which met the sole responsibility test.  The cause of death was not
    material in the light of all the other evidence on which the FTT placed
    weight.  Whilst accepting that there is now produced objective evidence
    from the WHO as to the first report of Ebola in  2014,  that  does  not
    mean that the Claimant's mother had not contracted the disease or  died
    of it. The sponsor believed that she had symptoms similar to Ebola.  In
    any event there was no evidence to doubt the authenticity of the  death
    certificate and it was not argued that  this  document  was  unreliable
    evidence. There was no objective evidence to show that in Sierra  Leone
    death certificates do not give the cause of death.  The  FTT  proceeded
    on the basis that the Claimant's mother had died in 2011 and  that  was
    central to the appeal. It was not necessary to prove the cause of death
    nor for the FTT to make a specific finding on that fact.  Similarly  it
    was not a requirement of the Rules to produce DNA  evidence.   The  FTT
    looked at all the evidence in the round and reached findings that  were
    open to it on the evidence adduced at the  hearing.   The  sponsor  was
    acting in person and understandably was unable to afford  the  cost  of
    DNA tests.  The FTT considered the appeal with reference to  Article  8
    outside of the rules and had regard to where the best interests of  the
    child lay.

Decision

10.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.

                               Signed            Date  5.2.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



NO ANONYMITY ORDER

A FEE AWARD was made by the FTT and that was appropriate.

                               Signed            Date 5.2.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


