
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10882/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 24th May 2021 via Teams       |On the 21st June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                AR (Pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Bradshaw, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

The hearings in this appeal were conducted remotely  in  circumstances  that
were consented to / not objected to by the  parties.   The  form  of  remote
hearing was V (video). A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was
not practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred  to  were  the  bundles  from  the  appeal
before the First-tier Tribunal, and a new  bundle  prepared  for  the  Upper
Tribunal proceedings, the contents of which I have recorded.





The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly.


 1. An anonymity order is necessary in these proceedings to  guard  against
    the risk  of  jigsaw  identification  of  a  child  whose  identity  is
    protected by an order of the Family Court, and also on account  of  the
    sponsor's status as a victim of domestic violence.  See my order at the
    end of this judgment.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") against a decision dated 10  May  2019
    to refuse entry clearance to the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,
    sought on the basis of his marriage to a British citizen,  the  sponsor
    in these proceedings, whom I shall refer to simply as S.

 3. The appellant's appeal was originally heard and dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes in a decision promulgated on 17 December 2019. On
    4 February 2021, I set aside the decision of Judge Parkes, with certain
    findings of fact preserved, and directed that the appeal be re-heard in
    this tribunal: see the Annex. It was in those  circumstances  that  the
    appeal was listed before me on 24 May 2021.

Factual background

 4. S is a victim of domestic violence at the hands of her former  partner,
    F. She is now happily married to the appellant, a citizen  of  Pakistan
    who seeks entry clearance as a spouse.

 5. S and F have a daughter together, C.  The appellant has begun to form a
    step-father relationship with C, which he maintains using remote  means
    from Pakistan.  A Family Court order is in force governing  S  and  F's
    child arrangements with C.  The order provides that C is to  live  with
    the mother, and grants the father limited fortnightly contact  with  C.
    Under the terms of the order, the mother may take  C  overseas  for  no
    more than a month at a time.  The arrangement is  to  remain  in  force
    until C is 18.

 6. It is common ground that the marriage between the appellant  and  S  is
    genuine and subsisting.  All other eligibility criteria under  Appendix
    FM are met.  The entry clearance officer refused the application on the
    basis of the appellant's very  poor  immigration  history,  relying  on
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules,  for  reasons  to  which  I
    shall return.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  featured  the
    following statement:

             "I note that no satisfactory reason has been put forward as to
             why the sponsor in the UK is unable to travel to Pakistan to
             be with you."

     The Entry Clearance Officer did not refer  to  the  Child  Arrangements
    Order dated 6 December 2016, a copy of which had been provided  in  the
    bundle of supporting documents provided with the application, at  pages
    133 to 136.  As stated above, that order prohibits C from  leaving  the
    UK for more than a month at a time, and grants that she is to live with
    S, her mother, in this country, while enjoying fortnightly contact with
    her father for one night.

 7. The appellant was born in 1983.  He was admitted to this country  as  a
    student on 5 December 2006,  with  leave  until  31  October  2009.  He
    applied to extend his student  visa  using  a  "non-genuine"  document,
    leading  to  the  application's  refusal  on  12  February   2010.   He
    subsequently applied for residence documentation as the  spouse  of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights. His application for a  residence
    card was refused on the basis that the marriage was one of convenience.
    The appellant appealed against the refusal, and on 15 December 2011 the
    First-tier Tribunal upheld the Secretary of State's decision  that  the
    marriage between the appellant and his wife  was  one  of  convenience.
    That finding has  not  been  successfully  challenged.   The  appellant
    subsequently made three further  applications  for  European  residence
    documentation, in 2014 and  2016.   The  appellant  and  his  EEA  wife
    divorced on 5 October 2017.  He was detained in late October 2017,  and
    departed to Pakistan voluntarily, at his own expense,  on  16  November
    2017.

 8. Earlier in 2017, prior to his voluntary departure, the appellant met S.
     They planned to marry here, having discussed the proposal  with  their
    families.   They  gave  notice  to  the  relevant  registrar,  but  the
    appellant was detained by the Secretary  of  State,  and  he  left  the
    country  voluntarily  shortly  afterwards,  at  his  own  expense.  The
    appellant and S married in Pakistan in August  2018.   C  attended  the
    ceremony and then returned to the UK with  S.   In  February  2019  the
    appellant made an application for entry clearance as S's spouse.   That
    application was refused and it is that decision which is  under  appeal
    in these proceedings.

 9. The  appellant  submits  that  paragraph  320(11)  is  a  discretionary
    provision, and that, even if it is  engaged,  in  light  of  mitigating
    features in his immigration history, the best interests of C,  and  the
    wider circumstances of his  relationship  with  S,  it  should  not  be
    applied. The use of paragraph 320(11) should take account of the public
    interest  in  encouraging  those  with   poor   immigration   histories
    voluntarily to leave the country, pursuant  to  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
    discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  Even  if  it  is
    appropriate to apply paragraph 320(11), submits Mr Bradshaw,  it  would
    be unjustifiably harsh for the appellant not to be  admitted,  and  the
    appeal should be allowed outside the rules. His relationship with C  is
    genuine and subsisting, even maintained as  it  is  from  Pakistan.  In
    light of the Family Court order,  this  is  not  a  case  where  it  is
    possible for C  and  S  to  relocate  to  Pakistan  to  live  with  the
    appellant, even if doing so were consistent with  her  best  interests.
    Maintaining the family's separation would be unjustifiably harsh.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer's position, as advanced by Mr Whitwell,  is
    that it is difficult to  envisage  someone  with  a  worse  immigration
    history. The appellant used a "non-genuine" document in support  of  an
    immigration application, and entered a marriage  of  convenience  in  a
    further attempt  to  circumvent  immigration  control.  Thereafter,  he
    submitted three abusive EEA applications, and did not leave the country
    until over seven years after the expiration of his leave to remain,  as
    found by Judge Parkes in findings that I preserved.

11. At the relevant  time,  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provided:

             "320.  Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the
             United Kingdom should normally be refused...

             (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a
             significant way to frustrate the intention of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not);

             and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as
             absconding, not meeting temporary admission/reporting
             restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity or
             multiple identities, switching nationality, making frivolous
             applications or not complying with the redocumentation
             process."

12. Mr Whitwell submits that the appellant meets each limb of the two-stage
    criteria under paragraph 320(11); he was an overstayer of some vintage,
    and there were plainly aggravating features.  He was found by the First-
    tier Tribunal to have absconded and  to  have  worked  illegally.   His
    attempted  explanation  concerning  the  marriage  of  convenience  was
    rejected  by  Judge  Parkes,  in  findings  that  have  been  expressly
    preserved.  The appellant  is  plainly  an  individual  to  whom  entry
    clearance should "normally" be refused, he submits.

Documentary evidence

13. The appellant provided three lengthy bundles in electronic  form.   The
    first featured documents for these proceedings.  The second  and  third
    were his bundle, and that of the respondent, from before the First-tier
    Tribunal respectively.

The hearing

14. At the outset of  the  hearing,  it  transpired  that  the  appellant's
    solicitor was, in fact,  his  sister-in-law,  S's  sister.   She  is  a
    qualified solicitor, but as a close family member, I queried  with  the
    parties whether it was appropriate  for  her  to  be  representing  the
    appellant. Mr Bradshaw readily accepted that this was an unsatisfactory
    arrangement, and explained that he had been as surprised as I  was,  as
    his understanding was that he  had  been  instructed  by  Duncan  Lewis
    solicitors, the firm for which S's sister usually  works.  I  indicated
    that I had some concerns about proceeding on the basis that Mr Bradshaw
    had been instructed by a family member of the appellant, rather than by
    a  solicitor  acting  independently.  The  solution,  suggested  by  Mr
    Bradshaw, was for him to put in place a direct access arrangement  with
    the appellant, which his clerks set up  immediately.  I  adjourned  the
    proceedings for a brief period to enable this to take place.  Thus,  by
    the time the substantive hearing was  underway,  Mr  Bradshaw  appeared
    before me on a direct access basis.

15. The hearing took place remotely in order to guard against the spread of
    Covid-19. At the conclusion of the proceedings, both parties  indicated
    they were  content  with  the  fairness  of  the  hearing  having  been
    conducted remotely.

16. There were two witnesses, S and her father, G,  with  whom  she  and  C
    currently live. Each gave evidence and adopted their statements. In the
    case of S, she  adopted  her  statements  dated  27  February  2021,  9
    November 2019, an undated statement at page 119 of the  bundle,  and  a
    further undated statement submitted  with  the  application  for  entry
    clearance at page 121. G adopted his statements dated 27 February  2021
    and 2 November 2019.  Each witness was cross-examined. I do not propose
    to set out the entirety of their evidence here, but will do so  to  the
    extent necessary to reach, and give reasons for my findings, below.

Legal framework

17. This is an appeal brought on the  ground  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance to the appellant would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998, on the basis that it  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights ("the ECHR") (right to  respect  for  private  and  family
    life).

18. As Baroness Hale explained in R (oao Bibi) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKSC 68 at [25]  to  [29],  and  in  R  (oao  MM
    (Lebanon)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC  10
    at [38] and [40] to [44], the European Court of Human  Rights  has  for
    long  distinguished  between  the  negative  and  positive  obligations
    imposed by Article 8 of the ECHR.  Contracting parties to the ECHR  are
    subject to negative obligations not to interfere with the  private  and
    family lives of settled migrants, other than as may be justified  under
    the derogation contained  in  Article  8(2).   By  contrast,  in  cases
    concerning the admission of migrants with no such rights, the essential
    question is whether the host state is subject to a positive  obligation
    to facilitate their entry.  In positive obligation cases, the  question
    is whether the host country has  an  obligation  towards  the  migrant,
    rather than whether it can justify the interference under Article 8(2).
     But the principles concerning negative and  positive  obligations  are
    similar.  As the Strasbourg Court held in G�l v Switzerland  (1996)  22
    EHRR 93:

             "In both contexts regard must be had to the fair balance that
             has to be struck between the competing interests of the
             individual and of the community as a whole; and in both
             contexts the state enjoys a certain margin of appreciation..."
             (paragraph 106)

19. Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  contains  a  number  of  public  interest
    considerations to which the tribunal must have regard when  considering
    the proportionality of the refusal of entry clearance.  In addition, it
    is settled law that the best interests  of  the  child  are  a  primary
    consideration when assessing proportionality under Article 8(2) of  the
    ECHR.

Discussion

20. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence, in the round to the balance of probabilities standard.

21. I  find  that  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is,  in
    principle, engaged.  The appellant was an  overstayer  for  over  eight
    years.  That alone is sufficient  to  engage  the  first  limb  of  the
    provision.  That overstaying was accompanied by significant aggravating
    features, in the form of the appellant's attempted reliance on  both  a
    false document, and even once that had been revealed by  the  Secretary
    of State, entering a marriage of convenience.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    found the appellant to have worked illegally and to have absconded. But
    for the fact paragraph 320(11)  only  applies  "normally",  it  plainly
    applies to the circumstances of this case.

22. In relation to the question  of  whether  it  is  appropriate  for  the
    discretionary ground for refusal in  paragraph  320(11)  to  be  relied
    upon, it is necessary to consider  the  broader  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's case, including the matters highlighted  in  PS  (paragraph
    320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC), including
    the public interest in encouraging voluntary departures.  I  must  also
    address  the  appellant's  family  circumstances,  including  the  best
    interests of C, which are a primary consideration, and to which I  turn
    first.  The views of the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  when  paragraph
    320(11) should be engaged ordinarily attract significant weight.

23. First, I must highlight a matter I drew to the attention of the parties
    at the resumed hearing.  At [24] of my error of law decision there  was
    a 'slip of the pen'; the reference to findings of fact up  to  [19]  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision being preserved should have been  to
    [22].  As Mr Bradshaw very  fairly  accepted,  although  the  appellant
    disagreed with the findings of fact reached by the First-tier  Tribunal
    at [20] to [22], he was unable  to  mount  a  perversity  challenge  in
    relation to any of them.  There was no analysis in  my  decision  which
    would have justified setting aside those findings of fact, pursuant  to
    the well established jurisprudence concerning  when  this  tribunal  is
    entitled to revisit  a  finding  of  fact  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I will proceed in  this  decision  on  the  basis  that  all
    findings of fact reached by the First-tier Tribunal  up  to  [22]  have
    been preserved.

Best interests of C

24. There is a considerable body  of  evidence  demonstrating  regular  and
    affectionate contact between the  appellant  and  C,  in  the  form  of
    WhatsApp and  other  social  media  transcripts,  which  take  up  many
    hundreds of pages in  the  bundle.   The  witness  statements  paint  a
    consistent picture.

25. I found S to be a credible witness and accept  her  evidence  that  the
    appellant has begun to assume a father-like role to C from Pakistan.  I
    accept that C addresses the appellant as 'papa' when speaking to him on
    FaceTime or the telephone; S's evidence in this respect was  internally
    consistent, in-depth and consistent with her written statements.  There
    was no real challenge to that  aspect  of  her  evidence  under  cross-
    examination.

26. C has visited the appellant in Pakistan once, for the wedding in  2018.
     Prior to his departure, C had begun to build a relationship  with  the
    appellant.  I accept that, at that stage, a combination of C being only
    three years old, and the fact that the appellant and  S  were  not  yet
    married (and not living together: see the fourth  unnumbered  paragraph
    of S's statement accompanying the application for entry  clearance,  at
    page 121 of the bundle; see also the description  of  living  apart  in
    Pakistan ahead of the wedding until after the marriage  itself),  meant
    that  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and   C   will   have
    strengthened more in its remote format following the marriage between S
    and the appellant, at a faster pace, than  would  have  been  the  case
    before the appellant's voluntary departure.  I accept that, before  the
    appellant left the UK, it would, in principle, have been  possible  for
    the appellant to begin to form a step-parent relationship with  C,  and
    that that  relationship  would  have  been  augmented  when  C  visited
    Pakistan for the wedding, and through  modern  means  of  communication
    subsequently.

27. At times, S and G appeared to suggest  that  the  appellant  bore  sole
    parental responsibility for C, from Pakistan.  While I accept that  C's
    relationship with her birth father does not preclude the appellant from
    developing a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  C,  I  do  not
    accept that the appellant takes certain decisions in relation to  C  in
    isolation.  For example, G's evidence was that the appellant chose  C's
    school.  I do not accept that the appellant alone was  responsible  for
    this decision, from Pakistan.  S would have been involved at  the  very
    least, not to mention F.  I do not accept that the appellant is more of
    a parent to C than S is, even accounting  for  the  relative  normality
    that the pandemic has brought to relationships being maintained through
    remote means of communication.  I do not find S to have been dishonest.
     Her deference to her husband was evident, and while it may seem to her
    that the appellant takes all  significant  decisions  concerning  C,  I
    consider that she has underestimated her own role in the process.   The
    dynamics of S's unchallenged  account  of  her  past  as  a  victim  of
    domestic violence from her abusive former  partner  mean  that  she  is
    likely to feel an acute bond and reliance  upon  the  appellant,  whose
    conduct towards her is the polar opposite of the  abusive  conduct  she
    has experienced in the past, on the basis of the materials  before  me.
    S's cultural background ascribes a significant role to the male leaders
    of households (see, for example, her account of her  father  discussing
    her prospective marriage with the appellant's family in  her  statement
    at page 121),  and  a  significant  element  of  her  emphasis  on  the
    appellant's role in C's life decisions will be attributable to the role
    of men in her community.  I did find G to have exaggerated  aspects  of
    his evidence concerning the role of the appellant, but that feature  of
    his evidence does not undermine the evidence of S, which  stands  under
    its own strength.

28. I accept that the appellant is consulted  about  significant  decisions
    concerning C, and heavily involved in  them,  just  as  any  stepfather
    would be consulted about a step-daughter's life  decisions  during  her
    childhood.  S writes movingly in statements about the  positive  impact
    the appellant has had on  her,  and  in  turn,  C:  see,  for  example,
    paragraphs 17 and 18 of her fourth witness statement.  In  addition,  I
    accept that C's remote learning during the  pandemic  has  enabled  the
    appellant to be a part of her education in a way which would  not  have
    been possible previously.  S's evidence under cross-examination in that
    respect was entirely consistent  with  her  statement.   The  appellant
    celebrates C's birthdays with her remotely, and sends gifts,  not  just
    for birthdays, but at other times, too: see paragraph 30 of S's  fourth
    statement.  I accept, as S writes in her fourth statement,  that  C  is
    confused as to why the appellant remains in Pakistan. She wants to  see
    him in person and live with him as her father.

29. I find that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting (step)  parental
    relationship with C.  He is married to her mother and has assumed a day
    to day role in her life, albeit remotely.   Such  remote  relationships
    have acquired a significance and normality over  the  last  year.   The
    fact that the appellant's relationship with  C  is  conducted  remotely
    does not prevent  it  from  acquiring  a  parental-like  role.   Modern
    families frequently encompass contact arrangements such as  those  that
    feature in this case, and the fact that F has limited contact with  his
    daughter does not preclude the appellant from  being  able  to  form  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

30. It is plainly in C's best  interests  that  she  is  able  to  see  the
    appellant.  It is in her best interests to live in the same country  as
    the appellant as the remote form of their relationship is a substandard
    substitute for enjoying family life on a face to face basis.

31. C also benefits from her extended family  in  this  country.    She  is
    settled in education.  It is in her best interests to remain here  near
    her family,  continuing  in  her  education,  in  the  country  of  her
    citizenship.

32. Drawing this analysis together, I must address the best interests of  C
    in the "real world" context of  her  circumstances.   C  is  a  British
    citizen.  She can live only in this country, as she cannot  be  removed
    from this country without permission from F, or an order of the  court,
    for more than a month  at  a  time.  The  need  for  C  to  maintain  a
    relationship with F militates decisively in favour of  C  remaining  in
    this country, even were it not for the court order.  It is in C's  best
    interests to remain here so she can continue her relationship  with  F,
    pursuant to the current contact arrangements, whereby S is the  primary
    carer.  I have already found that it is in the best interests of  C  to
    live in the same country as the appellant.  It is,  therefore,  in  C's
    best interests for the appellant to live  in  this  country,  the  only
    possible country of residence for her, allowing him fully to assume his
    role as her step-father, supporting her mother.

Paragraph 320(11): "should normally be refused..."

33. Against that background, I turn to the question of whether this case is
    one of those in which entry clearance should "normally be refused".  As
    this tribunal held in PS (India), a decision maker  applying  paragraph
    320(11) must have regard to the public interest  in  encouraging  those
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave and  to  seek  to  regularise
    their status by  an  application  for  entry  clearance.   It  is  also
    necessary to take into account an applicant's family circumstances:  PS
    at [14]:

             "...the family circumstances needed to be evaluated carefully
             in the balancing exercise to which we have referred."

34. While, contrary to what Mr Whitwell submits, one can  readily  envisage
    more  serious  immigration  offending,  the   appellant's   immigration
    misconduct was certainly at the very serious end  of  the  spectrum  of
    severity, involving a non-genuine document, a marriage of  convenience,
    absconding, frivolous applications, and unlawful working. The Secretary
    of State's responsibility for the maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls  should  result  in  a  vast  majority  of   cases   involving
    immigration misconduct of this magnitude  being  refused.   Refusal  in
    these circumstances would be consistent with the Secretary  of  State's
    guidance, General grounds of  refusal -  Considering  entry  clearance,
    version 29.0, 11 January  2018, as set out at  [25]  of  Mr  Bradshaw's
    skeleton argument.  Although that policy has  been  superseded  by  new
    guidance accompanying changes to Part 9 of the Immigration Rules,  this
    appeal falls to be considered by reference to paragraph 320(11), rather
    than the current equivalent position, and the  guidance  previously  in
    force.  The Secretary of State's policy attracts great weight  in  this
    balancing assessment, as can  her  views  on  individual  case-specific
    decisions to invoke paragraph 320(11).

35. The difficulty, however, with ascribing dispositive weight on the views
    of the Secretary of State  in  this  matter  is  that,  having  invoked
    paragraph 320(11), the refusal letter wholly failed to engage with  the
    unique family circumstances of this appellant, S and C.  When the Entry
    Clearance Officer stated, "I note that no satisfactory reason has  been
    put forward as to why the sponsor in the UK  is  unable  to  travel  to
    Pakistan to be with you", she singularly failed to engage with the very
    powerful reasons that had been advanced.  This sentence featured  under
    the refusal letter's discussion of "exceptional circumstances", but the
    factors raised by the application are considerations  that  are  highly
    relevant to the exercise of discretion under paragraph 320(11)  in  any
    event.  I find that the Entry Clearance Officer failed to engage with a
    relevant consideration, meaning her views as to the public interest  in
    applying a discretionary provision such as paragraph 320(11) carry  far
    less weight  insofar  as  those  views  relate  specifically  to  these
    proceedings.  This tribunal can only ascribe determinative significance
    to the views of the Secretary of State if those views are rational  and
    formed on the basis of consideration of all relevant factors, which  is
    not what took place here.  That is not to say the Secretary of  State's
    general policy concerning the importance of  maintaining  an  effective
    immigration and border control does not attract  weight:  it  does,  as
    Parliament has stipulated in section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act.  Normally
    those who abuse the immigration control system, such as this appellant,
    cannot expect to be readmitted to the United Kingdom.  However, to  the
    extent the Secretary of State has specifically sought  to  justify  the
    invocation of paragraph 320(11) in this case, her opinion carries  less
    than the customary weight it would usually attract, due to her  failure
    to engage with the specific features of the factual matrix.

36. In my judgment, this is a case falling outside the range of those cases
    in which paragraph 320(11)  should  "normally"  be  applied,  when  the
    balancing exercise inherent to  the  engagement  of  the  provision  is
    conducted.

37. I take account of the other factors which Mr  Bradshaw  invites  me  to
    consider: the passage of time since the  appellant's  most  significant
    immigration  breaches,  the  passage  of  time  since   his   voluntary
    departure, his desire  to  comply  with  the  law,  through  making  an
    appropriate out of country application,  and  the  public  interest  in
    encouraging people  to  leave  the  country  voluntarily  in  order  to
    regularise  their  immigration  status.   The   appellant's   voluntary
    departure attracts some weight, although not as much as it would  have,
    had he left at a much earlier stage, before being detained.

38. In isolation, the above factors would not tip the balance in favour  of
    the appellant.  However, when one factors in the best interests  of  C,
    and the wider circumstances of S, a  different  approach  is  required.
    This is a dimension of the application which the Secretary of State has
    wholly failed to deal with in her written decision and so I am  without
    the benefit of her considered views on this issue; Mr  Whitwell  relied
    on the refusal  letter  without  qualification.   S  was  a  victim  of
    domestic violence, as outlined in powerful  terms  in  her  statements.
    Despite that, and to her credit, she has maintained a relationship with
    her abuser, for the sake of their child, C.  The best  interests  of  C
    militate strongly in  favour  of  the  appellant  being  granted  entry
    clearance for the reasons already given.  C's relocation to Pakistan is
    out of the question, as is the prospect of S severing her  relationship
    with C in order to relocate to Pakistan on  her  own  to  be  with  the
    appellant.  The best interests of C are a primary consideration.  While
    they are not a  paramount  consideration  in  this  jurisdiction,  they
    combine with the factors outlined in paragraph 37, above, to provide  a
    cumulative weight that has the effect of making the  exercise  of  this
    discretionary power against the appellant inappropriate.

39. It is nothing to the point, contrary to Mr Whitwell's submission,  that
    the appellant left the country in order to "take advantage" of the  so-
    called "five year" route  to  settlement  under  Appendix  FM.   As  Mr
    Bradshaw submitted, the appellant complied with the  legal  requirement
    to which he was subject  to  leave  the  country  (albeit,  I  observe,
    belatedly).  That being so, in principle he is entitled to apply  under
    Appendix FM on the five  year  route,  but  for  the  applicability  of
    paragraph 320(11).  Of course, the appellant may well have been able to
    apply outside the rules from within the country under  section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act, which would have been likely to have placed him on the
    "ten year" route to settlement.  I do not consider that  the  appellant
    is to be penalised for leaving the country under  these  circumstances.
    In any event, the out of country route has taken over  two  years  thus
    far, not including the time spent in Pakistan before submission of  the
    application  which  amount  to  around  18  months.   S's  unchallenged
    evidence was that the time spent between the  appellant's  removal  and
    the  entry  clearance  application  was  attributable  to  her  gaining
    employment sufficient to meet the financial requirements of the  rules;
    S  has  two  employed  roles,  which  together   meet   the   financial
    requirements of Appendix FM.  It is hardly surprising that S, a  single
    mother to a young child, and victim of  domestic  violence,  took  some
    time to obtain roles that met the financial eligibility criteria.

40. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  accepted  that  the  appellant  met  all
    eligibility requirements.

41. I now find that he meets the suitability requirement also, as it is not
    appropriate to apply paragraph 320(11) for the reasons set  out  above.
    Pursuant to TZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34], where an appellant meets the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, that will be positively determinative  of  an
    Article 8 appeal.  I allow this appeal on human rights grounds  on  the
    basis that the eligibility requirements for entry clearance are met and
    the suitability concerns advanced by the Secretary  of  State  are  not
    sufficient to engage paragraph  320(11).   The  appeal  succeeds  under
    Article 8 as articulated by the rules.

Article 8 outside the rules

42. Many of the broader factors which feature in the above assessment would
    be relevant to an Article 8 assessment outside the rules, in any event.
     The parties addressed Article 8 outside the rules.  For completeness I
    do so now in any event.

43. Factors in favour of the appellant's non-admission include:

        a. The public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
           controls, encompassing the general need to  refuse  re-entry  to
           those who breach immigration control in a significant way,  such
           as this appellant (section 117B(1), the 2002 Act);

        b. The appellant used a  non-genuine  document  in  an  immigration
           application, relied on a marriage of convenience to  obtain  EEA
           residence   documentation,   made   a   series   of    frivolous
           applications, and absconded,  thereby  aggravating  his  already
           significant overstaying;

        c. Paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules  is,  in  principle,
           engaged by this appellant's conduct;

        d. Although the appellant left the UK voluntarily, he did  so  only
           upon being detained, after a considerable period of overstaying.

44. Factors militating in favour of the appellant's admission:

        a. The appellant and S meet all eligibility requirements under  the
           rules.  The neutral factors concerning the  appellant's  ability
           to speak English and  be  financially  independent  are  neutral
           factors under section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act;

        b. The appellant left the UK voluntarily at his own expense.  While
           there  are  significant  aggravating  features  in   his   prior
           immigration misconduct, those such as this appellant are  to  be
           encouraged to leave voluntarily in  order  to  regularise  their
           status from overseas;

        c.  The  appellant  enjoys  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
           relationship  with  C,  albeit   as   a   stepfather,   and   in
           circumstances in which the relationship is conducted remotely;

        d. It is in C's best interests that the appellant  be  admitted  to
           this country;

        e. There is no prospect of C relocating  to  Pakistan  due  to  the
           order of the Family Court and the need for her to remain in  the
           same country as her father, nor would it be possible  for  S  to
           leave C in this country to relocate to Pakistan on her own;

        f. In her decision, the Secretary of State failed  to  engage  with
           the unique circumstances of S and C, meaning her  views  attract
           less weight.

45. In my judgment, the factors in favour of the appellant  being  admitted
    outweigh those in favour of maintaining the  entry  clearance  refusal.
    While the Secretary of State's views ordinarily attract  great  weight,
    as set out at paragraph 35, above, she has failed to  engage  with  the
    highly case-specific factors advanced by this appellant in  support  of
    his application, as pointed out in S's witness statements prepared  for
    these proceedings (and in the statement provided to support  the  entry
    clearance application  itself).   By  relying  on  the  refusal  letter
    without qualification, as Mr Whitwell did, the Secretary of  State  has
    perpetuated this error, meaning that the weight which  would  otherwise
    and ordinarily be attached to her case-specific views cannot  apply  to
    the same extent in this appeal.  The margin of appreciation enjoyed  by
    the Secretary of State has been applied  on  an  erroneous  basis.   In
    addition, the appellant is entitled to some  credit  for  returning  to
    Pakistan voluntarily.  The best interests of C are for the appellant to
    be admitted.  She has formed a bond with the appellant and views him as
    her stepfather.  She calls  him  'papa'.   Her  relocation  with  S  to
    Pakistan is out of the question.

46. In my judgment, the best interests of C combine with the other  factors
    in favour of granting the appellant entry clearance so as  to  outweigh
    the  interests  of  the  community  as  a  whole  in   these   specific
    circumstances.  A fair balance would be for the appellant to be granted
    entry clearance.

47. Even had I not allowed the appeal under Article 8 as articulated by the
    Immigration Rules, I would have allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8
    outside the rules in any event.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant meets the requirements for entry clearance under Appendix FM.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                Date 9 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The appeal succeeded largely on the basis of a factual matrix  and  evidence
which was put before the Secretary of State and with which the Secretary  of
State failed to engage.   Had  the  Secretary  of  State  engaged  with  the
materials relating to  S  and  C,  these  proceedings  may  well  have  been
avoided.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                Date 9 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10882/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2021                            |                              |
|Extempore decision                            |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         THE Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes
promulgated on 17 December 2019 dismissing the appeal brought by the
appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, against a decision of the respondent to
refuse his application for entry clearance to the UK as the spouse of a
British citizen.  The application was submitted on 28 February 2019 and the
refusal decision under challenge before the judge was dated 10 May 2019.

Factual background

The appellant, although currently in Pakistan, previously resided in this
country.  He arrived as a student in December 2006, with leave to remain
until the end of October 2009.  Shortly before the expiry of his leave, he
made a further application in support of an attempt to secure additional
leave as a student.  That application was refused as he used a "non-genuine
document" in support.  The appellant did not dispute those allegations,
either at the time, or before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant subsequently obtained a certificate of approval for marriage
and sought to marry an EEA national.  Following his marriage, his
subsequent application for a residence card as the family member of an EEA
national was refused, on the basis that the marriage was one of
convenience.  On 15 December 2011, a differently constituted First-tier
Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against that refusal, accepting
the respondent's contention that the marriage had been one of convenience.
Thereafter, the appellant remained in this country, making a number of
additional applications under the EEA regime before departing voluntarily
on 16 November 2017.  That was after he had been served with papers upon
being detained by Immigration Officers, having been encountered working
illegally.

The Entry Clearance Officer refused the appellant's application for leave
to enter on the basis of paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.
Paragraph 320(11) features in the "general grounds for refusal" under the
heading "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United
Kingdom should normally be refused".  The provision states:

"(11)    Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant way
to frustrate the intention of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not);

and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding, not
meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions,
using an assumed identity or multiple identities, switching nationality,
making frivolous applications or not complying with the redocumentation
process."

The basis upon which the Entry Clearance Officer had relied on paragraph
320(11) was that the appellant had entered a marriage of convenience, had
submitted frivolous applications, had failed to report and had been
encountered working illegally.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision
noted that the appellant had chosen to leave the United Kingdom
voluntarily, however, the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that
that outweighed the previous immigration history of the appellant and his
disregard for the Immigration Rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal under consideration in these
proceedings followed a hearing in December 2019.  The judge heard evidence
from the sponsor, the appellant's British wife, and from a Dr [R] and a Mr
[B].  The judge identified at [14] of his decision that the main issue in
the appeal was whether the appellant was able to meet the suitability
requirements and whether his exclusion under paragraph 320(11) was
justified.  The judge noted that it was common ground that the appellant
had relied on a false document and observed that that was "a serious matter
as clearly the appellant hoped to obtain a grant of leave to which he was
not entitled".  The judge then noted that, contrary to the submissions that
had been made on his behalf, that was aggravated by his failure to leave
the UK when his application had been refused on that basis.

The judge then considered the circumstances of the appellant's marriage to
the EEA national, and specifically the 2011 decision of the First-tier
Tribunal in which that marriage was found to be one of convenience.  The
judge summarised the explanations that had been provided by the appellant
and his witnesses in these proceedings, concluding that there were no good
reasons to depart from the findings reached by the judge in 2011, thereby
accepting the earlier findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the marriage
was one of convenience.  The judge noted that the subsequent EEA
applications advanced by the appellant on the basis of his relationship
with the EEA sponsor in relation to whom he had been found to be in a
marriage of convenience, were "properly described as frivolous".

At [20] to [22], the judge outlined the additional aggravating features
said to exist in relation to the appellant; his failing to report and his
unlawful working.  In fairness to the appellant, the judge observed that
his unlawful working was "not the most significant aspect of the
circumstances under paragraph 320(11)".  The judge also considered the
appellant to have fallen foul of paragraph S-LTR.4.3 of the Immigration
Rules, in addition to having engaged paragraph 320(11).

The judge then addressed at [24] whether the appellant's continued
exclusion from the UK was justified and proportionate.  He addressed the
nature of the relationship with the sponsor.  I emphasise that there was no
dispute on the part of the Entry Clearance Officer that the relationship
between the appellant and the sponsor was genuine and subsisting.  The
judge noted that the relationship enjoyed between the sponsor and the
appellant commenced when the appellant was in this country without leave
and therefore here illegally.  As such, the relationship carried less
weight in the balancing exercise.

The judge noted at [25] that the appellant's sponsor has a child from a
previous marriage, and that contact is shared between the sponsor and her
ex-husband.  In those circumstances, the judge found that the appellant did
not have a parental relationship with the stepdaughter, although he
accepted that they "may have formed a close relationship".  The judge
considered a report provided by an independent social worker at [26], and
at [27] reached his overall operative conclusions in the case that the
appellant's behaviour was such that paragraph 320(11) was engaged and that
its use was justified in the circumstances of the appellant's case.

Grounds of Appeal

There are two grounds of appeal.  The first is that the judge failed to
take into account relevant factors when addressing the engagement and
applicability of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules.  In the case of PS
(paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC) a
panel of this Tribunal stated at [9] as follows:

"Paragraph 320(11) then offers the opportunity for a discretionary bar to
be applied in somewhat uncertain circumstances.  The uncertainty is sought
to be reduced by the promulgation of guidance under paragraph 320(11).  The
guidance provides that a refusal of entry clearance or leave under
paragraph 320(11) may be given on a discretionary basis where an applicant
has been an immigration offender or in breach of UK immigration or other
law and where there are aggravating circumstances."

At [14] the panel noted that it was important that the Entry Clearance
Officer, when considering whether to invoke paragraph 320(11), should bear
in mind the incentives that may exist to those seeking to regularise their
status by leaving the country of their own accord and making an application
for their return from overseas.  The panel said as follows:

"If the aggravating circumstances are not truly aggravating there is in
this context a serious risk that those in the position of (the appellant in
those proceedings) will simply continue to remain in the United Kingdom
unlawfully and will not seek to regularise their status as he has sought to
do.  The effect then is likely to be counterproductive to the general
purposes of the relevant Rules and to the maintenance of a coherent system
of immigration control.  However, as explained, the Entry Clearance Officer
in this case did not address the correct question and did not carry out an
adequate balancing exercise under the guidelines."

The grounds of appeal and the submissions advanced before me contended that
the judge failed to follow the guidance in PS and fell into the very trap
that was identified by the Tribunal on that occasion when promulgating its
guidance.  The judge failed to consider at all whether the decision of the
Entry Clearance Officer was counterproductive to the general purpose of the
discretionary rule.  There were a number of factors which the judge should
pursuant to PS have considered but did not.

      a) First, the judge is said to have failed to ensure that only "truly
         aggravating" factors are held against an individual.  In the case
         of this appellant it is submitted that the judge should have
         ascribed more significance to his voluntary departure from the
         United Kingdom coupled with his two and a half years out of the
         country before making an application for his return.

      b) Secondly, the judge failed to ascribe any significance to the fact
         the appellant meets the substantive requirements for eligibility
         for entry clearance as a spouse and that there is no question that
         the appellant and sponsor are in anything other than a genuine and
         subsisting relationship, and finally the judge is said to have
         failed to take account of the "close relationship" that he found
         the appellant to enjoy with his stepdaughter.

Mr Bradshaw contends that this ground of appeal is not a mere disagreement
of weight on the part of the judge.  Rather, in his submission, there were
a number of factors which the judge was bound to take into account but
which he failed to consider.  Accordingly, the conclusion that paragraph
320(11) was engaged and that its use was justified could not be sustained.
The appellant had been deprived of the balancing exercise which should lie
at the heart of any consideration of paragraph 320(11).

Pursuant to ground 2, the appellant contends that the judge failed to carry
out any or any adequate Article 8 assessment.  Mr Bradshaw highlights how
the operative reasoning of the judge at [14] to [27] does not even mention
the term 'Article 8'.  There is no express finding in relation to whether
family life is engaged between the appellant and the sponsor.  Although the
judge did address - and dismiss - the possibility of Article 8 family life
existing between the appellant and his stepdaughter (the daughter of the
sponsor), the reasoning provided by the judge for reaching that finding is
said to be irrational.  There the judge observed that contact arrangements
were in place in relation to the appellant's daughter and her father.
Contact is shared between both natural parents.  In those circumstances,
found the judge, the fact that the child's natural father continues to
enjoy a parental relationship with her precludes the possibility of the
appellant being able to enjoy a relationship of parental quality with the
child.  On behalf of the appellant it is submitted that that was an
irrational finding as the jurisprudence relating to Article 8 does not
admit the conclusion that whether family life can be engaged by modern
family arrangements is a mutually exclusive question.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker contends that the judge gave a full
and reasoned assessment of the applicability of paragraph 320(11), that he
reached findings that were open to him on the facts of the case and that
properly understood, the judge's overall analysis was precisely that which
was required by Article 8 of the Convention.  For example, see the
references in [27] of the judge's decision to the exclusion of the
appellant being "both justified and proportionate".  That is the language
of Article 8, submits Mr Walker.

Discussion

The grounds of appeal as formulated and developed by Mr Bradshaw are
compelling.  Paragraph 320(11) of the rules requires a balancing exercise
to take place.  It is significant that the judge addressed not one of the
factors that had been advanced in relation to why the appellant's admission
would be desirable.  While it may well be that the conclusion that the
judge reached in relation to that issue would have been open to him in the
event that a proper analysis under paragraph 320(11) took place, it is not
possible from the perspective of the Upper Tribunal to have the requisite
confidence that the judge undertook such analysis.  Nor can it be said that
any error was immaterial.  As Mr Bradshaw submits, the appellant was
entitled to the benefit of a balancing exercise, addressing all relevant
factors going to and against the discretionary reliance on paragraph
320(11).  I cannot say that, had such analysis taken place, it would
necessarily have been bound to fail.

There is further support for the erroneous nature of the judge's analysis
at [23] of the decision.  There the judge held against the appellant the
fact that he is said to have fallen foul of paragraph S-LTR.4.3 of the
Rules.  That is a paragraph which is not engaged in the entry clearance
context and was therefore by definition an irrelevant consideration.  It
concerns applications for leave to remain made by those already in the
country.  I accept Mr Bradshaw's submissions that that aspect of the
judge's analysis of Rule 320 was therefore tainted; the judge approached
the discretionary exercise on the inaccurate premise that the appellant
would fall foul of another provision of the Immigration Rules in any event.
 Given the provision was not engaged, that was an irrelevant consideration.


I find that ground 1 is made out.

In relation to ground 2, I accept the Secretary of State's submission that
the judge did use the language of Article 8 at various points, even if he
did not use the term expressly.  He addressed at [27] the concept of
proportionality and was mindful of well-established Article 8 concepts at
earlier points in his analysis.  For example, at [24] he addressed the
weight to be ascribed to the relationship between the appellant and the
sponsor, given it was developed at a time the appellant was in the United
Kingdom unlawfully.  That is the territory of Article 8.

However, what is not clear is whether the judge conducted the overall
balancing exercise which is required outside the Rules, even if it were the
case that Rule 320(11) had been engaged and was appropriate to be relied
upon.  In the bundles prepared for the First-tier Tribunal were details
relating to the contact arrangements between the sponsor and her daughter.
The contact order prohibits the removal of the daughter from the United
Kingdom without the permission of the Family Court or the written consent
of every person with parental responsibility for the child, which includes
the child's father.  There was no suggestion in the materials that I was
taken to that the child's father would be willing to entertain the prospect
of the child being taken to Pakistan.  The significance of this aspect of
the Article 8 materials before the judge was that it demonstrated
significant barriers to the sponsor having the option of relocating to
Pakistan in order to be with the appellant that way.  To do so would
require her either to leave her child, with whom she does enjoy a genuine
parental relationship, on her own with her father in this country, or would
require her to seek the father's permission or the leave of the court in
order to take her to Pakistan.  The judge did not engage with that very
significant feature of the underlying factual matrix to these proceedings.
He failed to engage with that aspect of the evidence in the context of
failing to conduct an overall proportionality assessment.  It follows that
ground 2 succeeds.

The question then arises as to the next steps.  Mr Bradshaw submits that
this is a case which has so many findings of fact that it is necessary for
it to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full factual hearing to
take place.  I disagree.  At [15] to [19] of the decision, the judge
outlines the evidence that he heard relating to the appellant's former
marriage to an EEA national and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in
2011 that that was a marriage of convenience.  As Mr Bradshaw very fairly
accepted before me, it is difficult for him to mount a perversity challenge
to those findings.

There were a series of disagreements of weight and fact which featured in
the grounds and Mr Bradshaw's submissions in relation to certain of the
judge's findings, for example that which features at the end of [19] where
the judge concludes that the appellant's subsequent EEA applications were
frivolous.  I find there is no reason for this Tribunal to interfere with
those findings.  They are not affected or otherwise undermined by the
making of any error of law.  Those findings must therefore be preserved.
However, the entirety of the remaining Article 8 analysis including the
applicability of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules and the judge's overall
Article 8 assessment to the extent that he conducted one must be set aside.

I therefore direct that the matter should be reheard in this Tribunal with
the judge's findings up to [19] preserved, and the focus of the forthcoming
hearing in this Tribunal will be the extent to which discretion should be
exercised to invoke paragraph 320(11) in order for an overall Article 8
assessment to be conducted, taking into account all relevant factors.

Form of resumed hearing

The parties were content that a remote hearing would be in the interests of
justice and consistent with the overriding objective.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

[Remaining details concerning arrangements for the rehearing omitted.]

