
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10116/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2019                       |On 22nd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               hamis kassanga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In this decision, from hereon I will refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations before the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal  by  the
    respondent against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke
    (Judge Clarke) on 19 November 2018 to allow the appellant's  Article  8
    appeal.  Judge Saffer gave the respondent  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision on 18 February 2019 because he was concerned that Judge Clarke
    arguably had erred in relation to the ten years' lawful residence  test
    for the purposes of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  That Rule
    requires an appellant who wishes to rely on a period of long  residence
    in the UK in support of an application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    (ILR) to show that for a continuous period of ten  years  he  has  been
    lawfully resident in the  UK.  However,  in  calculating  that  10-year
    period  any  period  of  overstaying  will  be  ignored  provided   the
    application was made before 24 November 2016 and within the  period  of
    28 days of expiry of leave or paragraph 39E of the Rules applied.  That
    paragraph provided that where an application was made within 14 days of
    expiry of the applicant's leave expiring and the respondent  considered
    there was a good reason beyond the control of the  applicant  or  their
    representative why the application was not made in time. In  either  of
    those cases that period will not count towards that continuous ten-year
    period.

2.   The case came before me for a consideration as to whether there was  an
    error of law on 12 April 2019 and my decision to allow the respondent's
    appeal was promulgated on 14 May 2019. I indicated that the  continuous
    lawful residence test  was  arguably  not  met  and  therefore  it  was
    necessary to look further at the evidence with a  view  to  considering
    the ultimate disposal.  The appeal was allowed to  the  extent  that  I
    found a material error of law, set-aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and directed the hearing listed on 5 July 2019.

3.   At that hearing, Mr Nath attended with  his  client  and  his  client's
    brother, but in fact there was no challenge to their evidence, which is
    included in a bundle of documents supplied to the Tribunal  on  3  July
    2019.  The  bundle  of  documents  includes  two  supplemental  witness
    statements for each of those witnesses.   It  also  includes  documents
    which relate to the appellant's alleged private or family life  in  the
    UK with his brother, Mnukwa Mohammed Khamis Kassanga.

Background to the current appeal

4.   The background to the appeal which came before  Judge  Clarke  is  that
    the appellant came to the UK on a student  visa  on  15  January  2008.
    That was extended on 6 January 2009.  He converted his application to a
    spouse application on 26 April 2010. According to the chronology  which
    Mr Bramble read out on behalf of the respondent, the  crucial  date  he
    identified was the date of lawful leave which expired on 21 June  2013.
    He said that left a gap in the  appellant's  lawful  leave  in  the  UK
    between 21 June 2013 and 4 February 2014 when  the  appellant  made  an
    application under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  He  said  that
    that broke the period of lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules  as  it  went  well  outside  the  28-day
    period.  There was in fact a later period which exceeded 28 days  by  a
    small number of days, three days he thought, but he was not relying  on
    that.

The hearing

5.   Mr Bramble also took me to the Court of Appeal decision  in  The  Queen
    (on the application of Masum Ahmed) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ  1070  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  at
    paragraph 15 analysed the nature of continuous lawful residence for the
    purposes of paragraph 276B.  The court said that "continuous residence"
    was to be  defined  by  an  "unbroken  period"  but  it  shall  not  be
    considered to be broken by certain periods  of  absence  from  the  UK.
    "Lawful residence", on the other hand, means unbroken period of certain
    types of leave, temporary admission,  immigration  bail  and  exemption
    from immigration control.  Unlike paragraph 276B (v) (a), sub-paragraph
    (b) contains is no corresponding provision which allows residence which
    is not continuously lawful to be deemed unbroken.  It is here one would
    expect to find the saving which the applicant incorrectly  contends  is
    created by 276B, but  one  does  not.   We  consider  it  to  be  clear
    indication  that  the  lawfulness  of  continuous  residence  must   be
    unbroken.

6.   I therefore identify that the  key  issue  before  the  Tribunal  today
    appeared to me to be whether there was a  sufficiently  strong  private
    and/ or private life in the  UK  for  his  rights  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) to override the fact that  there  had
    in fact been a failure to meet the  requirement  of  continuous  lawful
    residence for ten years as required by 276B of the  Immigration  Rules.
    Mr Nath appeared to disagree with that, stating that he  did  not  read
    the provision  in  the  same  way  as  Mr  Bramble  did.   He  did  not
    necessarily accept that the Court of Appeal had decided  the  issue  in
    the way that I have described in summarising  paragraph  15(5)  of  the
    court's decision.  Furthermore, he said that he relied on evidence that
    his client had been in the  UK  committing  no  criminal  offences  and
    enjoying a close family life with his brother and their children  since
    2008.  He also prayed in aid the fact that his  father  was  living  in
    Tanzania who had ill-health.

7.   Mr Bramble in reply, said it had been  established  in  the  course  of
    argument that the continuous ten-year period had not been met. He  said
    that the appellant did not qualify under Article 8.   The  relationship
    with the brother and sister-in-law were not "compelling  circumstances"
    and the issue as to the father's ill-health went both  ways.  The  fact
    that the appellant might be returning to Tanzania to resume family life
    with the father or be closer to the father may in fact be a  favourable
    factor in his father's  long-term  care.   Furthermore,  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant was actually sending money to his father in
    Tanzania.

8.   There were a number of documents produced which tended  to  go  to  the
    issue of whether the appellant had formed a private or family  life  in
    the UK, but they were  not  verified.   Many  of  the  authors  of  the
    documents had not provided witness statements and they had not attended
    the Tribunal. Overall, the evidence was not particularly compelling  at
    all. In the circumstances, I was invited to dismiss the  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal having allowed the appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    by the respondent.

9.   Mr Nath by way of brief reply said that his client had always tried  to
    regularise his status.  He was not an overstayer, had not "sat  on  his
    hands" and had taken steps at every juncture to try and regularise  his
    status.

Discussion and conclusion

10.  Having on the previous hearing decided  that  this  was  a  case  where
    Judge Clarke had materially erred in the  way  he  had  approached  the
    matter, I decided it  was  not  appropriate  simply  to  substitute  my
    decision for that of the First-tier Tribunal  without  hearing  further
    argument and carefully considering the evidence. However, having  heard
    further argument and considered that evidence:

    (1)  I am satisfied as a matter of law that the  continuous  period  of
    lawful residence test was not met in this case, because  of  the  break
    between the expiry of lawful leave on 21 June 2013 and 4 February 2014,
    when the appellant  made  an  application  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules;

    (2)  That following the commencement into force of the Immigration  Act
    2014, the appellant's sole ground of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (FTT)was that the decision on 17 April 2018 to refuse him further leave
    to remain, amounted to an unlawful refusal of his  human  rights  claim
    (see section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration And Asylum Act 2002, as
    amended);

    (3)  There are limited circumstances where the FTT will interfere  with
    such a decision, which is, for the reasons I have found, compliant with
    the Immigration Rules on the basis  that  it  is  nevertheless  not  in
    accordance with the ECHR. The refusal must result in justifiably  harsh
    consequences for the appellant so as to make it disproportionate.

11.  In the circumstances of this appeal, I  have  decided  that  the  FTT's
    Article 8 decision is unsustainable on the evidence before the  FTT  as
    supplemented by the evidence filed in advance  of  the  second  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The nature of  the  relationship  with  the
    appellant's brother and his family is not of sufficient, compelling  or
    weighty  a  character  to  outweigh  all  other  considerations.  Those
    considerations include the need to enforce proper immigration  controls
    in  the  wider  public  interest  of   controlling   immigration.   The
    appellant's private and family life is by no means of the strongest and
    the factors Mr Nath identified, such as his client's non-commission  of
    criminal offences, are in practice neutral factors.

12.  In the light  of  that  I  have  decided  that  it  is  appropriate  to
    substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal below for FTT's decision.

Decision

13.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  respondent  is  allowed.  The
    decision of the FTT is  set  as  aside.   The  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal is substituted which is to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of further leave to remain in this case.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 16 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date16 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

