
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2019                   |On 5 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                  RAUL [Z}
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvard
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones QC dismissing his appeal against  his
    application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 10 September 2014  on  a  student  visa
    valid from 1 September 2014 until 1 August 2015.  His daughter was born
    on 27 October 2014, some six weeks after his entry to the UK.

3.   On 26 July 2015 the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    in the UK, relying on human rights, on the basis that he has a wife who
    has dual Colombian and British nationality and a daughter, [Sg], who is
    a British citizen.  The appellant's  wife  also  has  a  son,  who  the
    appellant treats as his stepson.

4.   The respondent  refused  the  application  on  21  October  2015.   The
    appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  hearing  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley on 20 December 2016.  Judge Greasley  dismissed
    the appeal.

5.   By its decision promulgated on 6  November  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    allowed an appeal from the First-tier decision and remitted the  appeal
    for rehearing on  the  basis  that  the  findings  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley in paragraphs 23, 24 and  26  of  his  decision
    were to stand.  The preserved findings were as follows:

    (1)  The  appellant  and  his  sponsor  wife  were  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting marital relationship.

    (2)  That the appellant is the biological father of his daughter, [Sg],
         born on 27 October 2014 and treats [Sb] as his stepson.

    (3)  That the appellant participates in the upbringing of each  of  the
         children mentioned in (2) above.

    (4)  The appellant and his wife share parental responsibility  for  the
         children and so there is no reason why the appellant cannot  return
         to Colombia to make a  proper  and  timely  application  for  entry
         clearance.

    Judge Greasley recorded that the appellant had said in evidence that he
    would be able to do this, although would be reluctant  to  do  so;  for
    understandable reasons.  He also found that if the  appellant  returned
    to Colombia to make such an application his parents and  brother  would
    provide him with accommodation and support.

6.   The appellant gave evidence before Judge Jones by adopting his  witness
    statement dated 20 December 2016 as his evidence-in-chief.

7.   The judge recorded that when the appellant was cross-examined, he  said
    that when he entered the UK on 10 September 2014 he  then  intended  to
    depart before his student visa expired.  He went  on  to  say  that  he
    later changed his mind and did not do so because his wife was  pregnant
    and after the baby was born she suffered with  depression.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant made the instant application prior  to  his
    student visa expiring.

8.   The judge then went on to find as follows:

         "8.  However, I am entirely satisfied that  his  student  visa  was
             obtained  by  deception,   notwithstanding   the   appellant's
             assertion that he held an intention  to  depart  prior  to  it
             expiring.  I arrive at that conclusion because I have no doubt
             that given the evidence  about  the  appellant's  wife's  then
             income and reliance upon  benefits,  he  had  no  prospect  of
             obtaining entry clearance under the Immigration  Rules,  given
             that there was no  prospect  of  him  demonstrating  that  the
             financial requirements thereunder were met.   It  is  entirely
             understandable that in circumstances where he  knew  that  his
             wife was about to give birth, he would wish to  procure  entry
             into this  country  with  a  view  to  remaining  permanently.
             Nonetheless, the facts dictate that this appellant  chose  not
             to apply for entry clearance (because he knew  that  any  such
             application was doomed to fail) and instead  determinedly  set
             about deceiving the Entry Clearance Officer  into  granting  a
             student visa so that he could procure entry into this  country
             at a time when he had no intention whatsoever of departing (if
             he could possibly avoid it).  It was a blatant piece of  queue
             jumping  and/or  cynical  manipulation   of   this   country's
             immigration system.  No doubt the appellant was working on the
             basis that possession is 9/10 of the law.

         9.   I should record that during  cross-examination  the  appellant
             conceded that he had not made an application to join his  wife
             in  United  Kingdom  because  he  knew  that   the   financial
             requirements could and would not be met.  He also said that he
             has one other child in Colombia, who lives  with  his  mother.
             So  far  as  his  stepson  is  concerned,  he  said  that  his
             biological father has no involvement in his life".

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  He said as follows:

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  taking  against  the
             appellant a new point, without  notice,  namely  that  he  had
             employed deception in gaining entry  clearance.   The  primary
             findings of fact necessary for such a finding do not appear to
             have been made - a finding that the appellant did  not  intend
             to return to Colombia at the end  of  the  initial  period  of
             leave  was  arguably  not  of  itself  sufficient.    In   the
             circumstances any conclusion that there was an enhanced public
             interest in the appellant's removal was arguably flawed.

         4.   In any event it is arguable that the judge failed to  approach
             the Article 8 appeal on  the  correct  basis.   The  preserved
             findings meant that  the  appellant  had  established  'family
             life' with his wife and two children all of whom  are  British
             citizens.  Arguably the judge misunderstood or misapplied  the
             relevant jurisdiction concerning s117B(6)".

10.  Mr Fouladvard submitted  that  although  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    raising a new issue, this was not relevant to the consideration of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  This was because the  preserved  findings
    tipped the balance in favour of the appellant, applying the  principles
    in Razgar.   He  said  no  reasonable  Tribunal  will  agree  that  the
    appellant should be removed from the United Kingdom.

11.  Mr Bramble  submitted  that  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant recorded at paragraph 9, the judge was entitled to find  that
    the appellant had no intention whatsoever of departing from the UK  and
    had obtained his student visa by deception.

12.  It well known that deception has a high threshold and that  the  burden
    is on the respondent to prove deception.  I agree  with  Mr  Fouladvard
    that the judge had not considered this  at  all.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant had not made an application  to  join  his  wife  in  the  UK
    because he knew that the financial requirements could and would not  be
    met, did not displace his evidence that he intended to leave the UK  at
    the end of his studies.  The ECO was  satisfied  that  he  intended  to
    leave the UK at the end of his studies and issued him  with  a  student
    visa.

13.  The appellant said in evidence that he later changed his mind  and  did
    not do so because his wife was pregnant and after the baby was born she
    suffered with depression.  This evidence  was  not  factored  into  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 8.  It appears to me that the  judge  was
    making assumptions at  paragraph  8  and  those  assumptions  were  not
    sufficient to lead to a finding that the  appellant  had  obtained  his
    student visa by deception.

14.  I now turn to the judge's consideration of the  appellant's  Article  8
    appeal.

15.  The judge also heard evidence from the appellant's wife, Yudy  Mideros.
      She adopted the content of her witness statement  dated  20  December
    2016 as her evidence-in-chief.  Under cross-examination she  said  that
    she would not go to  Colombia  with  her  husband  if  the  appeal  was
    unsuccessful.

16.  The judge said that unsurprisingly Mr Fouladvard majored  upon  Section
    55  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   He  said   Mr
    Fouladvard did not specify which limb of EX.1 he relied  on.   He  said
    that no allegedly insurmountable obstacles were identified or argued.

17.  The judge cited the Supreme Court's decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53.  The  judge  said  the  Supreme  Court  has  now  settled  the
    difference of opinion about the approach to be taken when the interests
    of children fall to be considered.  He said the position has  been  put
    beyond doubt by paragraphs 18 and 19 of the judgment which lays to rest
    the myth that the interests of children are to be  considered  in  some
    kind of artificial vacuum.  The Supreme Court has pointed out that  the
    test of "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real world in which
    the children find themselves, which includes  the  real  world  of  one
    parent being required to leave the United Kingdom.

18.  The judge found that the instant case does not fit  precisely  into  KO
    because the children's mother and the children themselves  are  British
    citizens and so have a right to be in and to reside in the UK.  Whether
    they go to live elsewhere entirely depends upon choices made  by  their
    parents.

19.  The judge said whilst he acknowledged the  interests  of  the  children
    are better served if they live in a two-parent household,  there  would
    be nothing unreasonable in expecting them to remain resident within the
    nucleus of their family unit if that family unit chooses to  locate  in
    Colombia by reason of the appellant having  no  right  to  be  in  this
    country.

20.  The judge then went on to say that he was  heavily  influenced  in  his
    approach by the fact that this appellant has cynically sought to  abuse
    and flout the immigration laws of this country for his  own  advantage.
    He has used deception to obtain a  visa  at  a  time  when  he  had  no
    intention whatsoever of leaving when his student visa expired and quite
    probably,  no  intention  of  being  a  genuine  student  in  any   way
    whatsoever.

21.  The judge said that so far as Article 8  is  concerned,  Mr  Fouladvard
    did not advance any factors said to make this an unusual or  compelling
    case for consideration under Article  8  simpliciter  in  circumstances
    where the appellant could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Accordingly, he did not consider it necessary  to  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8.

22.  The judge said that if he had done so  the  appeal  would  have  failed
    because  he  could   not   possibly   conclude   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate for the UK authorities to require somebody  to  depart
    this country in circumstances where entry has been  gained  deceptively
    by somebody intent upon cynically manipulating its immigration laws.

23.  I find that the judge's decision on the  appellant's  Article  8  claim
    was significantly influenced by his decision  that  the  appellant  had
    cynically manipulated the Immigration Rules to suit his  circumstances.
    This was a wrong approach  to  the  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim.  I agree with Judge Holmes that the preserved findings
    meant that the appellant had established family life with his wife  and
    two children, all of whom are British citizens.  In  finding  that  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the judge had failed  to  consider  the  relevant  jurisprudence
    concerning Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The preserved findings should have formed the basis  of  the
    judge's consideration of the appellant's Article 8 appeal but the judge
    appears not to have had those findings in  mind  when  he  decided  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal.

24.  I find  accordingly  that  the  judge's  decision  on  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim was materially flawed.  I set it aside in order to  re-
    make it.

25.  Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

26.  I rely on the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  SR  (subsisting  parental
    relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT  00334  (IAC)  which  was
    promulgated on 5 September  2018.   This  decision  is  in  the  public
    domain.  SR states in its head note (2) as follows:

         "(2) The question of whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in Section 117B(6) of
             the 2002 Act does not necessarily require a  consideration  of
             whether the child will in  fact  or  practice  leave  the  UK.
             Rather, it poses  a  straightforward  question:  would  it  be
             reasonable 'to expect' the child to leave the UK?"

27.  The judge's findings on this issue were not based on the facts of  this
    case but based on what he considered  to  be  the  appellant's  cynical
    manipulation of this country's immigration laws.

28.  I take into account the preserved  findings.   The  appellant  and  his
    wife are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marital  relationship.   The
    appellant is the biological father of his daughter [Sg], who  was  born
    on 27 October 2014, and treats [Sb] as his  stepson.   The  appellant's
    wife and two children are British citizens.  It  has  also  been  found
    that the appellant participates  in  the  upbringing  of  each  of  the
    children, namely his stepson and [Sg], his daughter.

29.  Mr Fouladvard  submitted  that  the  appellant's  stepson  has  special
    needs.  The appellant's wife has been in  the  UK  for  over  seventeen
    years.

30.  I find that  the  appellant  entered  the  UK  lawfully  and  made  his
    application to remain under Article 8 when he still had valid leave  to
    remain in the UK.  I accept  the  argument  in  the  grounds  that  the
    children, although young, have every right to remain in the  safety  of
    the UK with the support of the appellant as opposed to being faced with
    a choice of going to Colombia with the appellant in order to maintain a
    relationship with the appellant.  I find on the facts that it would  be
    unreasonable to expect the two children, in particular, the stepson who
    has special needs, to go to a country to which they have no ties.

31.  In SR paragraph 54 the Upper Tribunal held that having  considered  all
    the relevant circumstances and weighed the public interest in expecting
    child A to leave the UK in order to enjoy family life with SR  (because
    SR cannot meet the requirements of the Rules), the Upper  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that to  use  the  wording  of  Section  117B(6)  the  public
    interest does  not  require  SR's  removal  because  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect A to leave the UK.

32.  SR went on to say at  paragraph  55  that  the  proper  application  of
    Section  117B(6)  when  resolved   in   an   individual's   favour   is
    determinative of the issue of proportionality.

33.  Accordingly, having found that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
    the British children to leave the UK, and relying on SR,  I  find  that
    the appellant's  removal  from  the  UK  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with the established family life.

34.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

