
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10314/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          IGNATIUS EMEKA ONYEKWERE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ikegwuruka, Almond Legals
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as respondent and the respondent as  the
    appellant,  as  they  appeared  respectively  before   the   First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 31 July 1969 and is a male  citizen
    of Nigeria who entered the United Kingdom in September 2007 with  entry
    clearance as a student. He was granted  further  periods  of  leave  an
    application which he made on  6  September  2017  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 6 September 2017. The appellant appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  26
    January 2018, allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).

 2. The judge considered a number of matters in the course of his decision.
    At the time of the hearing, the appellant was engaged in research for a
    PhD. He sought to argue before the judge that he had completed 10 years
    of lawful residence in the United Kingdom. The judge recorded that  the
    appellant had been absent from the United Kingdom in  the  relevant  10
    year period for a total of 965 days. The judge had regard at  [18]  for
    the respondent's guidance on long residence and concluded that leave to
    remain should be refused 'unless there  are  compelling  circumstances'
    [20]. The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR outside  the  rules.  In
    the context of the Article  8  appeal,  the  judge  then  examined  the
    reasons given by the appellant for having been absent from  the  United
    Kingdom during the 10 year period. At [35], he found that the appellant
    'has not adduced sufficient evidence to show that it was  necessary  or
    reasonable for him to be out of the country  to  the  extent  as  found
    above.' The judge gave detailed reasons finding  that  there  were  not
    compelling circumstances justifying the appellant's absences  from  the
    United  Kingdom.  He  therefore  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence.

 3. However, at the very end of his decision, [39] the judge wrote:

         "However, I consider that the respondent's  refusal  of  indefinite
         leave to remain is not the end of the matter. That is  because  the
         appellant is pursuing a PhD registered in the  United  Kingdom  and
         has had leave to study  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2007.  The
         circumstances, when placed in the context  of  the  evidence  as  a
         whole, amount to compelling  reasons  showing  that  he  should  be
         granted sufficient leave to at least complete his studies."

 4. The respondent challenges the judge's decision on the grounds that  the
    judge has used Article 8  ECHR  is  a  general  dispensing  power.  The
    respondent argues that the United Kingdom does not have  an  obligation
    to respect and individuals wish to access an education here. The  judge
    has given no details of any evidence adduced regarding the strength  of
    the appellant's connections within the United Kingdom nor has the judge
    indicated what compelling circumstances, if  any,  might  outweigh  the
    strong public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  I
    agree.  The  judge's  analysis  is  entirely  sound  as   regards   the
    application of the immigration  rules  and  his  consideration  of  the
    respondent's policy regarding long residence. Only at the very  end  of
    the decision does the  judge  fall  into  error  by  finding  that  the
    appellant should be granted sufficient leave 'at least to complete  his
    studies.' It is important when the  tribunal  considers  an  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds that proper attention is given to the  basis  of  the
    appeal, whether it be based on private or family life. In  the  absence
    of any evidence linking the article  8  appeal  to  either  private  or
    family life, there existed no basis for the judge to allow  the  appeal
    at all. I have no doubt that the judge felt sympathy for  an  appellant
    who wishes to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  complete  his  PhD.
    However, as the Supreme Court  in  Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72  held,  'the
    opportunity for a promising student to  complete  his  course  in  this
    country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a  right
    protected under Article 8 ECHR.' Judge appears  to  have  ignored  that
    principle and in doing so he has fallen into legal error.  Accordingly,
    I set aside his decision. I have proceeded to re-make the decision.  In
    the light of what I say above, I dismiss the appeal  of  the  appellant
    against the decision of the respondent dated 6 September 2017.

Notice of Decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal decision  is  set  aside.  I  have  remade  the
    decision.  I dismiss the appeal of the appellant against  the  decision
    of the respondent dated 6 September 2017


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

