
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10582/2019
                                                               HU/10583/2019
                                                               HU/10584/2019
                                                               HU/10585/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th August 2020                  |On 19th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             MRS MISBAH [T] (1)
                               MR RAJA [I] (2)
                                MR [A R] (3)
                              MISS [A Q R] (4)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Rowena Moffat, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


      1. The appellants are all nationals of Pakistan. The  first  appellant
         is the  wife  of  the  second  appellant.   The  third  and  fourth
         appellants are their children, both of whom were born  in  the  UK.
         Their  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  against  the
         respondent's decision of 4th June 2019 to refuse their  application
         for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human  rights  grounds,  was
         dismissed by FtT Judge Keane for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 12th March 2020.


      2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by FtT Judge
         Osborne on  29th  April  2020.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to
         determine whether the decision of FtT Judge Keane is vitiated by  a
         material error of law, and if so,  to  remake  the  decision.   The
         hearing before me on 11th August 2020 took the  form  of  a  remote
         hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected, and I was
         satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
         with the overriding objective to  proceed  with  a  remote  hearing
         because of the present need to take precautions against the  spread
         of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was  satisfied  that  a  remote
         hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly  in
         a way that is proportionate to the  importance  of  the  case,  the
         complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs  and
         resources of the  parties.   At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I  was
         satisfied that both parties had been able to participate  fully  in
         the proceedings.


Background


      3. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 3 June  2011,  with  entry
         clearance as a Tier 4 (Student) valid until 15 March 2014.  She was
         accompanied by the second appellant  who  had  been  granted  entry
         clearance as a dependent partner in line with that granted  to  the
         first appellant.  On 13 November  2013,  the  first  appellant  was
         informed that her leave had been curtailed so that it expired on 12
         January 2014.


      4. The third appellant was born in the UK on 27 December 2013.  On  15
         January 2014, the first appellant  completed  a  speaking  test  at
         Premier Language Training Centre and obtained a  TOEIC  certificate
         from Educational Testing Service ("ETS").


      5. On 17 February 2014 the first appellant  submitted  an  application
         for leave to remain as a student.  In support of  that  application
         she  relied  upon  the  TOEIC  test  certificate  from  ETS.   That
         application was refused by the respondent on 25 June 2014 without a
         right of appeal and she was served with a notice to a person liable
         to removal from the UK.  I pause to record that neither Miss Moffat
         nor Mrs Aboni were able to confirm to me whether  the  respondent's
         decision of 25 June 2014  was  before  Judge  Keane.   Judge  Keane
         cannot be criticised for failing to refer to  a  relevant  document
         that was not in fact provided to him.  Mrs Aboni was able to access
         a copy of that decision and she emailed a copy of the  decision  to
         the Tribunal and Miss Moffat  during  the  course  of  the  hearing
         before me.  The decision states:

             "... For the purposes of your  application,  you  submitted  a
             TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service ("ETS")  to
             the Home Office. ETS has  a  record  of  your  speaking  test.
             Using voice verification software, ETS is able to detect  when
             a single person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS  undertook
             a check of your test and confirmed to the SSHD that there  was
             significant evidence to conclude  that  your  certificate  was
             fraudulently obtained.  Your scores from the test taken on  15
             January 2014 at Premier Language Training Centre have now been
             cancelled by ETS.


             On the basis of the information provided to her  by  ETS,  the
             SSHD is  satisfied  that  there  is  substantial  evidence  to
             conclude that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.   As
             deception has been used in relation to your application, it is
             refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.


             Your application is further refused on the basis that  you  do
             not meet the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
             (General)  Student  listed  under  paragraph  245ZX   of   the
             Immigration Rules.  Since  you  fall  for  refusal  under  the
             general grounds for refusal, you do not meet  requirement  (a)
             of paragraph 245ZX. Furthermore, requirement (c) of  paragraph
             245ZX stipulates that you must have a  minimum  of  30  points
             under paragraphs 113 to 120 of  Appendix  A,  which  list  the
             required attributes for Tier 4 students. You have  claimed  30
             points  for  your  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for   Studies
             ("CAS").   However,  paragraph  118  of  Appendix  A  requires
             certain criteria to be met for an award of points for  a  CAS.
             You do not meet these criteria because  the  English  language
             test that you
             provided in accordance with  paragraph  118(b)(ii)(4)  [degree
             level study, non-HEI] has  been  cancelled.   Accordingly,  no
             points have been awarded for your CAS  and  you  do  not  meet
             requirement (c) of paragraph 245ZX.


             Furthermore, requirement (c)  of  paragraph  245ZX  stipulates
             that you must have a minimum of 30 points under paragraphs 113
             to 120 of Appendix A, which list the required  attributes  for
             Tier  4  students.  You  have  claimed  30  points  for   your
             Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS").  However,  the
             decision of your Tier 4 sponsor that you are either  competent
             in English  language at a minimum of level B2  of  the  Common
             European Framework of Reference (CEFR)  for languages or  that
             you are a person  who  meets  an  alternative  requirement  is
             rendered ineffective by the deception you used to obtain  your
             TOEIC certificate. Accordingly, no points  have  been  awarded
             for your CAS and you do not meet requirement (c) of  paragraph
             245ZX.


             In  making  the   decision   to   refuse   your   application,
             consideration has been given to the following:  On 3 May  2011
             you were granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
             student until 15 March 2014 ..."

      6. The first appellant submitted a further  human  rights  application
         based on her private and family life in the UK,  on  8  July  2014.
         That application was again refused by the  respondent  for  reasons
         set out in a decision dated 20  February  2015.  The  human  rights
         application  made  by  the  appellant  was  certified  as   clearly
         unfounded under s94 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002.  That decision was not challenged.  I have not been  provided
         with a copy of that decision, and again, neither  Miss  Moffat  nor
         Mrs Aboni were able to  confirm  to  me  whether  the  respondent's
         decision of 20 February 2015 was before Judge Keane.


      7. Nevertheless, the first second and third appellants remained in the
         UK and on 5 December 2015 the fourth  appellant  was  born.   On  7
         January 2019 the third appellant applied to register as  a  British
         citizen as a minor who is otherwise stateless. His application  was
         refused by the respondent on 4 March 2019.


      8. On 9 October 2019 the respondent received representations  made  on
         behalf of the appellants seeking leave to remain in the UK  on  the
         basis of their family and private life. The respondent refused  the
         application for reasons set out in a decision dated 4 June 2019 and
         it was that decision that was the subject of the appeal before  FtT
         Judge Keane.

The appeal before me

      9. The appellant advances  two  grounds  of  appeal,  which,  as  Miss
         Moffatt submits are interlinked. First, Judge Keane found the first
         appellant raised an innocent explanation against the allegation  of
         deception, which satisfied the minimum level  of  plausibility  and
         the respondent had failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  which
         had then reverted to the respondent.  Having so found, Judge  Keane
         failed to consider the consequences that flow from those  findings,
         and in particular, what had been said by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
         Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, and in Khan v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 1684.  The respondent's compromise in  those  cases,  was  that
         where a finding was made by the FtT in an ETS case that  there  had
         been no deception, the appellant would be put back in the  position
         he/she was in prior to the decision being made, and would  be  able
         to make a fresh application. The appellants  claim  that  following
         the guidance given in those decisions, Judge Keane  ought  to  have
         allowed the appeal so as to enable the appellants to be put back in
         the position they would have been in, but  for  the  allegation  of
         deception.  Second, the appellants claim Judge Keane erred  in  his
         assessment of the public interest considerations set out  in  s117B
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Judge  Keane  found
         there is family life between the  four  appellants  but  failed  to
         implicitly or explicitly address s117B(2)(a), and (b), and  s117(3)
         and s117(4)(b). Furthermore the assessment of the public  interest,
         required Judge Keane to have regard  to  the  consequences  of  the
         historical refusals of leave to remain because of the allegation of
         deception, which in the end, Judge Keane had found,  was  not  made
         out by the respondent.


     10. Before me, Miss Moffatt refers to the judgement  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in Ahsan -v- SSHD in which Underhill LJ said, at [120]:

             "120.  The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if
             on a human rights appeal an appellant were found not  to  have
             cheated, which inevitably means that the section  10  decision
             had been wrong, the Secretary of State  would  be  obliged  to
             deal with him or her thereafter so far as possible as if  that
             error had not been made, i.e. as if their leave to remain  had
             not been invalidated. In a straightforward case, for  example,
             she could and should make a fresh grant  of  leave  to  remain
             equivalent to that which had been invalidated. She could also,
             and other things being equal  should,  exercise  any  relevant
             future discretion, if necessary "outside the  Rules",  on  the
             basis that the appellant had in fact had leave  to  remain  in
             the relevant period notwithstanding that formally  that  leave
             remained invalidated. (I accept that how to  exercise  such  a
             discretion would not always be easy, since it  is  not  always
             possible to reconstruct the world as it would have  been;  but
             that problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on
             judicial review.) If it were clear  that  in  those  ways  the
             successful appellant could be put in  substantially  the  same
             position as if the section 10 decision had been quashed, I can
             see no reason in principle why that should not be  taken  into
             account in  deciding  whether  a  human  rights  appeal  would
             constitute an appropriate alternative remedy.  To  pick  up  a
             particular point relied on by Mr Biggs, I do  not  regard  the
             fact that a person commits a criminal offence by remaining  in
             the UK from (apparently) the moment of service of a section 10
             notice as constituting a substantial detriment such that he is
             absolutely entitled to seek to have  the  notice  quashed,  at
             least in circumstances where there has  been  no  prosecution.
             (It is also irrelevant that the appellant  may  have  suffered
             collateral consequences from the section 10  decision  on  the
             basis that his or her leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
             losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot alas  cannot
             be remedied by either kind of proceeding.)

     11. Miss Moffat submits that having rejected  the  claim  made  by  the
         respondent that the first appellant  had  used  deception,  it  was
         necessary for the judge to ask himself what wrong was caused to the
         appellants by  the  unfounded  allegation,  and  that  should  have
         included  a  consideration  of  how  the  decisions  made  by   the
         respondent had affected her  studies  in  the  UK,  and  the  other
         consequences that had flowed from the unfounded allegation.  Having
         made findings, those  findings  should  have  formed  part  of  the
         overall assessment of whether  the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
         remain is disproportionate to the legitimate aim. It  was  relevant
         to the assessment of proportionality that  if  the  appellants  had
         remained in the UK unlawfully because of an erroneous allegation of
         deception, that should not be held  against  the  appellants.   She
         submits that winding  the  clock  back,  if  the  only  reason  for
         refusing the application for leave to remain made on 17th  February
         2014, as it appears to be, was the allegation  of  deception,  that
         was  material  to  the  assessment  of  the  Article  8  claim  and
         proportionality.


     12.  In  reply,  Mrs  Aboni  submits  Judge  Keane   directed   himself
         appropriately and gave adequate reasons for  dismissing  the  human
         rights appeal.  She submits that if the first appellant is put back
         in the position she would have been in, her  leave  to  remain  had
         been curtailed on 13 November 2013 so that it expired on 12 January
         2014.  The first appellant had no leave to remain when she made her
         application on 17 February 2014. The decision to curtail her  leave
         to remain was made because the college that she was  attending  had
         lost its sponsor licence.  She was provided with  a  period  of  60
         days within which she could make an in-time application for further
         leave to remain.  The decision to curtail her leave to  remain  was
         not challenged and the first  appellant  did  not  make  a  further
         application until 17 February 2014.  She accepts the allegation  of
         deception was first made by the respondent in the decision dated 25
         June 2014.  Mrs Aboni submits that even if the clock is wound back,
         the appellant  had  no  valid  leave  at  the  time  she  made  her
         application.  She submits Judge  Keane  adequately  considered  the
         Article 8 claim and it was open to the judge to dismiss the  appeal
         for the reasons set out in his decision.


Discussion


     13. Judge Keane refers to the relevant immigration history at paragraph
         [1] of his decision. The claim made by the appellants is summarised
         at paragraph [3] of the decision. He heard oral evidence  from  the
         first and second appellants.  His findings and conclusions are  set
         out at paragraphs [8] to [14] of the decision. He  noted,  at  [9],
         that the appellant's immigration history was not in dispute and  in
         so far as the human rights claim is concerned, he said:

             "... The appellants' circumstances were unremarkable  in  that
             they reflected the life and times  of  two  parents  with  two
             young children and the manifold facets of family  and  private
             life ... although there was no medical evidence there was  not
             a reason to doubt that Mr [I] had been  admitted  to  hospital
             suffering severe chest pains. ... Similarly, there was  not  a
             reason to doubt that Miss [AQR] suffers from eczema."

     14. Judge Keane considered the evidence  relied  upon  by  the  parties
         regarding the allegation made by  the  respondent  that  the  human
         rights application fell  for  refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability
         because the first  appellant  had  fraudulently  obtained  a  TOEIC
         certificate, and willingly participated in what  was  an  organised
         and serious attempt to defraud the respondent and others.   It  was
         conceded on behalf of the first  appellant  that  the  respondent's
         evidence had discharged the evidential  burden  of  establishing  a
         prima facie case that the TOEIC certificate had  been  procured  by
         dishonesty.  Judge  Keane  went  on  to  consider  the  explanation
         provided by the first appellant and at paragraph [10] he  concluded
         as follows:

             "... There was a measure of conviction in Mrs  [T]'s  evidence
             (on which Mr Raza drew) when making submissions that given her
             background and academic pedigree she would have no  reason  to
             embark upon fraudulent conduct.  I  find  Mrs  [T]  raised  an
             innocent explanation which  satisfied  the  minimum  level  of
             plausibility. The respondent did not adduce  further  evidence
             so as to establish to the balance of  probabilities  that  her
             prima facie innocent explanation fell to  be  rejected.  There
             was no further evidence on which the  respondent  relied.  The
             respondent accordingly failed to discharge the burden of proof
             which had reverted to him."

     15. Judge Keane therefore found that the respondent had not established
         that the application fell for refusal on  grounds  of  suitability.
         However, he was not satisfied that the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1) of the immigration rules are met by  the  appellants.  He
         noted that neither of the children has lived continuously in the UK
         for at least seven years and he was not satisfied that it would  be
         unreasonable to expect the children to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
         Equally he was not satisfied that the first and  second  appellants
         have established that there would be very significant obstacles  to
         their integration into Pakistan for the reasons given in  paragraph
         [11] of the decision.


     16. Having found that the requirements of the immigration rules are not
         met, Judge Keane went on to consider whether there  are  any  other
         exceptional or compelling circumstances that justify the  grant  of
         leave to the appellant outside the application of  the  immigration
         rules. He found that the best interests of the two children lie  in
         their remaining with their parents.  At paragraphs [13]  and  [14],
         Judge Keane concluded as follows:

             "13. The  appellants  failed  to  establish  that  there  were
             compelling and exceptional  circumstances  which  justify  the
             grant of leave outside the immigration  rules.   As  mentioned
             earlier in this decision, the circumstances  were  not  to  be
             distinguished from  other  families  who  have  experienced  a
             period of residence abroad before returning to  their  country
             and moreover,  a  country  which  by  dint  of  their  lengthy
             previous periods of residence  would  be  highly  familiar  to
             them.  The  appellants'  (in  reality  Mrs  [T]  and  Mr  [I])
             expectations objectively considered were in any case that they
             would in time return to Pakistan upon the  conclusion  of  Mrs
             [T]'s academic studies undertaken in the United Kingdom. Their
             leave was precarious and their private life established in the
             United Kingdom was correspondingly deserving  of  less  weight
             than if their right to  reside  had  been  permanent.  I  have
             already mentioned in this decision that each could play  their
             part in re-establishing themselves in their country of  origin
             and each could apply (once more)  those  commendable  personal
             attributes of resourcefulness and  persistence  which  enabled
             them to establish themselves in  the  United  Kingdom.  Public
             interest  considerations  by  reference  to  Section  117B  of
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  applied.   The
             maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
             interest. Again, little weight should be accorded to a private
             life established by  the  appellants  at  a  time  when  their
             immigration status was precarious. It was not suggested by  on
             behalf  of  the  appellants  that  any  medical  treatment  or
             prescriptions which Mr [I] (dependent upon a cogent  diagnosis
             of his state of health) or Miss [AQR] might require would  not
             be available in Pakistan.


             14.  If it be necessary for me to carry out  a  Razgar  style"
             assessment (R (Razgar) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department  [2004]  INLR  349  HL)  and   finding   that   the
             consequence  of  removal  would  have  consequences  for   the
             appellants which would potentially  engage  the  operation  of
             Article 8, I nevertheless find for the same  reasons  as  have
             led me to find that there were not compelling  or  exceptional
             circumstances which justify the grant  of  leave  outside  the
             immigration rules that their right to respect for private life
             would not be subject to a disproportionate interference...."

     17. It is clear that in reaching  his  decision  Judge  Keane  did  not
         consider the impact of his finding that the first appellant had not
         used deception, and the consequences that flow from  that  finding,
         when addressing the Article 8 claim made by the appellants  and  in
         his assessment of proportionality.  As Underhill LJ said in  Ahsan,
         where on a human rights appeal an appellant is found  not  to  have
         cheated, the Secretary of State would be obliged to deal  with  him
         or her thereafter, so far as possible, as if  that  error  had  not
         been made.


     18. I must therefore consider whether the error  was  material  to  the
         outcome of the appeal.   It  is  correct  to  say  that  the  first
         appellant's leave to remain was curtailed so  that  it  expired  on
         12th January 2014.  Importantly, the decision to curtail the  first
         appellant's leave to remain was not  in  any  way  based  upon  the
         conduct of the first appellant and neither was  any  allegation  of
         deception levelled against at that stage.  Mrs  Aboni  submits  the
         curtailment was as a result of  the  sponsor  licence  having  been
         revoked and in  accordance  with  the  respondent's  practice,  the
         appellant was given a short period of time to secure an alternative
         sponsor so  that  she  could  make  arrangements  to  continue  her
         education. The first appellant made  her  further  application  for
         leave to remain as a student on 17 February 2014 after her leave to
         remain had expired.


     19. The only reasons given by the respondent in the decision of 25 June
         2014 for refusing that application  is  that  the  first  appellant
         submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS  in  support   of   the
         application that had been cancelled by ETS.   The  application  was
         refused because the first appellant did not  meet  the  requirement
         set out at paragraph 245ZX(a) of the immigration rules.   That  is,
         the applicant must not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
         for refusal and must not be an illegal immigrant.  Furthermore, the
         first  appellant  was  not  awarded  the  relevant   points   under
         paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A, because  she  relied  upon  an
         English language test that had been cancelled, and  the  respondent
         claimed was ineffective, because of the deception  used  to  obtain
         the TOEIC certificate.


     20. The respondent's decision is silent as to whether  the  requirement
         set out in paragraph 245ZX(m) was met by the appellant.   That  is,
         the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of  immigration  laws
         except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28  days  or
         less will be disregarded.  The respondent had not conceded that the
         requirement was met.  On a proper application of  the  rules,  that
         requirement could  not  be  met  by  the  first  appellant.  It  is
         uncontroversial that the leave to remain that had  previously  been
         granted to the first appellant, ended on 12 January 2014.  She  did
         not submit her further application for leave to remain as a Tier  4
         (General) Student under paragraph 245ZX of  the  immigration  rules
         until 17th February 2014.  That was more than  28  days  after  her
         previous leave to remain had come to an end.


     21. The first appellant has been exonerated by  Judge  Keane  from  the
         allegation of deception that was previously made against her,  such
         that the respondent will be unable to rely upon that allegation  in
         any future applications that  are  made  by  the  first  appellant.
         However, in my judgment it remains the position that on any view of
         the facts and  a  proper  application  of  the  immigration  rules,
         winding the clock back and dealing with the first appellant so  far
         as possible as if the allegation of deception had not been made  in
         the respondent's decision of 25  June  2014,  the  first  appellant
         could not satisfy the requirements set out in paragraph  245ZA  for
         leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
         under the points based system.


     22. The Judge's failure to consider the decision of the Court of Appeal
         in Ahsan was not material to the outcome of the appeal.  It was  in
         all the circumstances, in my judgement,  open  to  Judge  Keane  to
         conclude that there are no compelling or exceptional  circumstances
         that justify the grant of leave outside the immigration  rules  and
         that the right to respect for private life would not be subject  to
         a disproportionate interference.


     23. Even winding the clock back, the appellants have remained in the UK
         unlawfully since 12 January 2014.   The  findings  by  Judge  Keane
         regarding the best interests of the children and that there are  no
         very significant obstacles  to  the  first  and  second  appellants
         reintegration into Pakistan are not challenged. The appellants  are
         therefore unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  immigration
         rules.  All that the appellants were left  with  insofar  as  their
         Article 8 claim is concerned, is what was described by Judge  Keane
         as being circumstances that "... were  unremarkable  in  that  they
         reflected the life and times of two parents with two young children
         and the manifold facets of family and private life.".  Judge  Keane
         carefully addressed the  Article  8  claim  having  regard  to  the
         relevant public interest set out in  s117B  of  the  2002  Act.   I
         accept that as a general principle, Miss Moffatt is right when  she
         submits that in any assessment of proportionality, the fact that an
         individual has  overstayed  in  the  UK  because  of  an  unfounded
         allegation of deception made by the respondent, may be relevant and
         ought not be held  against  the  applicant  in  the  assessment  of
         proportionality, but that does not assist the appellants here.  For
         example, it is easy to understand that where an individual has  had
         leave to remain curtailed on the grounds that they used  deception,
         that the Tribunal subsequently finds on appeal  not  to  have  been
         established, the presence of the applicant in the UK without  leave
         may be relevant to the assessment of proportionality. However,  the
         appellants here had already overstayed following the curtailment of
         leave to remain to 12 January 2014 and the application for  further
         leave  to  remain  was  not  made  until  17  February  2014.   The
         immigration rules already make  provision  for  the  respondent  to
         disregard a short period of overstaying to enable an  applicant  to
         get their  immigration  affairs  in  order,  but  here,  the  first
         appellant did not make her application either in-time, or  so  that
         the short period of overstaying would be disregarded.


     24. It follows that in my judgement, there was no material error in the
         decision of Judge Keane capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal and the appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


     25.  The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Keane shall stand.



    V.  Mandalia                                             Date      13th
    August 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
