








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10158/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                      Decision and Reasons Promulgated

On: 4 September 2018                            On: 25 September 2018

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          Mrs Cindy Mendes de Souza
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."  The  claimant  appeared  in  person.  I
      explained the nature of the proceedings to her at the outset.

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 2  April  2018,  allowing
      the claimant's appeal to the extent that the secretary  of  state  had
      failed to exercise her discretion, the effect of which was to  vitiate
      the entirety of the decision. The appeal was decided  on  the  papers.
      She found that the decision of  the  secretary  of  state  is  not  in
      accordance with the law and the applicable immigration rules. Further,
      the reasons given by the  secretary  of  state  did  not  justify  the
      refusal of entry clearance.

   3. She stated at paragraph 2 of the decision:  "Appeal allowed".

   4. In the grounds seeking permission, the secretary  of  state  contended
      that the determination was "hopelessly confused[1]"  [14].  The  Judge
      found that the appeal failed under the Immigration Rules.  At [17]  it
      was found that for reasons which are unclear, the appeal is allowed to
      the limited extent that the appellant is to send original documents to
      the Home Office in order for proper checks to be undertaken.  Then  at
      [20], the Judge appears to allow the appeal generally.

   5. It is asserted that the appeal however was  on  human  rights  grounds
      only. The Judge engaged in no consideration of that issue.

   6. On  9  July  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. She noted that the  right  of
      appeal in  this  case  was  on  human  rights  grounds  only  and  the
      claimant's ability to meet the rules was clearly relevant to the issue
      of proportionality under Article 8. Given that there is no longer  any
      power to allow an appeal "to a limited extent" as the  Judge  purports
      to have done, the Judge failed properly to engage with the  rights  of
      appeal that the claimant has in respect of Article 8.

   7. She found that there are a number of arguable errors of law.

   8. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I explained to the  claimant
      the secretary of state's ground of appeal. I had earlier provided  her
      with a bundle of the core documents, including the  decision  and  the
      permission to grant the appeal. She confirmed that she  had  read  the
      documents.

   9. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the secretary of state simply relied  on  the
      grounds of  appeal.  He  contended  that  there  had  been  no  proper
      engagement with the appeal, which was limited to human rights  grounds
      only.

  10. The claimant stated that she did not wish to say anything.

      Assessment

  11. I find that the appeal in this case was on human rights grounds  only.
      Accordingly, the ability  of  the  claimant  to  meet  the  Rules  was
      relevant to the issue of proportionality under Article  8,  which  was
      not considered.

  12. As noted, there is no longer any power to allow an appeal to a limited
      extent as the Judge has purported to do in  this  case.  She  did  not
      properly engage with the right of appeal which the  claimant  in  fact
      has under Article 8.

  13. In the circumstances, I find that the decision of the  Judge  involved
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  14. The decision is accordingly set aside. Mr Whitwell submitted that this
      is a proper case for the decision to  be  re-made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  15. I am satisfied that the  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  that  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be re-made is fairly extensive.
      There will be a complete re-hearing with no findings preserved.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made
      by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer           Signed Dated: 20 September
2018
-----------------------
[1]   That is a wholly unnecessary and gratuitously offensive  assertion  in
the circumstances and adds nothing to  the  strength  or  otherwise  of  the
ground.


