
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/10911/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LUQMAN ONIKOSI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. R Chapman, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is referred to as the Secretary of State in this decision
    and the respondent as the claimant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian ('the Judge') sent to  the  parties
    on 4 September 2019 by which the  claimant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    (article 3 and 8) grounds was allowed.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup granted the Secretary of  State  permission
    to appeal on all grounds by a decision dated 7 February 2020.

Hearing

 4. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

 5. The  parties  agreed  that  all  relevant  documents  were  before  the
    Tribunal.  The  video  and  audio  link  were  connected  between   the
    representatives  and  the  Tribunal  throughout  the  hearing.  At  the
    conclusion of the hearing both parties confirmed that the  hearing  had
    been completed fairly.

 6. The claimant attended remotely and was supported by several friends who
    also  attended  the  hearing  remotely.  All  were  reminded  that  the
    recording, videoing or taking  of  still  pictures  was  not  permitted
    without the permission of the Tribunal, which was not granted,  and  to
    undertake such act was a criminal offence.

Anonymity

 7. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and no request for  such
    direction was made before me.

Background

 8. The claimant is a national of Nigeria and is aged 40.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2007 with entry clearance and commenced studying  for
    a university degree. In 2009 he began to feel unwell and was  diagnosed
    with hepatitis B. Upon informing his family as  to  his  condition  two
    brothers underwent tests and were subsequently diagnosed with the  same
    illness. Both brothers died of chronic liver disease and  complications
    arising from hepatitis B in 2011 and 2012.

 9. Consequent to the expiry of his leave to remain as a  student  in  2011
    the claimant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Highly  Skilled)
    Migrant, which was refused by the Secretary of State. The claimant then
    applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules ('the Rules')
    on compassionate grounds and this too was refused. In 2013  he  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis  of  private  life  rights  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in December 2013. Subsequent  further
    representations were refused by the Secretary of State  in  April  2015
    and certified as clearly unfounded.

10. The claimant made further representations on human rights grounds which
    were finally accepted by the Secretary of State to constitute  a  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353 of the Rules by decision dated 1 May 2018 and
    it is from this decision that the claimant enjoys a right of appeal.

Hearing before the FtT

11. The appeal came before the Judge at Taylor House on 23 August 2019. The
    claimant attended and gave evidence. The Secretary of  State  had  been
    provided  with  21  witness  statements  supporting  the  claimant  and
    requested that five of the witnesses attend and be cross-examined.  All
    five witnesses attended the hearing before  the  Judge  and  gave  oral
    evidence. Over twenty friends attended the hearing to  provide  support
    to the claimant. The claimant further relied upon medical evidence from
    various medical practitioners, including  two  reports  from  Professor
    Katona, a consultant psychiatrist, and a report from a country  expert,
    Ms. Adaobi Nkeokelonye, dated 9 June 2018.

12. By means of a detailed decision running to 128 paragraphs over 28 pages
    the Judge allowed the appeal on article 3 grounds and also on article 8
    grounds both within and outside the Rules.

13. At paras. 107-108 the Judge concluded that the  claimant  would  suffer
    mental  health  stigma  upon  his  return  consequent  to  his  bipolar
    diagnosis that had led to  several  hospital  admissions.  Further,  he
    found that there would be an absence of appropriate medical support  in
    relation to hepatitis B treatment  for  the  claimant  upon  return  to
    Nigeria which would lead to him succumbing to chronic liver disease  or
    to take his own life. The Judge concluded as to article 3:

         108. ... Thus, there is in my view having regard  to  the  case  of
             Paposhvili at paragraph 183, a real risk, on  account  of  the
             absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country  or
             lack of access to  such  treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his state of health
             resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant  reduction
             in life-expectancy.'

14. The Judge concluded at para. 119 that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to the claimant's integration in Nigeria  in  line  with  his
    conclusions  as  to  article  3,  and  so  his  removal  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his protected article 8 private life
    rights: paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

15. At para. 128 the Judge concluded that exceptional  circumstances  arose
    and so the claimant succeeded on  article  8  grounds  outside  of  the
    Rules.

Grounds of appeal

16. The essence of the Secretary of State's grounds are complaints that the
    Judge materially misdirected  himself  in  considering  the  article  3
    appeal  before  him  and  further  made  such  muddled  findings   when
    considering article 8 as to constitute a material error of law.

17. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Pickup succinctly  identified  the
    grounds advanced:

         '1. Whilst the medical evidence detailed previous suicidal ideation
             and attempts, the latest report, which was already three years
             out of date, stated that  the  appellant's  mental  state  was
             stable. He continues to suffer from bipolar disorder  and  has
             recurrent thoughts of death, and suicide. Dr Katona's  opinion
             in 2016 was that on return the risk of suicide would  increase
             substantially. However, there was no up-to-date evidence  that
             returning the appellant to Nigeria  pose  such  a  significant
             risk of suicide as to meet the high threshold required. It  is
             also arguable that by applying Paposhvili  the  judge  made  a
             material misdirection. In the circumstances,  it  is  arguable
             that the article 3 finding was flawed.


         2.   It is also arguable that the article 8 assessment was  flawed,
             failing to give any  consideration  of  section  117B  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  or  the  public
             interest. Neither is it made clear how  the  medical  evidence
             impinged on article 8 rights.'

Decision on error of law

18. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Walker confirmed that the Secretary of
    State continued to rely upon the grounds of appeal. He  further  relied
    upon a short  skeleton  argument  authored  by  Mr.  T  Melvin,  Senior
    Presenting Officer, dated 27 May 2020.

19. Ms.  Chapman  confirmed  her  continuing  reliance  upon  her  rule  24
    response, dated 9 March  2020.  She  further  relied  upon  a  skeleton
    argument, dated 2 September 2020, which Mr. Walker confirmed  had  been
    received by the Secretary of State.

Article 3

20. With his usual candour, Mr Walker accepted that the primary  thrust  of
    the Secretary of State's challenge to the Judge's  article  3  decision
    was that he had applied the approach identified by the Grand Chamber in
    Paposhvili v Belgium (41738/10) [2017] Imm. A.R. 867 rather  than  that
    established by the House of Lords in N v. Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] UKHL 31; [2005] 2 A.C.  296.  He  conceded  that
    such argument fell away consequent to the recent Supreme Court judgment
    in AM (Zimbabwe) v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
    UKSC 17; [2020] 2 W.L.R. 1152 where the decision in N was departed from
    and the approach in Paposhvili confirmed, namely that cases raising  an
    issue under article 3 may include 'situations involving the removal  of
    a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds have been shown for
    believing that he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would
    face a real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
    the receiving country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being
    exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible  decline  in  his  or  her
    state of health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
    reduction in life expectancy'. This is the very approach adopted by the
    Judge in this matter who, as now confirmed by the Supreme Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe), properly recognised that in cases of resistance  to  return
    by reference to ill health focus  is  to  be  upon  the  existence  and
    accessibility of appropriate treatment in  the  receiving  state.  This
    element of the respondent's challenge now lacks merit post the  Supreme
    Court judgment.

21. Mr. Walker further accepted, and again entirely appropriately, that the
    author of the grounds erred in asserting as a  fact  that  the  medical
    evidence before the Judge was of such age that the most  recent  report
    was three years old. Mr. Walker  accepted  that  the  Judge  considered
    medical evidence that spanned several years up to  and  including  2018
    and such evidence was consistent as to the claimant's health  concerns,
    including risk of suicide. This element  of  the  challenge  enjoys  no
    merits.

22. Two paragraphs of the grounds address  the  failure  of  the  Judge  to
    adequately bear in mind the fact that the claimant was able to function
    in Nigeria before he relocated to this country.  This  ground  was  not
    withdrawn by Mr. Walker, but it was not positively advanced. Mr. Walker
    was right to do  so.  It  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  significant
    deterioration in the claimant's physical health, and  attendant  impact
    upon his mental health, occurred in  the  United  Kingdom  and  not  in
    Nigeria. This challenge is misconceived and enjoys no merits.

23. The final challenge to the article 3 decision is an assertion that  the
    Judge had made findings that medication for  the  appellant's  'various
    ailments' exist in Nigeria but are expensive, and  so  in  finding  the
    high threshold to have been met the Judge failed  to  engage  with  the
    Strasbourg judgment in Bensaid v. United Kingdom (44599/98)  (2001)  33
    E.H.R.R. 10 which addressed situations where medication was  available,
    but expensive or requiring some distance to be travelled to secure. The
    Tribunal is not presently  required  to  consider  the  application  of
    Bensaid post AM (Zimbabwe) because the difficulty for the Secretary  of
    State in relying upon the judgment in Bensaid in this  matter  is  that
    the Judge expressly found at para. 100 that there was an absence in the
    entirety of Nigeria of scanning  equipment  that  is  required  by  the
    appellant in relation to his treatment, such absence being confirmed by
    Ms. Nkeokelonye. As acknowledged by Mr. Walker, upon examination of the
    findings made by the Judge, which are not challenged, the Secretary  of
    State had difficulties in relying upon this element of her challenge to
    the article 3 decision. Again, Mr. Walker was  correct  to  acknowledge
    that this challenge failed to engage with the actual findings  of  fact
    made. Rather, it was a challenge based  upon  a  factual  scenario  the
    Secretary of State wished the Judge to  have  found,  rather  than  the
    facts that were actually found and which  she  has  not  challenged  on
    rationality grounds. This element of the article 3 challenge lacks  any
    merits.

24. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's challenge to the Judge's
    decision on the article 3 appeal is dismissed.

Article 8

25. The Secretary of State's challenge is, in parts, confused. There  is  a
    challenge to certain 'assumptions' made by the Judge at para. 96 of his
    decision, though upon consideration of this paragraph  I  am  satisfied
    that the Judge  is  simply  recording  Ms.  Nkeokelonye's  evidence  as
    detailed within her  expert  report.  Further,  much  of  the  argument
    advanced is simply a disagreement with the Judge as to the  conclusions
    drawn from the evidence, without more.

26. The difficulty for the Secretary of State in  challenging  the  Judge's
    conclusion  as  to  removal  disproportionately  interfering  with  the
    claimant's article 8 rights as considered under the Rules is that it is
    founded upon a flawed assertion that the appellant's  medical  concerns
    could not properly impact upon his private life.  Paragraph  276(1)(vi)
    of the Rules confirms that an applicant will meet the requirements  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life where  'there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to  the  applicant's  integration  into  the
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the  UK'  and
    the real risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate  medical
    treatment in the receiving country  or  the  lack  of  access  to  such
    treatment, of being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in his state of health resulting in intense suffering or  to  a
    significant reduction in life expectancy  can  clearly  establish  very
    significant  obstacles  to  integration  upon  return  to  Nigeria,  as
    expressly found by the Judge. Given that the Judge lawfully allowed the
    appeal on article 3 grounds, it is axiomatic that  the  claimant  would
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

27. As accepted by Ms. Chapman during her submissions, the Judge adopted an
    unfortunate approach in setting  out  his  positive  conclusion  as  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at para. 119 and then proceeding to explain his
    reasons over subsequent paragraphs. However. I am satisfied  that  such
    error is not material, as it is abundantly clear at para. 123 that  his
    conclusions to there being very significant obstacles as to integration
    were formed upon consideration of his lawful article 3 assessment.

28. As for the consideration of article 8 outside of  the  Rules,  I  agree
    with Mr. Walker that it is a confused assessment as to  exceptionality.
    The Judge has not adopted a structured approach as to the consideration
    of exceptionality, as recommended by Sir Ernest Ryder in TZ  (Pakistan)
    v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1109;
    [2018] Imm. A.R. 1301. The consideration of article 8 outside the Rules
    is a proportionality evaluation involving a balance of public  interest
    factors in which some factors are heavily weighted,  the  most  obvious
    being the public policy in immigration control. Such balancing is  non-
    existent at paras 125 to 128 of the Judge's decision. Rather, there  is
    a listing of positive aspects in favour of the claimant to support  the
    conclusion as to exceptionality. Such approach  is  erroneous  in  law.
    However, in the circumstances I am satisfied that  such  error  is  not
    material because the  article  3  conclusion,  which  concerns  a  non-
    derogable right, can only establish that it would not be in the  public
    interest for the claimant to be returned to Nigeria as to do  so  would
    breach his protected article 8 rights.

29. The Secretary of State's challenge to the Judge's decision  as  to  the
    article 8 appeal is therefore dismissed.


Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated  4  September  2019,  is
    upheld and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 7 September 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal has paid no fee  and  so  there
is no fee award.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 7 September 2020

