
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10366/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                             |On 6 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 Foysol [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, Peter G Farrell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hetherington promulgated on 22 March 2017.  In that
    decision the judge dismissed the appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 30 March 2016 to refuse him leave to remain pursuant
    to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
    refuse his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is in a genuine subsisting relationship
    with his partner, Miss [T] and has  a  genuine,  parental  relationship
    with Miss [T]'s daughter born in January 2015 and that  they  all  live
    together as a family.

 3. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant  was  in  a
    genuine subsisting relationship with Miss  [T]  given  the  absence  of
    evidence of cohabitation  for  a  period  of  two  years  nor  was  she
    satisfied that there was  a  genuine  parental  relationship  with  the
    child.   She  was  also  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. After reviewing the evidence which included the oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant and Miss [T], as well as letters from Miss [T]'s  father  and
    other supporters, concluded that [15] he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant enjoys family life within the meaning of Article 8 with  Miss
    [T] and her child as he was not satisfied  that  the  relationship  was
    akin to a marriage.  He did, however, accept that Miss T  supports  the
    appellant financially and that  he  provides  some  childcare  for  the
    child.

 5. The judge accepted that if the appellant were to return  to  Bangladesh
    there would be a break in continuity of care of the child and it  would
    be better for the appellant and Miss [T] if that did  not  happen  [17]
    and also [13] that it was unreasonable to expect the child to  go  with
    the appellant and Miss T to Bangladesh [13].

 6. Applying Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 the judge concluded [noting the appellant  had  had  a  precarious
    immigration status for many years], that the decision was proportionate
    [31] because the personal circumstances of the appellant, Miss [T]  and
    the child do not identify a compelling or other argument that outweighs
    the public interest.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in failing to give proper reasons  for  rejecting  the  documentary
         evidence in support of the claim from  people  who  had  known  the
         appellant to be in a relationship for two or two and half years and
         that they had lived together; and, that this is  inconsistent  with
         the exceptions that Miss [T] supports the appellant financially and
         provides childcare for the child, simply stating that the witnesses
         had failed to attend being an insufficient basis for rejecting  the
         evidence;

     ii) in failing to set out whether  he  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and the sponsor that they had been cohabiting.

 8. Permission was  granted  by  Upper-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  on  20
    November 2017.  Judge Reeds noted that there appeared to be no  reasons
    given as to why the judge concluded that there was no genuine  parental
    relationship with the child, the fact that she was not  the  biological
    child not being determinative.

 9. In a response pursuant to Rule 24 the respondent averred that the judge
    was entitled to reach  the  conclusions  made  and  that  even  if  the
    appellant had demonstrated a parental relationship this was simply  one
    factor  in  the  proportionality  assessment  which  could  have   been
    outweighed by the adverse features in the appellant's case.

10. As Mr Bradley submitted, the refusal letter does turn on a  core  issue
    which is the lack of evidence of  cohabitation.   The  judge  does  not
    reach any finding on that, finding only that  there  is  no  Article  8
    family life.  He does not, however, reach  any  conclusions  about  the
    veracity of  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  Miss  [T],  merely
    rejecting  the  case  on  the  lack  of  documentary  evidence  without
    factoring into  the  account  the  fact  that  there  would  be  little
    documentary evidence in respect of the appellant, given  his  irregular
    status in the United Kingdom.  Whilst it may  have  been  open  to  the
    judge to describe the individual pieces of evidence as  bearing  little
    weight, what the judge has not done is  looked  at  them  as  a  whole.
    Given the number of individuals who  have  provided  details  of  their
    identities and have provided  letters  in  support  confirming  certain
    aspects of the case it was incumbent on the judge to explain why  other
    than the fact that they did not travel 200 miles to the court to attend
    to give evidence, he attached little weight thereto.

11. Further, while the judge appeared to have attached little weight to the
    evidence in respect  of  confirmation  of  cohabitation,  he  does  not
    explain why he accepted that Miss [T] supports the appellant  and  that
    the appellant provides childcare.  Further, if the couple were not in a
    relationship it is not at all clear why this arrangement  would  exist,
    despite Miss Pettersen's submissions to the  contrary,  I  do  consider
    that the judge's approach to the evidence is inconsistent and whilst it
    would have been open to the judge to accept some parts of the evidence,
    yet reject others, reasons  for  so  doing  would  need  to  have  been
    provided and there are none.

12. With regard to the child, the judge appears not to have considered that
    there could be a parental relationship absent the blood tie.   That  is
    apparent from what he says at [18] and also at  [29].   It  is  not  in
    dispute that the appellant is not the biological father of  Miss  [T]'s
    child but that is not determinative - see R (on the application of RK)
    v SSHD (s117B(6): "parental relationship") IJR [2016]  UKUT  31  (IAC).
    It is not possible to infer from the judge's reasoning whether  or  not
    he considered that the biological relationship was a  necessary  factor
    but it appears to be the case  that  he  has  done  so.   Again,  there
    appears to be no reasoned basis for the judge not accepting a  parental
    relationship or the closeness of the relationship between the appellant
    and the child.  This question is  also  in  a  sense  coloured  by  the
    finding about the nature of the relationship between the appellant  and
    Miss [T].

13. I have, however, considered whether  the  errors  are  such  that  they
    affect the outcome of the appeal.  As Miss  Pettersen  submitted  there
    are a significant number of factors in the public  interest  militating
    against the appeal being allowed.  Many of those are addressed  by  the
    judge in the decision at [22] to [30].  The difficulty with  that  line
    of argument is the ambiguity in the findings about the  child  and  the
    reasonableness of the child being expected to go to Bangladesh  or  for
    that  matter  be  separated  from  the  appellant.   Whilst  there  are
    considerations [17] as to the best interests of the  child,  these  are
    predicated on the assumption that there is not a parental relationship.



14. Taking all of these factors into account I am satisfied that the errors
    made by the judge are material and  will  require  a  remaking  of  the
    decision in its entirety.  I therefore remit the decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

