
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/10767/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 January 2019                        |On 8 March 2019                    |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     MH
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Read
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in 1983 and is a male citizen of Afghanistan. He
    entered the United Kingdom in May 2011. By a decision dated 6 September
    2017, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  application  to
    remain on the basis of his  family  and  private  life.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    6 March 2018, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turned on the judge's consideration of the circumstances  of
    the fourth child of the appellant, A. The appellant has been married to
    a British citizen since May 2016 and A was born in August 2017. A is  a
    British citizen. The judge heard evidence from the appellant's wife  to
    the effect that the appellant is a 'good father' to  A  and  that  they
    were 'fond of each other.'

 3. At [43] et seq, the judge considered the operation of  section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act (as amended):

    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child, and

    (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The judge found that it would not be reasonable to expect  A  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. However, the judge found that the  appellant  would
    be able to have contact with his partner and  A  by  'modern  means  of
    communication and visits'. The judge concluded that 'the fact that  the
    child is only six months  old  or  thereabouts,  I  am  not  satisfied,
    despite the evidence of the parties, that the appellant has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with her.' At the initial  hearing
    at Bradford, Mr Bates, who appeared to the Secretary of State, told  me
    that he did not  seek  to  support  that  finding  of  the  judge.  The
    Secretary of State  accepts  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with A.

 5. In the light of Mr Bates is acknowledgement, the decision of the  judge
    cannot stand. I set it aside. I have proceeded to remake the decision.

 6. The Upper Tribunal now has the benefit of the decision of the President
    in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  72
    (IAC). Section 117B(6) operates as a free-standing provision.  Even  in
    circumstances, such as in the present case, where in reality A will not
    leave the United Kingdom to travel to Afghanistan whilst the  appellant
    makes an application for a spouse visa, it is necessary to  hypothesise
    that the child would leave the United Kingdom and whether it  would  be
    reasonable for her to do so. Mr Bates did not submit that it  would  be
    reasonable. It follows, therefore, that the public  interest  does  not
    require the appellant's removal. As the tribunal observed in JG AT [39-
    41]:

    39.       We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can be
    affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases where -  on  his
    interpretation - the subsection does not have  purchase  (i.e.  because
    the child would not in practice leave the United Kingdom), there  would
    nevertheless  need  to  be  a  full-blown  proportionality  assessment,
    compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of the 2002  Act,  with
    the result that a person with parental  responsibility  who  could  not
    invoke section 117B(6) may, nevertheless, succeed  in  a  human  rights
    appeal.




    40.          Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of
    the immigration history of the person  subject  to  removal;  so  there
    could well be a very  real  difference  between  the  outcome  of  that
    exercise, and one conducted under section 117B(6). But, the real  point
    is that this submission does not begin to affect the plain  meaning  of
    subsection (6).  If,  as  we  have  found,  Parliament  has  decreed  a
    particular outcome by enacting section 117B(6), then that is the end of
    the matter.




    41.          We accept  that  this  interpretation  may  result  in  an
    underserving individual or family  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, the fact that Parliament has mandated such an  outcome  merely
    means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be  more  generous
    than is strictly required by the Human Rights  Act  1998.   It  can  be
    regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A  of  imposing
    greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by  courts  and
    tribunals.  The fact that section 117B(6) has such an aim was expressly
    recognised by Elias LJ at paragraph 44 of MA (Pakistan) .



Notice of Decision

 7. Pursuant to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as  amended),  the  public
    interest does not require  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 6 September 2017 is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR)




Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
