
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2017                           |On 06 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                          Raul Andres Luna Zambrano
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand of MAAS
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley promulgated on 29 December 2016.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Colombia born on 15  November  1976.   He
    was issued with a student visitor entry clearance on 1 September  2014,
    pursuant to which he entered the UK on 10 September 2014.  On  26  July
    2015 he made a human rights  application  for  leave  to  remain.   The
    application was refused on 21 October 2015 for reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL')  of  that  date.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the IAC against the decision.


3.   Prior to his entry to the United Kingdom the Appellant had developed  a
    relationship with Ms  Yude  Portilla  Mideros,  a  British  citizen  of
    Colombian origin, born on 25 April 1976.  Although Ms Mideros had  been
    living in the UK for some years the relationship developed, I am  told,
    during visits to Colombia; it commenced in July 2011.


4.   Also prior to the Appellant's  entry  to  the  UK,  Ms  Mideros  became
    pregnant with the Appellant's child. The child was delivered in the  UK
    on 27 October 2014 - just under two months after  the  Appellant's  own
    entry to the UK.  The child is a British citizen presently  approaching
    her third birthday.  Ms Mideros  has  another  child  from  a  previous
    relationship, a son born on 8  January  2010  who  is  also  a  British
    citizen.  I was told that there  is  no  contact  between  Ms  Mideros'
    firstborn child and his natural father.


5.   The Appellant's  application  was  made  by  way  of  application  form
    FLR(FP), signed by the Appellant on 24 July 2015 and submitted  with  a
    covering letter from his advisers.  The  application  sought  leave  to
    remain through the so-called '10 year partner route': in  this  context
    it may be noted that the financial circumstances  of  the  family  were
    indicated to be that there was no income from employment but  that  the
    family  was  reliant  upon  benefits  -  maternity  allowance,  housing
    benefit, child benefit, council tax benefit, and child tax credit  were
    all listed by way of sources of income, with no other source of  income
    being declared (section 5 of the application form).


6.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  primarily  on  the
    basis that she was not satisfied that the claimed marital  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting.


7.   Further and in any event, the Respondent was not satisfied  in  respect
    of the eligibility requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 of Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules because the Appellant was present in the UK as
    a visitor.


8.   In this latter context, whilst I note that according  to  the  Rules  a
    period of six months' leave is ordinarily to be granted  to  a  student
    visitor,  the  Respondent's  decision-maker  herein  appears  to   have
    proceeded  on  the  premise  that  at  the  date  of  the   Appellant's
    application he still had valid leave as a student visitor conferred  by
    way of the entry clearance document that was valid until 1 August 2015.
    Indeed before me it was common ground that the Appellant had leave as a
    student visitor at the date of his human rights application on 26  July
    2015.  In those circumstances paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1  was  appropriately
    invoked by the Respondent's decision-maker - and, as I have  noted,  no
    issue has been taken by the Appellant in this regard before the  First-
    tier Tribunal or before me.


9.   The Respondent also gave consideration to paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM, but decided that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  its  requirements
    whether by reference to his relationship with Ms Mideros or in  respect
    of his relationship with either child.


10.  The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  for
    reasons set out in the decision of Judge Greasley.


11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 25 July 2017.


12.  It seems to me that there is a fundamental error on  the  face  of  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley with regard to the ambit
    of the appeal.  The Respondent's decision  gave  rise  to  a  right  of
    appeal limited - by  reason  of  the  amendments  to  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 introduced by the Immigration Act  2014
    - to the ground that the decision was unlawful under section 6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998. The Judge appears not to  have  recognised  this
    and proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  only  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  This may be seen in the first instance at paragraph
    23 where the Judge states in terms that having considered the oral  and
    documentary evidence "I find that the appeal must be refused under  the
    UK Immigration Rules".  At paragraph 30 the Judge goes on to state that
    he does not consider it necessary  or  appropriate  to  embark  upon  a
    consideration of the  family  circumstances  in  relation  to  "classic
    Razgar principles".  The decision is concluded under the head Notice of
    Decision with the words "I dismiss the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules".


13.  It seems to me clear that the  Judge  fundamentally  misunderstood  his
    jurisdiction and to that extent has failed to engage with the appeal on
    a proper basis. Such circumstances in themselves, it seems to me, would
    be enough to justify setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


14.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Judge  reached  an  adverse  conclusion  in
    respect of the Appellant's case under the  Immigration  Rules,  he  did
    make some favourable findings of fact that essentially  overturned  the
    approach of the Respondent in the RFRL.   At  paragraph  23  the  Judge
    found that the Appellant and Ms Mideros are in a genuine and subsisting
    marital relationship, and he also accepted that there was  unchallenged
    DNA evidence to establish that the Appellant was the biological  father
    of the daughter born to his partner on 27 October 2014.  The Judge also
    accepted that the Appellant was a stepfather to his partner's son  from
    a previous relationship. At paragraph 24 the Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was participating in the upbringing and development  of  both
    children, and that all four individuals lived as a family unit  in  the
    UK.  At paragraph 26 the Judge accepted that both the Appellant and his
    wife had joint  shared  parental  responsibility  in  relation  to  the
    children.


15.  However, the Judge also made an adverse assessment in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history.  At paragraph 25 of the  decision  the
    Judge stated that "the Appellant has an adverse immigration history  in
    the United Kingdom" and found  "that  he  has  demonstrated  a  blatant
    disregard and  a  complete  cavalier  attitude  to  proper  immigration
    control  in  the  United  Kingdom".   The  Judge's  reasons  for   this
    conclusion appeared to be those stated in the following  sentence:  "He
    entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa as a  student  in  September
    2014 and simply overstayed."


16.  As I  have  indicated  above,  it  has  seemingly  been  common  ground
    throughout these proceedings that the Appellant was not  an  overstayer
    at the time that he made his  application.   Indeed,  had  he  been  an
    overstayer it would not have been open to  the  Respondent's  decision-
    maker to invoke paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 of Appendix FM.  The Judge appears
    to have disregarded the invocation of  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1,  and  not
    otherwise to have engaged in the apparently agreed circumstance of  the
    Appellant having had valid leave at the time of his application.


17.  That said, it may nonetheless be the case that there is  a  significant
    issue to be explored in respect of the Appellant's immigration  history
    by reference to his intentions when securing entry clearance and at the
    time of entry.  It is to be recalled that he entered the United Kingdom
    just some two months prior to the birth of  his  daughter.  It  is  not
    clear - and hitherto does not appear to have been  the  matter  of  any
    consideration or exploration - exactly what his intentions were at this
    time.  In  circumstances  where  his  partner  was  seemingly  entirely
    dependent upon benefits and there was no obvious prospect of satisfying
    the stringent financial requirements of the Immigration Rules,  it  may
    not be a difficult inference to draw that there must at the very  least
    be some concern and doubt as to  the  bona  fides  of  the  Appellant's
    intentions in entering the UK as a  student,  and  whether  or  not  he
    intended simply to use that as a device to enter and thereafter make an
    application to remain  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  on  switching
    contained in paragraph E-LTRP.2.1.  As I say, this matter has not  been
    explored and I express no decided view on it  one  way  or  the  other:
    suffice to say it does seem to me a matter that may in due course  need
    some further and close scrutiny.


18.  Be that as it may, on the face of  it  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was, in my judgment, plainly in error in characterising  the  Appellant
    as an overstayer.


19.  It is equally clear that the Judge placed quite  considerable  reliance
    upon this in his overall consideration of the  Appellant's  case.   The
    language of paragraph 25 is  robust  in  its  characterisation  of  the
    Appellant as somebody with "a blatant disregard and a complete cavalier
    attitude".  Accordingly I find a material error of law in  this  regard
    too.


20.  In my judgment there  is  further  error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's  approach  to  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles  under
    paragraph EX.1.


21.   So  far  as  is  material  paragraph  EX.1  as  it  relates   to   the
    circumstances of a partner is in the following  terms  at  subparagraph
    (b):

         "the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen... and there  are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the UK."


    The focus of that paragraph is  very  clearly  an  exploration  of  the
    ability or otherwise of an applicant to establish family life with  his
    partner in another country.


22.  However, the Judge's  approach  -  at  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  the
    Decision - is not to consider the ability or otherwise of  establishing
    family life together in Colombia or some third country, but  rather  to
    consider the extent of disruption to family life if the Appellant  were
    to pursue an application  for  entry  clearance  from  abroad.   In  my
    judgment that displays a misunderstanding of the meaning  of  paragraph
    EX.1.


23.  For completeness, I note that complaint is also  made  that  the  Judge
    has not given full or close consideration  to  the  best  interests  of
    either child with reference to the case of ZH (Tanzania), and  moreover
    that the Judge has not given any close or proper consideration  to  the
    case of Chikwamba.  However, in the circumstances where I have  already
    concluded that there are fundamental errors of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal I do not propose to  explore  those  particular
    challenges.


24.  In my judgment the errors are such that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge must be set aside; the decision in the  appeal  requires
    to be remade.  I take the view that this decision  should  properly  be
    remade before the First-tier Tribunal  because  there  are  significant
    factual aspects of this case that have not  been  adequately  explored.
    Be that as it may, it is also my judgment that the findings to which  I
    have referred from paragraphs 23, 24 and 26 of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in respect of the genuineness  of  the  marital  relationship  and  the
    family unit are all matters that should be preserved.


25.  However, on remaking the decision the  parties  and  the  Tribunal  may
    wish to give some further consideration to my observations  in  respect
    of the circumstances surrounding the Appellant's entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom,  and  also  to  give  some  further   consideration   to   the
    circumstances  of  the  two  children  -  in  particular  perhaps   the
    circumstances of the older child, who has exceeded  his  7th  birthday,
    having, as I understand it, lived his entire life in the UK.   However,
    even in this regard it may be necessary to  explore  something  of  the
    frequency of the Appellant's partner's visits to Colombia in the period
    between July 2011 and September 2014 which do not appear to  have  been
    the subject of any consideration hitherto.


26.  All  of  these  matters  require  careful  consideration  and  possibly
    further findings of fact - and all of them must  be  considered  within
    the framework of Article 8 rather than being confined, as per the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, to the framework of the Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  is
set aside.


28.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Greasley. However,  the
    favourable findings at paragraphs 23, 24, and 26  of  the  decision  of
    Judge Greasley (referred to above) are to be preserved.


29.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

