
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/10391/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 January 2018                        |   On 05 February 2018            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                         mr Temitope Iam Micha-Grace
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sharma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Naith, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was born on 21 May 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's refusal  to  grant  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, the application having been made
    on 30 October 2015.

 3. Judge Hembrough   (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  Decision
    promulgated on 26 September 2017.

 4. The grounds claim the judge  arguably  erred  "......  in  the  way  he
    dismissed Mr Micha-Grace's appeal" as follows:

    (a)  At [49]-[51] the judge erred in seeking to attach no weight to the
         evidence and the submissions of the appellant.

    (b)  The judge accepted that the appellant had provided a great deal of
         physical and emotional support to his mother for the preceding  ten
         years.  He was living with his mother until August 2017  and  after
         that had been visiting her three times a week.  In considering  how
         the appellant's removal would affect his mother, the  judge  failed
         to consider that the appellant would not be  able  to  provide  her
         with that physical and emotional  support  from  Nigeria.   Despite
         living 27 miles apart as of the date of the hearing, he visited his
         mother three times every week.

    (c)  The appellant was the primary carer of his mother and had been for
         ten years.

    (d)  The appellant had gone through a form of religious marriage to  Ms
         Faloye.  They had been unable to register their marriage here as he
         did not have his ID documents which are in the  possession  of  the
         respondent.  The grounds claimed the judge erred  in  finding  that
         family life could continue in Nigeria; Ms Faloye  is  British,  she
         was born here and has never lived in Nigeria. Further, the  grounds
         relied on 276ADE

    (e)  With regard to Ms Faloye as I understand the grounds, the claim at
         [8] is that if it was reasonable to expel an alien from the  UK  if
         that person has lived here for at least twenty years  then  it  was
         disproportionate to expect  a  British  citizen  to  leave  the  UK
         because she meets the residential requirements of 276ADE.

 5. Judge McGinty granted permission on 23 November 2017 finding:

         "It is arguable that the  learned  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
         materially erred in failing to adequately explain why there was not
         family life for the purposes of Article 8 between the appellant and
         his mother, given the appellant's  evidence  regarding  him  having
         lived with her until two  months  previously,  his  ongoing  visits
         three times per week and what the judge found to be a  'great  deal
         of  physical  and  emotional  support'  given  to  his  83-year-old
         mother."

 6. The respondent filed and served her Rule 24  response  on  18  December
    2017.   The  respondent  claimed  that  the  judge   directed   himself
    appropriately.  He was entitled to take into account that the appellant
    and his mother had overstated their relationship and ties.  Bearing  in
    mind Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, the  judge
    did not err.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Sharma relied upon the grounds.  She submitted that family life  was
    continuing.  The distance of 27 miles between mother and  son  did  not
    detract from daily contact and thrice weekly visits.  Family  life  was
    continuing particularly given there were  particular  issues  affecting
    the appellant's mother in terms of the death of her daughter  22  years
    ago, history of domestic violence, and her health conditions.

 8. Mr Naith relied upon the Rule 24 response. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's circumstances did not reach the necessary  relationship  to
    constitute the family life.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The grounds claim the judge attached no weight to the evidence and  the
    submissions of the appellant. As can be seen from what I say  at  [10]-
    [14] below, the judge did  attach  some  weight  to  the  evidence  and
    submissions. Matters of weight were for the judge to assess. He set out
    the evidence and proceeded to carry out an analysis  of  that  evidence
    and submissions in reaching his decision.

10. I find the judge carried out a careful and comprehensive assessment  of
    the appellant's evidence which he set out at [7]-[10] and [17]-[37].

11. The judge accepted that the appellant had provided  for  some  time,  a
    great deal of physical and emotional support to Mrs Atoki and  that  he
    had been a comfort to her, but I  find  nevertheless  on  the  evidence
    before the judge which he describes, it was open to him  to  find  that
    the appellant's ties with his mother were not such as to be  more  than
    the normal emotional ties.  See Kugathas at [19]. "......neither  blood
    ties nor the concern and affection that ordinarily go with them are, by
    themselves or together, in my  judgment  enough  to  constitute  family
    life. Most of us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond and
    whom we visit, or who visit us, from time to time; but none of us would
    say on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them in any
    sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8."

12. The judge set out his findings  and  reasons  at  [39]-[59].   For  the
    reasons he gave, the judge did  not  accept  that  Mrs  Atoki  had  any
    significant care needs that were not being met  or  could  not  be  met
    through the various agencies of the  welfare  state.   See  [45].   The
    judge did not accept that the appellant was Mrs Atoki's  primary  carer
    or that she was in want of care.  See [46].

13. Given the appellant and his mother did not live together, that she  was
    not physically dependent and that such care needs as she had  could  be
    provided by the state, for the reasons he set out, the  judge  did  not
    accept that such emotional attachment as existed between the  appellant
    and his mother was such as to amount to  dependence  so  as  to  engage
    Article 8 family life.  See [51].  The judge found that to some  extent
    Mrs Atoki's emotional needs were managed remotely from  27  miles  away
    notwithstanding visits and he found they could continue to  be  managed
    remotely from Nigeria.  See [51]. It was open to the judge to find that
    the appellant and his mother  had  overstated  their  relationship  and
    ties.

14. As regards the appellant's relationship with his wife,  which  did  not
    form part of the original claim, the judge considered the same but  for
    the reasons he set out at  [52]-[54]  he  found  it  was  a  matter  of
    personal choice for Ms Faloye as to whether  she  wished  to  join  the
    appellant to live in Nigeria or not.

15. I conclude that the decision did not contain a material error  of  law,
    such that the decision of the First-tier tribunal should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 25 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



