

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10419/2017
      HU/07980/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2018                     |On 9 January 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  ALTAF [E]
                                    [S A]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adebayo, A2 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND


    1. The Appellant  in  this  appeal  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
       However, for ease of reference, I refer to the parties as they  were
       in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Respondent  appeals  against  a
       decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  promulgated  on  30
       August  2018  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellants'  appeals
       against the Respondent's decision dated 19 March 2018 refusing their
       application to join their sponsor under the Immigration Rules  ("the
       Rules") applying to Family Reunion.


    2. The Respondent relied upon paragraph 320(7A) of  the  Rules  on  the
       basis that the Appellants had produced two documents which were  not
       genuine, namely a Certificate of Entry of Marriage apparently signed
       by Jasim Abdullateef Al Ghanem as  the  "Emam  and  Khateeb"  of  Al
       Jaharaa Mosque dated 1 May 2008  ("the  Marriage  Contract")  and  a
       birth certificate purportedly issued  by  the  Ministry  of  General
       Health dated 24 September 2007 in relation to  the  registration  of
       the  First  Appellant's  birth  on   26   May   1988   ("the   Birth
       Certificate"). The Respondent's decision also refused an  Article  8
       ECHR claim and it is that refusal which gave rise to  the  right  of
       appeal.


    3. The Appellants claim to be  nationals  of  Kuwait  and  undocumented
       Bidoons.  Their sponsor is [SM] ("the Sponsor").  The Sponsor is the
       husband of  the  First  Appellant  and  the  father  of  the  Second
       Appellant.  He has been recognised as a refugee in the UK.


    4.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  an  earlier  refusal  of  entry
       clearance.  Their appeals were allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Flynn in a decision promulgated on  3  September  2015  ("the  First
       Decision").  The Appellants rely  on  the  First  Decision  and  the
       documents relied upon in that earlier  appeal  (which  included  the
       Marriage Contract and the Birth Certificate) as evidence  that  they
       are entitled to entry clearance and  that  therefore  their  appeals
       should be allowed.


    5. Judge Devittie, relying  on  the  First  Decision,  found  that  the
       Marriage  Contract  and  the   Birth   Certificate   supported   the
       Appellant's case to be entitled to entry  clearance.   He  therefore
       concluded  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  amounted  to  a
       disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights  and  that
       the appeals should be allowed.


    6. The Respondent  relied  in  the  current  appeals  on  two  Document
       Verification Reports dated 9 May 2016 in relation  to  the  Marriage
       Contract and the Birth Certificate ("the DVRs").


    7. The Respondent's raises three grounds of challenge to the  Decision.
       First, he says that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  DVRs  when
       assessing the case in relation to deception and/or  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence contained in the DVRs.


    8. Second, the Respondent submits that the Judge has failed properly to
       understand the case as regards the Marriage Contract and  the  Birth
       Certificate.  The case was not based on the fact that  the  Marriage
       Contract was not issued by the authorities in Kuwait  but  that  the
       Mosque which had purportedly issued the Marriage Contract said  that
       it was not genuine and that, in relation to the  Birth  Certificate,
       it was the Appellants' case that  the  document  emanated  from  the
       Ministry of Health who said that the document was not in the  proper
       form.  The Judge's finding that the Appellants could not  obtain  an
       official document was therefore in error.


    9. Third, although the Respondent accepts that the First  Decision  was
       the appropriate starting point in these  appeals,  it  is  submitted
       that the  Judge  failed  to  recognise  that  there  was  additional
       evidence in the form of the DVRs and to consider how  that  evidence
       affected the earlier findings.


   10. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  on  17
       October 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "... 2.     The grounds argue that the Judge erred in failing to
           make findings on a document verification report  that  suggested
           that the Appellant had submitted false documents in  support  of
           her application.


           3.    The Judge gave no reasons for attaching little  weight  to
           the document verification report.  In SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA
           Civ 155 the Court of Appeal found that the weight to be given to
           an expert report was a matter for  the  Judge  as  long  as  the
           evidence had been carefully considered  and  reasons  given  for
           discounting  it.   This  decision   does   not   satisfy   those
           requirements.


           4.    The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

  11. The matters come before me to decide whether the Decision  contains  a
      material error of law and,  if  I  so  find,  either  to  re-make  the
      Decision or remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  do  so.




    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


   12. I begin by setting out the relevant findings from the First Decision
       as those are accepted to be the appropriate starting point for Judge
       Devittie's findings:


           "25.  I accept that the marriage and birth certificates are  not
           officially  issued  documents,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
           appellants were not entitled to official documentation and  that
           they produced the best available evidence.


           26.   Looking at the evidence  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
           appellants  demonstrated  that  they  met  the  requirements  of
           paragraph 352A and D. I do not agree with  the  respondent  that
           the evidence of identity and  nationality  was  insufficient.  I
           find his decisions were not properly based on the evidence or in
           accordance with the law.  I allow the appeal of  each  appellant
           under the immigration rules."

   13. Mr Adebayo confirmed  that  the  Marriage  Contract  and  the  Birth
       Certificate are the self-same documents as referred to  at  [25]  of
       the First Decision.  I therefore asked how it was that  Judge  Flynn
       found that the Birth Certificate was not an official document.  That
       document purported to be issued by  the  Ministry  of  Health  which
       appears to be an  official  body.   Mr  Adebayo  said  that  Kuwaiti
       Bidoons were  able  to  get  documents  prior  to  1990.   That  was
       therefore an error by the Judge, but he said that  Judge  Flynn  may
       have misunderstood the Appellants'  case  as  the  Sponsor  appeared
       unrepresented in the first appeals.

   14. I turn then to the DVRs.  An issue arose at the start of the hearing
       before me as the copies of the DVRs included only every  other  page
       and were missing what I  now  understand  to  be  the  crucial  page
       (four).  I was supplied with  a  complete  copy  of  the  DVRs.   Mr
       Adebayo had a complete copy of both DVRs.  Although  the  copies  on
       file are incomplete and it is therefore not  entirely  clear  to  me
       whether the copies I had were all that was  before  Judge  Devittie,
       the hearing before him was an oral one and it was evident  from  the
       copies I had that pages were missing due to the pagination of  those
       documents.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe applied to amend her grounds in  the
       event that I decided that an error  had  arisen  in  this  way  but,
       having considered that issue, I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  must
       have had the full copies as otherwise he would  have  requested  the
       omitted pages during the hearing or thereafter when he came to write
       the Decision as the omission would be evident.

   15. In relation to the DVR  referring  to  the  Marriage  Contract,  the
       crucial paragraph is as follows:


           "... 2.     I have examined the copy of the Certificate of Entry
           of Marriage presented with this application.   This  Certificate
           of Entry of Marriage is NON GENUINE for the following reasons:


              . The document presented is the same format and bears the same
                signature as Certificates of Entry of Marriage submitted  as
                part of Family Reunion visa applications by  claimed  Bidoon
                whom Ralon Amman, have been  able  to  establish  are  Iraqi
                nationals.


              . On 29/01/15, a representative  of  the  British  Embassy  in
                Kuwait provided the Chief  Administrator  of  the  Al  Jahra
                mosque with a copy of these certificates.  He confirmed that
                Jassim  Abdul  Latif  Al  Ghanim  (the  signatory  of  these
                certificates) was not and never had been an officiating Imam
                at  the  mosque.   The  Administrator  confirmed  that   the
                certificates were not genuine and there was no corresponding
                entry in the mosque  ledger  confirming  the  marriages  had
                taken place.  The Chief  Administrator  confirmed  that  any
                certificates signed by Al Ghanim should  not  be  considered
                genuine.


           I am  satisfied  to  a  high  degree  of  probability  that  the
           certificate of Entry of Marriage presented with this application
           is NON GENUINE and this has  been  confirmed  through  enquiries
           made with the appropriate source."

       The DVR is prepared by a verifier said to be an Immigration  Liaison
       Assistant who has worked at the British  Embassy  Amman  since  June
       2013 in that capacity.   His  duties  include  verifying  supporting
       documents submitted with applications.  The DVR is dated 9 May 2016.

   16. The DVR referring to the Birth Certificate reads as follows  so  far
       as relevant:


           "... 2.     I have examined the copy of the Ministry  of  Health
           birth registration presented with the application.   As  only  a
           photocopy of the document has  been  produced  I  am  unable  to
           comment on the colour and type of paper.  However, the  document
           in question is an identical format to a  document  sent  to  the
           Kuwaiti authorities for verification.  On 26 July 2015 Mr Jassim
           Al Akari from the registry office advised that the document sent
           for verification was forged as a genuine  birth  record  printed
           from the MOH is of a different format."

       The DVR appears to have been prepared by  the  same  person  as  the
       other DVR as the same experience is noted.

   17.  Judge  Devittie  dealt  with  the  Marriage  Contract   and   Birth
       Certificate at [5] of the Decision as follows:


           "[5]  In considering this appeal I bear in mind that it  is  for
           the respondent to establish on a balance of  probabilities  that
           the appellant's marriage and birth certificates are forged.  The
           respondent has provided a verification report.  In oral evidence
           the sponsor explained that they were not permitted as Bidoons to
           gain formal  marriage  certificates  in  Kuwait.   They  had  no
           status.  This is not open to dispute because the 1st immigration
           judge made a specific finding that the documents relied upon had
           not been officially issued.  She further found as  a  fact  that
           this  was  because  Bidoons  were  not  entitled   to   official
           documents.   The  1st  immigration  judge's  finding  that   the
           appellants, not being entitled to official documents as Bidoons,
           had produced the best evidence of marriage and  birth  available
           to them, I believe largely exonerates them from  the  charge  of
           deception and forgery.  The evidence  of  the  sponsor  at  this
           hearing was clear - that they had asked  the  village  elder  to
           issue their marriage certificate.  It was the  best  they  could
           do.  I accept his evidence.  In the light of this finding I find
           that  the  refusal   of   leave   constitutes   disproportionate
           interference with the article 8 rights of the parties.  I  would
           accordingly allow this appeal on human rights grounds."

   18. Judge Devittie was of course entitled to take the  findings  in  the
       First Decision as  a  starting  point  as  the  Respondent  accepts.
       However, even leaving aside the DVRs,  there  is  an  error  in  the
       Judge's reliance on the  earlier  findings  because  as  Mr  Adebayo
       indicated, one of the documents namely  the  Birth  Certificate,  is
       purportedly issued  by  the  authorities.   As  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
       pointed out, the Judge needed to deal  with  this  document  because
       either the Appellants would not be able to get the Birth Certificate
       as they are not entitled to it which Mr Adebayo says is not the case
       but Judge Flynn found to be the position (  a  finding  which  Judge
       Devittie accepted) or, if the Appellants were entitled  to  it  then
       the issuing authority says that the document is  not  in  the  right
       format.  Either way, Judge Devittie's  findings  do  not  take  into
       account those concerns and resolve the conflict of evidence.

   19. Mr Adebayo submitted that Judge Devittie took the DVRs into  account
       as those are referred to in [5] of  the  Decision.   However,  other
       than a reference to them, there is no consideration of the substance
       of them.  It may be, as Mr Adebayo submitted,  that  Judge  Devittie
       preferred the evidence of the Sponsor to the DVRs.  It may be, as he
       also submitted, that the content of the  DVRs  can  be  overcome  by
       other evidence such as the birth certificate at [AB/16-17] being  in
       a different format or a submission that  it  was  not  the  Marriage
       Contract which was itself examined by the Mosque but rather one in a
       similar form.  However, that is all speculation  because  the  Judge
       simply does not deal with the evidence contained in the DVRs.

   20. For those reasons, although  the  findings  in  the  First  Decision
       formed the starting point for the Decision, Judge Devittie has erred
       by failing to take relevant evidence namely the DVRs  into  account,
       to make findings about that evidence and to decide  what  weight  to
       accord to it.

   21. I add a further observation which arises from the difference in  the
       issues before Judge Devittie and Judge Flynn.  As appears  from  [4]
       of the First Decision, the Respondent's case at that stage was  that
       the evidence could not be accorded weight because the documents were
       not officially registered (although that appears not to be the  case
       at least as  regards  the  Birth  Certificate).   The  reference  to
       paragraphs 320(3) and 320(10) of the Rules relates to a  failure  to
       provide identity documents and not, as paragraph 320(7A) that  false
       documents have been provided.  As such, Judge Flynn was not  dealing
       with an assertion that the Marriage Contract and  Birth  Certificate
       were not genuine documents.  It is not  apparent  from  [5]  of  the
       Decision that  Judge  Devittie  recognised  the  difference  in  the
       issues. He appears to have  considered  Judge  Flynn's  findings  in
       relation to the  Marriage  Contract  and  Birth  Certificate  to  be
       determinative of the issue of deception and forgery.  However,  that
       was not an issue before Judge Flynn and the findings  in  the  First
       Decision in relation to those documents could not possibly determine
       that issue.

   22. I am therefore satisfied that the Decision contains an error of  law
       by reason of the Judge's failure  to  take  relevant  evidence  into
       account and failure to  provide  adequate  reasons  or  findings  in
       relation to that evidence.  I therefore set aside the Decision.

   23. In relation to the  appropriate  forum  for  the  re-making  of  the
       decision, I have given careful consideration to the  Joint  Practice
       Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper  Tribunal  concerning
       the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:

           "[7.2]      The Upper Tribunal is likely on each  such  occasion
           to proceed to re-make the decision,  instead  of  remitting  the
           case to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that:-


                  a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                     before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or
                     other opportunity for that party's case to be  put  to
                     and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                  b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                     which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
                     appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
                     the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
                     to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

  24. My reasons for setting aside the Decision concern the Judge's  failure
      to make adequate findings about evidence which lay at the heart of the
      Respondent's case.  That evidence needs to be considered alongside the
      evidence produced for the Appellants and findings  reached  about  the
      weight to be given to each party's evidence and therefore whether  the
      allegations concerning the genuineness of the documents are made  out.
      In fairness to both parties, it is appropriate for those  findings  to
      be made in the first instance by the First-tier Tribunal.


    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of law. I set
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on
    30 August 2018. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Devittie.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 19 December 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
