
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10150/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                       |On 29th March 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                   m o f j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox dismissing his appeal against the refusal
    by the Secretary of State to grant him leave to remain under Article  8
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 17 February 1979.

3.   The judge noted that a preliminary issue was raised by the  appellant's
    Counsel, Ms Nelson, who identified that she had  only  at  the  hearing
    been served with evidence by the respondent  of  the  test  results  in
    support of the assertions made in the  RFRL.   I  note  that  the  test
    results in question were in relation to the TOEIC language  test  taken
    by the appellant at a centre in Birmingham.  The  judge  said  that  Ms
    Nelson said she did not have the relevant authorities with her but  the
    difference between questionable and invalid  was  important.   She  was
    unhappy that such evidence should be before the judge and asked that it
    be excluded.

4.   The judge however said that having regard to the  overriding  objective
    and the fact that the issue was plain from the RFRL and that Ms  Nelson
    had  identified  the  issues,  she  could  address  any   concerns   in
    submissions and it was a matter for the judge  as  to  the  weight  she
    attached  to  the  results.   Consequently,  the  judge   refused   the
    application to exclude the evidence and admitted it.

5.   Judge E M Simpson granted permission to  appeal  holding  that  it  was
    arguable that the appellant was the subject of procedural unfairness in
    the respondent's production on the  day  of  hearing  of  ETS  evidence
    specific to the appellant having before only furnished the respondent's
    ETS generic evidence, and  the  judge's  admission  of  that  evidence,
    arguably not with reference to the appellant's  Counsel's  request  for
    its exclusion, rather there appeared a failing to provide the appellant
    and his Counsel time on the day to deal with matters and/or adjourn for
    these purposes.

6.   Mr Tufan accepted that there was a procedural unfairness caused by  the
    judge's failure to adjourn the hearing so that the issues raised by the
    respondent at the last minute could  be  properly  dealt  with  by  the
    appellant's Counsel.

7.    Ms  Harvey  concurred  with  Mr  Tufan's  submission  that  there  was
    procedural unfairness and submitted that the case should go back to the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

8.   In the light of the above, I found that  the  judge's  decision  cannot
    stand.  I set it aside in order for it to be re-made.  The  appellant's
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing by a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 26 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
