
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10887/2017
                                                               HU/10890/2017
                                                               HU/10929/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2019                   |On 27 March 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 m a a g (1)
                                M d v k K (2)
                                 m p r g (3)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Signature Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants nationals of Nigeria appealed against decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 9 September 2017 to refuse  applications  made
    in November 2016 based on human rights claims to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of family life.

2.   Their appeals against the adverse decisions of the Secretary  of  State
    came before First-tier Tribunal Chana (the Judge) who on 8 August  2018
    dismissed all appeals with  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 ECHR.  Anonymity orders were made in respect  of  the  second
    and third Appellants and those  are  to  be  continued.  permission  to
    appeal was given by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  Macdonald  on
    16 November 2018

3.   It is common ground between the parties  that  it  was  a  decision  of
    counsel who appeared for the Appellants that the  first  Appellant  was
    not called to give evidence although she wished to do so.  It  appeared
    that her counsel took the view that her normal practise was,  when  the
    key issues were revolving around the children, that there was  no  need
    for the mother or parent of the child to be called  to  give  evidence.
    It was clear from the note of her counsel that there were issues raised
    at the hearing upon which  the  first  Appellant  might  have  relevant
    evidence: There was nothing to indicate that the  first  Appellant  was
    involved in the decision not to give evidence, as opposed to it  simply
    being a decision  of  her  counsel.  It  therefore  appeared  from  the
    statement produced for the purposes of appeal that the first  Appellant
    was aggrieved by the lack of a  fair  hearing  and  an  opportunity  to
    present her story insofar as it was material to the issues

4.     The absence of fairness may constitute a material error of  law.   On
    the face of it there appeared to have been a clear error of law in that
    there was not a fair and proper consideration of the case  particularly
    when exceptionality, insurmountable obstacles and the reasonableness of
    removal were material issues concerning a child.  Whilst  that  was  no
    fault on the Judge's part I accept that  the  First  Appellant  not  be
    allowed to give evidence  which  raised  concerns  about  her  informed
    consent, opportunity to give instructions  and  have  a  fair  hearing.
    Whilst a difficulty may be that she was represented by counsel,  rather
    than in person, I did not think the submission of Mr  Wilding  excluded
    the possible error of law.  The absence of the first  Appellant's  live
    evidence was, even if unspoken, bound to raise doubts  in  the  Judge's
    mind as to the real reasons why  the  first  Appellant  was  not  being
    called and have her evidence tested.

5.     In any event the Judge recited a great deal  of  the  case  law  that
    tied in with the issue of the child and to a degree Section 117B of the
    NIAA 2002. However the analysis of particularly  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 has been overtaken by the case of KO (Nigeria)  2018  UKSC
    11 which gave rise to concern that the judge did not correctly  address
    the relevance of the immigration history of the   Appellants.

6.   In these circumstances I agree  with  the  parties  that  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand, the matter  must  be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and no findings of fact should stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is to be remade  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

List for hearing at  Taylor  House  not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Chana.

No interpreter required.

Time estimate two and a half hours.

Any further documentation relied upon in the support  of  the  human  rights
based claim to be submitted not  less  than  ten  working  days  before  the
further hearing.

 Any further  directions  to  be  made  on  application  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Taylor House or in the event of a PTR or CMRH at that time.

Signed                                  Date 18 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

