
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/10862/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2018                         |On 4 December 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                   M A H A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Harris, Counsel for Ferial Saada Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Yemen born on 26 June 1982.  He  appealed
    the respondent's decision of 11 April 2016  refusing  his  claim  under
    Article 8 of ECHR on the basis of his relationship with his daughter  A
    A born on 14 May 2005. She is a British citizen.  His appeal was  heard
    by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Courtney  on  4  April  2018  and
    dismissed under Article 8 of ECHR in a decision promulgated on 17 April
    2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  2  July
    2018.  The permission states that at paragraph 30 of the  decision  the
    Judge states that the appellant is  theoretically  able  to  acquire  a
    right of residence in Saudi Arabia.  The permission goes  on  to  state
    that given the reference by the Judge to the theoretical position it is
    arguable that the Judge should further  have  delineated  the  boundary
    between the theoretical ability to acquire a right of residence and the
    existence or otherwise of very significant obstacles  to  reintegration
    into Saudi Arabia.  The permission states  that  it  is  arguable  that
    insufficient analysis has been set out exploring that boundary and this
    has affected the conducting of a full proportionality exercise.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel submitted that at paragraph 30 of the decision the Judge  deals
    with the appellant's possible return to  Saudi  Arabia.   Theoretically
    the Judge finds he can go there but I was referred to  the  appellant's
    bundle at pages 297 to 312 being  the  residence  regulations  for  the
    Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  I was also referred to paragraph  30  of  the
    Judge's decision and she submitted that the Judge gets the  information
    in this paragraph from that document.  I  was  asked  to  consider  the
    Refugee Board of Canada document in the appellant's bundle about  Saudi
    Arabia and work and residence permits and  the  assessment  therein  of
    residence permits and citizenship rights.

 5. She submitted that there are difficulties for the appellant going  back
    to Saudi Arabia. The appellant would not  be  considered  to  be  Saudi
    Arabian and residency and citizenship are both based on the appellant's
    father's side of the family but it is this appellant's  mother  who  is
    from Saudi Arabia, his father  is  not.   Their  children's  rights  to
    residence therefore are discretionary and this appellant is no longer a
    minor.

 6. The objective evidence shows that when a visa ends  a  new  application
    has to be made and the last permit this appellant had in  Saudi  Arabia
    was in 2002. She submitted that this would also be a  problem  for  him
    renewing  his  permit  as  it  would  be  considered  a   totally   new
    application. A completely new visa would have to be granted  to  enable
    the appellant to enter Saudi Arabia. He has left Saudi  Arabia  and  he
    has no retained rights.   When  the  appellant  went  there,  after  he
    started living in the UK, he entered on visit visas.  Counsel submitted
    that there are restrictions on  where  you  can  enter  from.   Counsel
    submitted that for the appellant to get entry he will need  a  passport
    and he does not have a passport.

 7. She submitted that this appellant has Yemeni  nationality  but  he  has
    never been to Yemen.  She submitted that if the appellant did manage to
    get entry to Saudi Arabia once his visa ends he could be sent to  Yemen
    and that would be unduly  harsh.   Much  of  Yemen  cannot  be  entered
    because of 15C difficulties there.

 8. I was referred to the refusal letter and Counsel submitted  that  Yemen
    is not adequately addressed therein.  Return to the Yemen has not  been
    analysed in the refusal letter and he  submitted  that  what  has  been
    concentrated on is whether the appellant can go to Saudi Arabia but  he
    has no right to go there.

 9. I was referred to the appellant's statement from paragraph 24  onwards.
    The appellant states that the respondent has suggested that there would
    be no significant obstacles to his  integration  into  Yemen  or  Saudi
    Arabia if he had to leave the UK but he has been in the UK  since  2002
    and has only visited Saudi Arabia on four occasions.  He  was  born  in
    Saudi Arabia and stayed all his life there before coming to the  United
    Kingdom and he has never visited Yemen.  His father, who is  originally
    from Yemen, has not been to Yemen since  1962.   His  family  in  Saudi
    Arabia are residing on temporary residence permits  which  are  renewed
    every year and when the appellant lived there he was a dependant on his
    father's residency as he was in  full  time  education.  His  residence
    permit has now been cancelled and he no longer has any right to  reside
    in Saudi Arabia.  When he went there from the UK he had to apply for  a
    visit visa.  Counsel submitted that the appellant will not be permitted
    to return to Saudi Arabia to live with his family.

10. Counsel submitted that this appellant was married to a British national
    but the marriage has now broken down. To go to  Saudi  Arabia  he  will
    require a visit visa and then only a temporary stay  will  be  granted.
    He has no passport  and  he  has  not  lived  there  since  2002.   She
    submitted that if the appellant wants to get  a  work  permit  he  will
    require to get a Saudi Arabian to get this for him before he enters.

11. Counsel referred to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  considered  the
    appellant returning to Yemen but found that it would not be appropriate
    for the appellant to go there.  He  submitted  therefore  that  if  the
    appellant goes to Saudi having managed to get a permit he could well be
    sent back to Yemen by Saudi Arabia when his visa ends. In any  case  he
    would only be there for six months and his permit could be withdrawn at
    any time.  The maximum permit would be for one year and he  would  have
    no citizenship there.  Counsel submitted that  the  Judge  has  made  a
    material error of law in his decision.

12. She submitted that there is not sufficient  analysis  in  the  decision
    when proportionality is assessed.  This is an appellant who has nowhere
    to go if he does not stay in the United Kingdom.  15C applies in  Yemen
    and she submitted that at present the greatest connection the appellant
    has to any country is the United Kingdom.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the application for permission to
    appeal  is  merely  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's  decision.   He
    submitted that it would be perfectly reasonable for the appellant to go
    back to Saudi Arabia and an application should have been made, as it is
    not clear whether he is able to go to live there or not and it  is  not
    clear whether, if he is allowed to go there, it  would  only  be  on  a
    temporary basis.

14. The Judge states in the decision that there is nothing  before  him  to
    show that the appellant would be discriminated against if he went  back
    to Saudi Arabia and the Presenting Officer submitted that  the  refusal
    letter cannot be challenged unless there is a breach of the appellant's
    Article 3 rights.  He submitted that Saudi Arabia is the country of the
    appellant's last habitual residence and he submitted that there are  no
    very significant obstacles to  the  appellant  reintegrating  in  Saudi
    Arabia.

15. Counsel submitted that at paragraphs 31, 32 and 33 of the decision  the
    Judge has explained why he finds the  appellant  can  return  to  Saudi
    Arabia.  At paragraph 33 the Judge states that he is not  persuaded  on
    the balance of probabilities that the appellant  would  face  any  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into Saudi Arabia. He  finds
    that he is not entitled to a grant of limited leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of his private life  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He finds that the appellant could get work in Saudi
    Arabia and I was asked to take into account all the objective  evidence
    which was before the Judge.

16. The Presenting Officer accepted that the Yemen issue should be  ignored
    as the appellant would be in danger if he had to return to Yemen in its
    present war-torn situation.

Decision and Reasons

17. I have to decide if there is a material error of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.  The Judge has referred to a theoretical  position  but  when
    the residence regulations for Saudi Arabia are  considered  it  is  not
    clear whether the appellant is able to go to reside  in  Saudi  Arabia.
    The problem is that the appellant has not made enquiries about this and
    has not made any application to go there on any basis.  This  makes  it
    difficult for a decision to be reached.  It seems that if the appellant
    could acquire a right of residence he could go there and there would be
    no significant obstacles to his reintegration into Saudi  Arabia.   The
    Judge has not considered this in any detail. Because of this it is  not
    clear whether, if the appellant returned to Saudi Arabia there would be
    a possibility of him having to go to Yemen when  his  residence  permit
    ran out.

18. The appellant has a British daughter.  He is  divorced.   He  only  has
    indirect contact with his daughter.

19. It has been accepted  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  send  the
    appellant to Yemen.

20. I have to decide if there is a material error of law on the part of the
    Judge who made no finding as to whether this appellant can be  sent  to
    Saudi Arabia, other than on a theoretical basis, on the evidence  which
    was before him.  The grounds suggest that the issue based on Saudi  law
    should be re-determined on the evidence  submitted  and  not  heard  de
    novo. I do not find that this is can be done as the appellant has  made
    no attempt to enter Saudi Arabia on any basis.   The  appellant  states
    that he cannot return to Saudi Arabia  but  he  has  not  produced  any
    evidence to support this  apart  from  objective  evidence.  There  was
    nothing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  relating  to  this  particular
    appellant's ability to go and live there. His family is there.  He  has
    made no application for, for example, a residence card. The  burden  of
    proof is on the appellant and the appellant should make an  application
    and submit further evidence about this  at  a  de  novo  hearing.   The
    appellant does not have a passport, his father is a temporary  resident
    of Saudi Arabia and his mother is from Saudi Arabia. The grounds  state
    that any admission to Saudi Arabia would be of a  temporary  status  or
    one without rights. The appellant has not shown  this.  The  burden  of
    proof is on the appellant.

21. I find that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  not  delineated  the
    boundary  between  the  theoretical  ability  to  acquire  a  right  of
    residence and the existence or otherwise of very significant  obstacles
    to reintegration into Saudi Arabia.  This is a material error  of  law.
    For this appellant to succeed he has to show that he has tried to enter
    Saudi Arabia. He has no right to be in the United Kingdom  at  present.
    The Judge has insufficiently analysed the evidence before him and  this
    has affected the full proportionality exercise.

22. I find that there are material errors of law in the First-Tier Tribunal
    Judge's decision promulgated on 18 April 2018. The  appellant  has  not
    made any attempt to clarify his situation relating  to  his  return  to
    Saudi Arabia.

Notice of Decision

Because I find that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier
Judge's decision I direct that that decision is  set  aside.   None  of  its
findings are to stand other than as a  record  of  what  was  said  on  that
occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and of Practice Statement 7.2  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing and to enable  the  First-Tier  Judge
at that hearing to reach a decision the appellant  requires  to  make  every
effort to show that he either can or cannot obtain  residency,  even  for  a
temporary period in Saudi Arabia.

Members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not  to
include Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Courtney.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
