
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10534/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 6 December 2016                     |On 7 December 2016       |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               SARFARAJ THAVA
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bloom (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 5 June 2016, in which it dismissed  his
         appeal against the decision of an entry clearance  officer  ('ECO')
         dated 13 October 2015 to refuse entry clearance as a spouse.

      2. The ECO refused the application because he was not  satisfied  that
         there was  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  subsisting  and  on-going
         relationship between the parties.

FTT decision

      3. The FTT decided the matter  on  the  papers  and  without  an  oral
         hearing.   In  support  of  the  appeal  the  appellant   submitted
         relatively extensive evidence of social media contact  between  him
         and his spouse in the period just before  the  ECO's  decision  and
         just after.

      4. The FTT considered itself unable  to  take  account  of  additional
         evidence not before the ECO at the date of decision.  The FTT  then
         concluded that it was in agreement with the ECO that  the  evidence
         provided at the date of  the  application  did  not  demonstrate  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship, and dismissed the appeal under
         the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

Legal framework

      5. At the beginning of the hearing both representatives agreed that as
         the instant decision was made after 6 April 2015,  the  new  appeal
         provisions in the Immigration Act 2014 ('the 2014 Act') apply.

      6. Section 15 of the 2014 Act  amended  Part  5  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  This  provides  that  where  an
         appellant's human rights claim has been refused, an appeal must  be
         brought on the ground that the decision breaches his human  rights.
         The FTT has failed  to  direct  itself  in  accordance  with  these
         provisions.

      7. In any event both representatives agreed that the FTT has erred  in
         law in its approach to the  evidence.   The  old  section  85(5)(b)
         clearly states that the FTT "may consider  only  the  circumstances
         appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."  In  DR  (ECO:
         post-decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT  00038  the  Tribunal
         drew a distinction between post decision evidence that "shed light"
         on the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  decision,  which
         remained admissible, and post decision evidence  relating  to  post
         decision events, which was not.   The  evidence  in  this  case  of
         social media contact clearly fell within the  former  category  and
         the FTT has materially erred in law in failing to  consider  it  in
         the context of an appeal on Art 8 grounds.

Re-making the decision

      8. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice statement for appeals  on
         or after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

             "the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

      9. Both representatives agreed that the FTT failed to consider all the
         relevant evidence of social media contact, and  the  assessment  of
         the credibility of the claimed relationship needs to be  completely
         redone.  In all the circumstances I am satisfied that it  would  be
         proportionate to remit the case to the FTT.   This  is  a  case  in
         which the FTT failed to consider the  appropriate  legal  framework
         governing the grounds and evidence before it, and this needs to  be
         redone.  In any event consideration needs to be given to the proper
         approach to the relevant evidence appertaining to circumstances  as
         at the date of decision in accordance  with  the  applicable  legal
         framework.

Decision

     10. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law and I set it aside.

     11. The decision shall be remade by the FTT.

Directions

      1) The matter shall be listed on the first available date  before  the
         FTT with a time estimate of 2 hrs.

      2) The appellant's solicitors shall file and serve a skeleton argument
         outlining the applicable legal framework and  the  evidence  relied
         upon with page references to the appellant's bundle, 28 days before
         the hearing.

      3) The respondent shall file  and  serve  a  skeleton  argument  or  a
         document summarising her position in response, 14 days  before  the
         hearing.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 December 2016
