

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/10831/2016
                                                               HU/10839/2016





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2018                   |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                Nirmal guring
                                regina guring
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1.  The  appellants  are  siblings  and  citizens   of   Nepal   born
          respectively on 3 October 1982 and 31 May 1991.  They  seek  entry
          clearance to join their mother, the sponsor. she is the widow of a
          former Gurkha. The appeals are brought on human rights grounds and
          were heard  and  decided  jointly  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Greasley at Hatton Cross on 7 July 2017. They  were  dismissed  by
          way of a determination promulgated on 13 July 2017.


       2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Birrell on 24 December 2017 and the matter came before  me  on  12
          February 2017.


          The hearing


       3. Mr Jaisri conceded that Annex K did not apply  to  the  appellants
          because the sponsor was eth widow of a Gurkha  and  not  a  Gurkha
          herself. He submitted that the judge had failed to  make  findings
          on the quality of family life that existed  at  the  time  of  the
          sponsor's departure. He submitted that the sponsor had left the UK
          and returned to Nepal for  two  years  and  was  living  with  the
          appellants at the date of their entry  clearance  application.  He
          argued that there had been inadequate findings  on  the  sponsor's
          evidence and the family life issue. He further submitted that  the
          judge had erred in his approach to the sponsor's decision to leave
          the appellants and live  in  the  UK;  that  conflicted  with  the
          guidance in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.



       4. Mr Duffy submitted that this was an unusual  appeal  in  that  the
          sponsor was not a Gurkha but the widow of one. He  submitted  that
          the  judge  had  found  there  was  no  family  life  because  the
          appellants were no longer dependent beyond  the  normal  emotional
          ties. There was no supporting evidence to show particularly  close
          ties. Whilst another judge may have reached a different  decision,
          that was not the test.



       5. Mr Jaisri responded. He submitted that the judge had the  evidence
          of the sponsor's passport to show that she had travelled to Nepal.





       6. That completed the submissions. At the completion of the hearing I
          reserved my determination which I now give.



       7. Discussion and conclusions



       8. Four criticisms have been made of the judge's decision. The  first
          is that he made no  finding  on  whether  there  was  family  life
          between the appellants and their mother, the sponsor, prior to her
          departure  from  Nepal  in  December   2013.    Having   carefully
          considered the judge's findings and conclusions at paragraphs  20-
          25, I note that despite this being an article 8 claim,  the  judge
          did not follow the Razgar steps although he refers to the guidance
          at the conclusion of his discussion (at 24) and did not touch upon
          the issue of family life until paragraph 24. Indeed, he  commences
          his assessment with whether the appellants were fit to work (at 21-
          22). At paragraph 24 he finds that: "there  is,  to  some  extent,
          family life links" (sic).  I am unclear what the  judge  means  by
          this as either there is family life between the parties  or  there
          is not. He then  proceeds  to  conclude  that  the  decisions  are
          proportionate and lawful without any further reasoning. As far  as
          the first criticism is concerned, therefore, I  conclude  that  it
          has merit. Nowhere in the determination was there any  finding  on
          family  life  at  the  time  of  the   sponsor's   departure   and
          additionally, the finding that has been made is unclear.


       9. The second complaint is that the judge  maintained  there  was  no
          evidence that the sponsor had resided with the appellants when she
          returned to Nepal for  her  extended  visit  when  there  was  the
          sponsor's oral and  written  evidence  to  this  point.  Mr  Duffy
          submitted that the judge must have  meant  corroborative  evidence
          and that may be the case. However, it was still incumbent  on  him
          to consider the sponsor's evidence and to make a  finding  on  it.
          This was not done.



      10. Ground three is that the assessment contained no reference to  the
          historical injustice point although this is clearly dealt with  in
          the sponsor's witness statement. That is also a  valid  criticism.
          The judge refers to the point when  summing  up  the  respondent's
          case but it does not feature in his own assessment.



      11. Finally, the judge erred in his approach  to  the  matter  of  the
          sponsor's decision to leave the appellants and move to the UK. His
          finding  that  she  made  a  choice   about   leaving   them,   is
          contradictory to the approach set out in Rai (at 38, 39  and  42).
          The judge did not engage with the issue of whether the  appellants
          would have come here earlier with their mother had they been  able
          to afford to do so. However, even if the  sponsor  had  chosen  to
          leave Nepal to settle in the UK, the judge was still  required  to
          consider whether there was family life at the time she left (which
          ties in with the first ground).



      12. For those reasons, the judge erred in law and his decision is  set
          aside. No findings are preserved and the matter is remitted to the
          First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.



      13. Decision


      14. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the decision is set
          aside in its entirety. The appeal is remitted  for  re-hearing  to
          another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.









      15. Anonymity



      16. I make no anonymity order.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 15 February 2018




