
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10063/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2018                           |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  RAZAN [S]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Dr N. [S]


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  respondent,  whom  we  shall  call  "the  claimant",  is  probably
    stateless: she has identity  documents  furnished  by  the  Palestinian
    authority.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the refusal
    of her application for Entry Clearance as a  spouse:  her  husband,  Dr
    [S], is a British Citizen, as are their children.  The refusal  was  on
    the grounds that the application was not accompanied  by  the  required
    specified documents.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge James allowed the appeal in  a  determination
    which is characterised in the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal
    with considerable justice as "hopelessly confused".   The  judge  found
    that the Rules were not met and that "the appeal fails on this point"".
     The judge then referred to a "discretion in regards to article  8  and
    potential  points  raised  ...  which  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    exercise".  The judgment continues:

         "Therefore the Appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent that the
         Respondent  has  failed  to  exercise  her  discretion,   and   the
         consequent effect of that decision is to vitiate  the  entirety  of
         the Respondent's decision, which as it stands is unlawful.  I  find
         that the Respondent's decision in relation to the Appellant remains
         outstanding with the Respondent and she awaits a lawful decision on
         her application.  I allow the appeal to this limited extent."

 3. In the next paragraph, however, the judge writes:

         "Thus [sic] in summary the Appellant's documentation  submitted  in
         support of her appeal fully addresses and counters the Respondent's
         objections."

 4. And finally:

         "The Appellant has discharged the burden of proof upon her and  the
         reasons given by the Respondent do not justify the refusal of entry
         clearance.   Therefore  the  Respondent's  decision   is   not   in
         accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.

         Appeal allowed."

 5. So far as we can  see,  the  appeal  is  determined  both  against  the
    claimant and in her favour on the basis of the Immigration Rules; it is
    allowed to a limited extent on the basis of a discretion unknown to the
    law and at the same time allowed outright; the reasons for allowing the
    appeal are not permissible grounds of appeal following the coming  into
    force of the appeals provisions of the Immigration Act  2014,  and  the
    only permissible  ground,  that  the  decision  was  a  breach  of  the
    claimant's human rights,  is  not  discussed,  nor  is  any  conclusion
    reached upon it.  It is extremely regrettable that the claimant and her
    family have been misled by a decision of such incompetence.

 6. The position, as we endeavoured to explain to Dr [S],  is  as  follows.
    By failing to send the required documents  with  her  application,  the
    claimant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    could not expect a decision in her favour.  She was entitled  to  argue
    that in these circumstances  the  refusal  of  Entry  Clearance  was  a
    disproportionate interference with her rights protected by  art  8  but
    did not really do so: the grounds of appeal are concerned  mostly  with
    attempting to show that the requirements of the Rules could  have  been
    satisfied.  In determining any question of whether the interference was
    proportionate the Tribunal was and would be bound to take into  account
    that the relevant features of the Rules are there in  order  to  enable
    applications to be processed efficiently and it is extremely  difficult
    to see how it would be disproportionate to maintain a negative decision
    on this application when the claimant had and has  the  opportunity  at
    hand to make a new application that would be effective in securing  her
    what she seeks by complying with the Rules.

 7. For the reasons we have given, Judge James erred in law.   We  set  the
    decision aside.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision  was  justified
    if not mandated by the Rules and for the reasons given in the  previous
    paragraph  the  claimant  has  failed  to  show  that   the   resulting
    interference  with  her  Convention  rights  is  disproportionate.   We
    therefore substitute a decision dismissing her appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 26 November 2018.

