
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/10594/2018
     HU/10598/2018
     hu/10603/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 07 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     N C
                                     V C
                                     T C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Tariq, Legal Representative, West London
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of India.  They are mother, father  and
    son.  The son is aged 16.  The  appellants  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
    student and dependants and received further grant of leave until 1 June
    2015 following a curtailment  decision.   In  a  decision  sent  on  31
    October 2018, Judge Andrew of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissed
    their appeals against the decision made by the respondent on  26  April
    2018 refusing them leave to remain.  In granting permission to  appeal,
    Judge Grant-Hutchison of the FtT stated that it was arguable  that  the
    judge had misdirected herself in four respects.

2.   I heard excellent submissions from both Mr Tariq and  Ms  Everett,  for
    which I express my gratitude.

3.   It is unnecessary to set out the appellants' grounds in full  as  I  am
    persuaded that there are at least two material errors  in  the  judge's
    decision.

4.    The  first  error  is  that  the  judge  incorrectly  identified   the
    appellants as overstayers.  As Mr Everett conceded, that was  incorrect
    since the appellants still had valid leave when they applied for  leave
    to remain in May 2015.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  this  was  not  a
    material error, but it is clear from paragraphs 8 - 11 that  the  judge
    regarded this adverse immigration history as a  significant  factor  in
    the Article 8 proportionality assessment and at paragraph 21 the  judge
    highlighted the need to maintain immigration control.

5.    The  second  error  concerns  the  judge's,  treatment  of  the  third
    appellant's circumstances.  Although stating that she had taken note of
    the guidance given by the Supreme Court in KO & Others  v  SSHD  [2018]
    UKSC 53, there is nothing to indicate that  she  understood  that  this
    decision left unaffected two important principles set out  by  previous
    High Court authority.  First of all, at the date of  the  decision  and
    the hearing the respondent still had a policy stating that in the  case
    of children who had resided in the UK for seven  years  strong  reasons
    had to be shown for not granting them leave to remain.  Secondly, in MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] 705 Elias LJ stated, to similar effect,  that  strong
    or powerful countervailing reasons had to  be  given  for  requiring  a
    child resident in the UK for seven years to leave  the  UK.   There  is
    nothing to show that the judge adopted such an approach.  For the judge
    the fact that the child had been in the UK was simply "something I must
    consider" (paragraph 12) and that it was for the appellants to  provide
    strong reasons why the child should be permitted to remain.

6.   My concern about the nature of the judge's treatment of the seven  year
    issue is intensified by two  matters.   One  is  that  although  making
    reference to the letter from the third appellant, the judge appears  to
    have regarded it as irrelevant to assessment  of  her  best  interests.
    The other relates to the manner in  which  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    Social Circumstances and Family Assessment Report by Dr Jasmine Murray,
    which concluded that to disrupt the family by requiring them  to  leave
    together would be detrimental to the third appellant's emotional health
    and wellbeing.  Whilst the judge was entitled to make  some  criticisms
    of this report I do not consider  that  those  made  warranted  setting
    entirely at nought the social worker's findings  which  were  based  on
    interviews and close observation.

7.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law.

8.   But for two respects, I would consider that I am in a position  to  re-
    make the decision for myself.  The  first  matter  is  that  the  third
    appellant is now a young man seeking to make a career  as  an  engineer
    and he has not as yet had his voice heard as to what he considers to be
    in his best interest and why.  Second, I am concerned about some of the
    features of the social worker report as criticised by  the  FtT  Judge.
    If I simply had this report to consider, I would have to focus more  on
    the issue of the methodology of the report than its contents.  I  think
    in fairness the  appellant's  representatives  should  be  offered  the
    opportunity of seeking a further report from a more established expert.

9.   I should also  comment  that  whilst  I  have  applied  the  law  as  I
    understand it to be currently, there are cases in the pipeline before a
    presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal intended  to  clarify  various
    aspects of KO, including its applicability to the case of children with
    seven years or more residence in the UK. It is likely there will  be  a
    reported decision on these cases by April 2019.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that:

    -    the decision of the FtT Judge must be set aside for material error
         of law.

    -    the case should be remitted to the FtT so that the third appellant
         is afforded  the  opportunity  of  giving  oral  evidence  and  the
         appellant's representatives  have  the  opportunity  to  produce  a
         further expert report, this time from an established  expert.   Any
         such report is to be produced to the First-tier Tribunal within ten
         weeks of this decision being sent to the parties.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 3 January 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
