
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/10366/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |         Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th February 2019                |         On 13th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                      mr SIDHEEKH KUTTIKKATTIL MEETHAL
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. O'Ceallaigh (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Tufan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer, promulgated on 6th December 2018, following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 12th November 2018.  In the decision, the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary  of  State,
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 6th  April
    1984.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  20th
    April 2018, refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain  in
    the UK, on the basis of his long residence in this country.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he came to the UK on  26th
    February 2008 as a student and  thereafter  had  his  leave  to  remain
    extended on various occasions, which took him up to 2014.  In India  he
    had completed a Bachelor of  Science  Degree  from  the  University  of
    Calicut.  He had completed his Degree in the  English  Medium  Language
    from Malabar Christian College.  His  secondary  school  education  was
    also in English.  In 2014, having secured a  number  of  extensions  of
    leave to remain, he then applied for leave  to  remain  as  his  wife's
    dependant.  He was granted valid leave until 28th August 2015.  When he
    applied to extend his leave thereafter on 27th August  2015,  this  was
    refused by the Respondent, on the basis that  he  had  submitted  false
    documents in one of his previous Tier 4 student applications.

 4. The Appellant, however, denies that he obtained a TOEIC certificate  by
    using a proxy on 19th June 2012, as alleged, and maintains that he  did
    attend the test and he did obtain the certificate genuinely.  In  fact,
    his representative lodged  an  application  for  administrative  review
    against a decision of 8th February 2016, and permission was granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  Subsequently, a consent order was entered into  on
    8th  May  2017,  when  the  Respondent   agreed   to   reconsider   the
    administrative review decision.  The Appellant then  submitted  further
    representations.  He provided his previous IELTS certificate,  as  well
    as his Bachelor of Physics Degree certificate from India.  Moreover, he
    provided a NARIC certificate.  Judge Mailer, in  his  decision  of  6th
    December 2018, observes that "The level of English in the NARIC  report
    is  much  higher  than  that  required  for  the  TOEIC  for  students"
    (paragraph  19).   The   Appellant's   application   for   review   was
    unsuccessful.  The original decision was  withdrawn.   The  application
    was sent  back  to  the  original  case  working  team.   However,  the
    Appellant did not hear back from the Home Office for a very long  time.



 5. He considered it better to make an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain pending that decision.  This he did.  On 14th February 2018  the
    Home Office asked him to attend an interview to assess his application.
     At the interview on 23rd February 2018, the Appellant  was  asked  for
    information about his TOEIC test.  He explained that  this  took  place
    nearly six years ago, and provided as much information as he could.

 6. On 20th April 2018 the application was refused, that  is  the  decision
    that is being appealed presently.  The Appellant repeats  that  he  has
    not used deception in obtaining his certificate.  He contends  that  he
    has proved his innocence on a previous occasion.   The  Respondent  was
    forced to review her decision.



The Judge's Decision

 7. The judge applied the relevant case law in SM  and  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT
    229, and in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450.  The  judge  also
    had regard to the more recent decision of Majumder v. SSHD [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 1167  (see  paragraphs  48  to  49  of  the  decision).   He  heard
    submissions from the Appellant's Counsel that with regard to the  TOEIC
    test on 23rd May 2018, the Appellant had only "narrowly failed"  by  20
    points, so that it was "absurd" that he would ask  someone  to  take  a
    test for him which resulted in a failing score.  He had to pass a  test
    in June.

 8. However, two months earlier he had actually  passed  the  much  tougher
    IELTS test, and he was well-qualified, and had a good grasp of  English
    when he gave evidence (see paragraph 50).  Consideration was  given  by
    the judge to the submissions of the Respondent HOPO who relied upon the
    refusal letter, and who stated that  none  of  the  Appellant's  family
    members had any status, and that his claim was based upon private  life
    outside the Rules (see paragraph 43), and that his recorded result  was
    judged to be invalid, and that the Respondent had  met  the  evidential
    burden, but the legal burden had not been met  by  the  Appellant  (see
    paragraph 44).

 9. The judge went on to specify  that  "The  sole  basis  upon  which  his
    application was refused was the allegation that he used a proxy to take
    his English test and had therefore engaged in TOEIC  fraud"  (paragraph
    59).  The judge observed how, when the Appellant took the IELTS test, a
    month before his leave expired, "His overall assessment was high enough
    but he did not score highly enough in the reading module.  He  obtained
    a score of 6 in the speaking component" (paragraph 60).  Reference  was
    also made by the judge to the judicial review proceedings that followed
    and how "the respondent eventually withdrew the refusal  of  leave  and
    reconsidered the application" (paragraph 64).

10. Finally, consideration was given by the  judge  to  how  the  Appellant
    provided a fulsome description of how he had booked  the  English  test
    with the London College of Social Studies, operating near Tower Bridge,
    and how he had travelled  by  underground  and  reached  London  Bridge
    underground station, and then taken ten minutes to walk to the  centre,
    where there were some fifteen to twenty candidates  present,  and  "the
    college verified his ID as well as took his photograph" (paragraph 74).
     The judge was impressed by the fact that the Appellant had  "described
    in some detail what the listening test involved" and how it "took about
    45  minutes"  and  that  "the  reading  test  took  about  75  minutes"
    (paragraph 75).

11. The judge was satisfied that no dishonesty was involved  and  that  the
    Appellant had not engaged in fraudulent conduct, so that the allegation
    against him was unwarranted and that the Appellant had  met  the  legal
    standard that was upon him.  The judge allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  explain
    properly why the evidence of the Appellant was sufficient  and  why  it
    precludes the use of a proxy as alleged.  The grounds also  state  that
    the matters relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  have  not  been  properly
    explained by the judge as to their acceptance.

13. On 19th December 2018, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that "the Judge's reasoning it would  seem,  may  amount  to  a  simple
    acceptance of what the Appellant says  without  providing  the  reasons
    why".

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 4th February 2019, Mr Tufan,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account Professor French's report (at paragraphs 74
    to 75).  The Appellant had maintained that he had undertaken a  Physics
    Degree in India, but if that was so,  the  UK  NARIC  exemptions  which
    apply to those who have had their education in  the  English  language,
    were not shown to have been applicable to the Appellant, and  therefore
    he had to take the test.

15. This being so, Mr Tufan submitted, that the decision in MA (ETS - TOEIC
    test) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 became relevant.  What was said  in  this
    decision was that:-

         "In the abstract, of course,  there  is  a  range  of  reasons  why
         persons proficient in English may engage  in  TOEIC  fraud.   These
         include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of failure,  lack
         of time and commitment and contempt  for  the  immigration  system"
         (paragraph 57).

16. Mr Tufan submitted that any  one  of  these  factors  could  have  been
    applicable in the Appellant's case.  Even if the Appellant  was  versed
    in the English language this did not necessarily mean that there was no
    incentive for him to cheat.  Accordingly,  the  judge  could  not  have
    allowed this appeal without a proper engagement with Professor French's
    report.  The weight to be given to that report was well-established  in
    the cases in this area.  It had to be remembered that there was an  ETS
    report to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant's  results  were  invalid.
    Against the finding, the judge had to be particularly  careful  not  to
    take the Appellant's evidence at face value.  In the case of MA  [2016]
    UKUT 450, the Tribunal had made it clear that the "invalid"  assessment
    is something which may be treated as reliable.

17. For his  part,  Mr  O'Ceallaigh  submitted  that  if  the  Respondent's
    representative was today going to place reliance  upon  Majumder,  then
    this was the very reason why this appeal could not succeed, given  what
    had been said at paragraph 18 of that  decision.   It  was  made  clear
    there that:-

         "in considering an allegation of dishonesty  the  relevant  factors
         included the following: what the person accused had  to  gain  from
         being dishonest; what he had to  lose;  what  is  known  about  his
         character; the cultural environment in which heh operated; how  the
         individual accused of dishonesty performed under cross-examination,
         and whether the Tribunal's  assessment  of  that  person's  English
         language proficiency is commensurate with his or her  TOEIC  scores
         ..." (paragraph 18).

18. Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that this was a case where the  Appellant  had
    actually performed successfully on  a  more  stringent  test  only  two
    months earlier, when he passed an IELTS test (see paragraph 50  of  the
    decision).  He had passed the much more demanding Pearson test.  It was
    untrue to say that he was not exempted by UK NARIC  standards,  because
    at the time that he had decided to take the test, he was  unaware  that
    he was subject to an exemption.  However, he admitted he had been  able
    to get precisely this certificate which provided him with the necessary
    exemption.  Therefore, the test was unnecessary for him to have  taken.
    The decision recorded that "The NARIC certificate  was  produced.   The
    level of English in the NARIC report is much higher than that  required
    for the TOEIC for students" (paragraph 19 of the decision).  He  had  a
    Physics Degree from India where his tuition had  been  in  the  English
    medium.  Against this, the repeated  reference  to  Professor  French's
    report was a red-herring, because Professor French had been  unable  to
    say whether test reports could accurately be correlated with the person
    taking them, which was to suggest, that errors of identification  could
    take place.

19. Mr O'Ceallaigh also submitted that in the case of MA [2016]  UKUT  450,
    the experts had jointly "highlighted the following matters"  and  these
    included that "The integrity of the test taking procedures and  systems
    established by ETS in its manuals depends heavily  on  the  reliability
    and probity  of  test  centre  staff"  (paragraph  15(xi)).   This  was
    important because the staffing of the centres, by officials, in  itself
    left much to be desired, and this was now a matter of recorded fact  in
    a case such as MA.  Mistakes were known to occur.

20. The person who had to bear the brunt  of  these  mistakes  would  be  a
    person such as the Appellant in this case.  In the  same  way,  it  had
    been accepted that "The test  centre  seating  plans  which  have  been
    produced are incomplete" (paragraph 15(xiii)).  Finally:-

         "A study of the spreadsheets attached to the witness statements  of
         the Home Office employee, Mr Sewell reveals a  lack  of  any  nexus
         between the data supplied to him  by  ETS  and  the  unique  ID  of
         individual candidates" (paragraph 15(xiv)).

    This, submitted Mr O'Ceallaigh, was nothing more  than  a  disagreement
    with the decision of the judge below.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by Judge Mailer did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I do  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

22. First, the judge has provided a comprehensive background to the  events
    which transpired, which included the Appellant lodging  an  application
    for administrative review against a decision that  he  had  obtained  a
    TOEIC certificate by using a proxy on 19th June 2012, which  led  to  a
    consent order, on the basis of which  the  application  was  withdrawn.
    The judge has set out the relevant case law meticulously (at paragraphs
    48 to 49).  He has had regard to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  only
    "narrowly failed" his TOEIC test of 23rd May 2012, and that there was a
    submission before him that if the Appellant were to  use  a  proxy,  he
    would not use one which would lead to his failing the test.   Reference
    was also made to how the Appellant provided a fulsome  account  of  his
    going to the  London  College  of  Social  Studies  to  take  the  test
    (paragraph 74 to 75).

23.  Most  importantly,  however,  the  judge  found  that  "The  Appellant
    currently  showed  that  he  has  the  ability  to  speak  English  and
    understand it well.  He  gave  his  evidence  in  English  without  any
    difficulty".  Reference was made to the fact that "he had  a  Bachelors
    Degree in Physics which was also conducted in English".  Moreover, this
    was a case where,  "he  has  a  postgraduate  certificate  in  Business
    Administration from the University of Wales".

24. However, perhaps the most significant, was the judge's finding that "in
    the month before the taking of the TOEIC test, he obtained  a  speaking
    score in an IELTS, commensurate with his TOEIC result - and higher than
    that required" (paragraph 77).  This is important, because  whereas  it
    is the case that in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450, reference
    is made to how "In the abstract, of course, there is a range of reasons
    why persons proficient in English may engage in TOEIC fraud" (paragraph
    57), the  judge  was  not  here  dealing  with  the  position  "in  the
    abstract".

25. What the judge was doing was having proper regard to  the  more  recent
    decision of Majumder [2016] EWCA Civ 1167,  which  enjoins  a  decision
    maker to consider  "an  allegation  of  dishonesty"  on  the  basis  of
    "relevant factors", which include "what is normal about this character"
    and include "whether his or her academic achievements are such that  it
    was unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated" (paragraph  18).
    In this case, the judge was firmly of the view that:-

         "it is unlikely that he would have paid someone to fail an  English
         test for him.  Although there might be reasons why he would wish to
         pay a proxy to take the test for him, I consider the evidence as  a
         whole,  including  his  unchallenged  evidence  that  his  ID   and
         photograph was taken by the college" (paragraph 79)

    to have been in his favour.  The fact  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that his ID and photograph  was  taken  by  the  college  was  repeated
    earlier as well, when it was stated that "the college verified  his  ID
    as well as took his photograph" (paragraph 74).   In short,  the  judge
    had ample grounds on which to reach the decision that he did.  There is
    no error whatsoever.

Notice of Decision

26. There is no material error of law.  The decision shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th March 2019
