
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10232/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 18th of December 2017               |On 10th January 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                MR EDOSA [A]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Rahman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 21st of March  1984.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herlihy
      sitting at Hendon Magistrates Court on 8th of March 2017 who dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 14th
      of August 2015. That decision was to refuse to grant leave  to  remain
      in the United Kingdom under Article 8 on the basis of his private  and
      family life.


   2.  The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom  on  14th  of  October
      2004 with entry clearance as a student valid  until  31st  of  October
      2005. He applied for and was granted extensions in this capacity until
      31st of December 2011. On 3rd of May 2008 the  Appellant  applied  for
      and was granted a certificate of approval of marriage. It appears that
      this marriage was subsequently dissolved by a decree  absolute  issued
      in August 2013. A further application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a Tier 4 general student made on  30th  of  December
      2011 was refused as were applications made in September 2012, February
      2013 and April 2014 for leave to remain under family and private  life
      rules. On 1st of June 2015 the Appellant made an application for leave
      to remain in the United Kingdom under family and  private  life  rules
      the refusal of which has given rise to these proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant and his  wife  married  in  2014  at  a  time  when  the
      Appellant had no leave. He had met his present wife in 2011 when still
      married to his first wife  although  that  marriage  had  broken  down
      before that time. The Appellant had obtained  some  qualifications  in
      the United Kingdom during his 8 years of study here.  The  Appellant's
      wife is a British citizen and the couple's daughter  was  born  in  or
      about March 2016. The child is also a British citizen.  The  Appellant
      told the Judge that his principal child care role was to help feed the
      couple's daughter as his wife had fibroids and was unable to  wake  at
      night to feed the child.


   4. The Appellant's studies had been supported in the United Kingdom by an
      uncle who had since stopped supporting him and had asked him to  leave
      his house. The Appellant had seven siblings who were all  married  and
      living in Nigeria but he had not seen them since his  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom. His wife was also originally from Nigeria. She came to
      the United Kingdom at the age of 12 years (in 2002).  She  worked  for
      HSBC bank and was currently  on  maternity  leave.  She  expected  her
      salary to rise to  �23,000  per  annum  and  the  plan  was  that  the
      Appellant would care for their daughter while she  returned  to  work.
      All her family were in this country and it would be impossible for her
      to remain in the United Kingdom  without  her  husband.  Her  parents'
      families were still in Nigeria but she had no relationship with  them.
      Both  her  paternal  grandparents  were  there  as  was  her  maternal
      grandmother. The language in  which  she  was  taught  at  school  was
      English.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. It was accepted that the Appellant and his wife were in a genuine  and
      subsisting relationship but the Judge did not find the  Appellant  and
      his wife would face any significant obstacles upon return  to  Nigeria
      as this was where they both had family and  where  the  Appellant  had
      spent his formative life and was educated. The couple's  daughter  was
      born since the decision was made  although  the  Respondent  had  been
      aware that the Appellant's wife was pregnant at the date of  decision.
      At the date of hearing at first instance the daughter  was  aged  less
      than one year old. The family could live  together  in  Nigeria  where
      they could rely on the  support  of  their  respective  families.  The
      Appellant's father and his 7 siblings were still living in Nigeria the
      Appellant had no family supporting him in the United  Kingdom  as  the
      entirety of his family were based in Nigeria.


   6. At [27] the Judge dealt with the issue of the British  nationality  of
      the Appellant's wife and daughter. The Judge found  it  reasonable  to
      expect the wife and daughter to continue their family  life  with  the
      Appellant in Nigeria if they wished to do so. There  was  no  evidence
      that the daughter would be unable to adapt to the culture of  Nigeria.
      English was  the  language  which  was  most  widely  spoken  and  the
      Appellant's wife had confirmed that when she attended school  she  was
      taught in English as was the Appellant. There were no  medical  issues
      in relation to either the Appellant's wife or the daughter. The  Judge
      was not satisfied that the Appellant or his wife  had  lost  cultural,
      family or social ties to Nigeria. The Appellant and his wife  had  met
      at her father's church and as a pastor he would no doubt  have  strong
      connections to other ministers in Nigeria who might be able to provide
      support.


   7. The Appellant had produced little evidence of his financial  situation
      or his income and resources or how he supported himself. His  presence
      in the United Kingdom had always  been  precarious  as  his  continued
      presence was reliant upon further grant of leave. Since  2011  he  had
      had no lawful leave and was in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.  The
      Appellant and his wife could have had no reasonable  expectation  that
      the Appellant could remain so that they  could  develop  their  family
      life together.


   8. At [32] the Judge dealt with  section  117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The daughter was a  qualifying  child
      (by reason of her British  citizenship)  but  it  was  reasonable  for
      family life to continue in Nigeria where the Appellant  and  his  wife
      had strong links. The decision to remove the Appellant in Nigeria  was
      proportionate given that family life could be continued by the  family
      in Nigeria if the wife and daughter chose to accompany the  Appellant.
      There would be some disruption to the private lives of  the  Appellant
      and his wife but private life could  continue  in  Nigeria.  Any  such
      disruption would be limited and proportionate. The Judge dismissed the
      appeal.



The Onward Appeal

   9.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  arguing  that  the
      Respondent's decision had contravened case law. It was  unlikely  that
      the Appellant's friends would follow him to Nigeria and therefore  the
      Appellant's removal would interfere with their human rights. There was
      evidence of the earnings of the Appellant's wife which showed how  the
      Appellant was supported.

  10. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 27th of October 2017.
      In granting permission to appeal he found it arguable that  the  Judge
      when  carrying  out  the   proportionality   exercise   had   attached
      insufficient weight to the fact that the Appellant's  daughter  was  a
      British  citizen.  Consideration  of  section  55   of   the   Borders
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had not been set out fully. There
      was a need to consider whether the Appellant's daughter should  remain
      with both her parents and a need to take into account the  conclusions
      from a section 55 analysis in the proportionality exercise.

  11. The Respondent replied to the  grant  of  permission  indicating  that
      whilst the grounds of application were extremely hard  to  follow  and
      some of the points appeared to be misplaced  the  Respondent  did  not
      oppose the Appellant's application for permission to appeal so far  as
      it related  to  the  relevance  of  the  British  citizenship  of  the
      Appellant's daughter. The Respondent invited the Tribunal to determine
      the appeal with a fresh oral hearing to consider whether the Appellant
      should succeed under section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.


  12.  The  Appellant  submitted  a  lengthy  nine-page  response   to   the
      Respondent's rule 24 reply settled by counsel who appeared  before  me
      but who did not appear at first instance.  This  complained  that  the
      Judge had not considered Section EX.1 (a) or  paragraph  276A  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The birth of the  Appellant's  daughter  after  the
      date of decision was  a  matter  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
      decision and was a circumstance giving rise to the  Appellant's  claim
      under section EX.1.


  13. The  Judge  had  found  no  insurmountable  obstacles  or  exceptional
      circumstances in the return of the  family  to  Nigeria  but  had  not
      considered the difficulties they would  face  upon  return  given  the
      length of time they had resided in the United Kingdom and  the  strong
      ties  to  this  country.  There  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
      Appellant's wife and daughter's rights as British  citizens  under  EU
      law. Where a non-EU national applicant enjoys a family life  with  the
      British spouse and their British child it would  breach  the  European
      Union rights of the spouse and their child  if  as  a  result  of  the
      refusal of their application for leave to remain they were  forced  to
      leave the United Kingdom. It was possible to find that the Appellant's
      case was exceptional and had features  of  a  special  and  compelling
      character. The Appellant had persistently  sought  to  regularise  his
      stay and did not regard himself as an overstayer. There was  no  clear
      finding  on  whether  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with his daughter nor had there been a full consideration
      of the section 55 issues.

The Hearing Before Me

  14. At the hearing before me the Presenting Officer raised  a  preliminary
      issue in relation to the Appellant's response to the Respondent's rule
      24 submissions. The grounds of appeal for which  permission  had  been
      granted had not made submissions relating to  the  Immigration  Rules.
      The Appellant's response sought to raise the Immigration  Rules  which
      was a new matter and was not permitted at this  stage  reliance  being
      placed on the Upper Tribunal authority of Mahmud [2017] UKUT 488.  The
      Respondent had not been represented at first instance.


  15. Mahmud defined a new matter as  one  which  constituted  a  ground  of
      appeal of a kind listed in section 84 of the 2002 Act. It must contain
      a matter which could raise or establish a listed ground of  appeal.  A
      matter is the factual substance of a claim. The ground  of  appeal  is
      the legal basis on which the fact in any given matter could  form  the
      basis of a challenge to the decision under appeal.  In  practice,  the
      new  matter  is  a  factual  matrix  which  has  not  previously  been
      considered by the Respondent in the context of the decision in section
      82(1) or in a statement made by the Appellant under section 120.  This
      requires a matter to be factually distinct from that previously raised
      by the Appellant as opposed  to  further  or  better  evidence  of  an
      existing matter. The assessment will always be fact sensitive.


  16. In response, counsel argued that her reply to the Rule 24 response was
      her skeleton argument for this appeal. This had  been  an  application
      under the partner rules and Article 8. The birth of a child after  the
      date of decision was not a new matter nor  was  it  a  new  ground  of
      appeal. The Appellant had challenged the Respondent's  decision  under
      paragraph 276 ADE on appeal to the First-tier.  At  [26]  the  Judge's
      finding that there were no significant  obstacles  to  relocation  was
      relevant to the substance of the decision giving rise to a claim under
      EX.1. The Judge had not made a clear finding whether the Appellant was
      in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  or   whether   it   was
      unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave.  There  was  not  a  full
      assessment of the child's best interests.


  17. There was no examination of the present links to the  United  Kingdom.
      There was a material misdirection at [28] where the Judge appeared  to
      require independent corroboration of  the  ties  to  Nigeria  and  the
      potential support from ministers in Nigeria. By finding at  [25]  that
      the Appellant's wife had strong connections to Nigeria the  Judge  was
      excluding consideration  of  all  the  other  factors  raised  by  the
      Appellant in his statement as to  why  he  could  not  relocate.  Just
      because they were past ties did not mean he could  relocate  now.  The
      Judge should have taken a forward-looking view of the case. She should
      have taken such factors into account as the protracted  delay  by  the
      Respondent. The Appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  since  2004
      but there had been a delay  by  the  Respondent  in  enforcement.  The
      Appellant's wife had no ties to Nigeria. The Appellant was an integral
      member of the church community. His family would not take care of  him
      if returned.


  18. It was not a question of whether the Appellant's wife and child  would
      choose to accompany the  Appellant  it  was  whether  they  should  be
      compelled to accompany him. There was no criminality in this case  the
      issue was whether the child  would  be  forced  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom  in  breach  of  the  child's  rights  under   EU   law.   The
      reasonableness of expecting the child to leave the United Kingdom  had
      not been assessed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. There had been  no
      consideration of the application of section 55 of the 2009 Act.  There
      needed to be a very careful examination of all  the  relevant  factors
      and circumstances of the child.


  19. In response, the Presenting Officer argued there was no material error
      of law in the decision. The child had not been born  at  the  date  of
      decision but the wife's pregnancy had been referred to in the  refusal
      letter. The Judge had dealt with  all  relevant  matters.  Whilst  the
      Respondent had not enforced removal the Appellant could have chosen to
      leave the United Kingdom as he was an overstayer. The  Respondent  was
      not forcing the child to leave the United Kingdom. The Appellant might
      have to leave but the child could remain in the United  Kingdom  being
      looked after by her mother. The Judge was aware that the  sponsor  had
      come to the United Kingdom at the age of  12.  The  finding  that  the
      Appellant and his wife had strong connections to Nigeria was  open  to
      the Judge on the evidence. The challenge  in  this  case  was  a  mere
      disagreement with the result.


  20. In conclusion counsel argued there were no new matters. The Respondent
      in her rule 24 reply had not challenged the basis of the appeal if the
      issue was in relation to the Judge's failure  to  consider  sufficient
      weight to the child being British. There was other evidence which  was
      pertinent to the issue of obstacles to relocation.

Findings

  21. In this case the Appellant who had no leave  to  be  in  this  country
      sought to remain here because he was married to a British citizen  and
      they had a British citizen  child.  The  Judge's  view  was  that  the
      Appellant could return to Nigeria  as  there  were  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to this and his wife and child  could  choose  to  accompany
      him. The  Appellant  submitted  a  somewhat  chaotic  application  for
      permission to appeal introducing irrelevant matters  such  as  whether
      the Appellant's  friends  would  miss  him  and  making  uncalled  for
      comments about the Judge. It was rightly criticised by the  Respondent
      in her rule 24 response.


  22. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that arguably the  Judge
      had  not  adequately  considered  the  weight  to  be  given  in   the
      proportionality exercise to the fact that  the  child  was  a  British
      citizen. The Appellant's reply to the Respondent's  rule  24  response
      was criticised for raising matters which were not in  the  Appellant's
      onward grounds of appeal against the decision at first instance. I  do
      not find that that is a  valid  objection.  The  Respondent  gave  the
      indication in her rule 24 response that she did not oppose the setting
      aside of the determination for the case to be considered under section
      117B (6) of the 2002 Act. At the hearing before me the  Respondent  no
      longer pursued that argument but instead contended that there  was  no
      material error of law in the Judge's decision and it should be upheld.
      In those circumstances, I consider it reasonable  that  the  Appellant
      should have the opportunity to make all the  points  open  to  him  in
      relation to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


  23. The Appellant's arguments break down  as  follows:  (i)  although  the
      Appellant's daughter had not been born at the date of decision she had
      been born by the date of the hearing and therefore  the  Judge  had  a
      duty to consider her best interests  under  section  55.  This  it  is
      argued the Judge failed to do in the matter should  be  set  aside  on
      that basis; (ii) the Judge did not consider whether the child would be
      forced to leave the United Kingdom in the event of the Appellant being
      removed. As the child was a European Union citizen  this  would  be  a
      breach of European  Union  law  pursuant  to  the  CJEU  authority  of
      Zambrano;  (iii)  the  Judge  had  erred  in  finding  there  were  no
      insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant  and  his  wife  continuing
      their married life in Nigeria and failed to look at all of the factors
      which the Appellant and his wife had put forward  to  show  that  they
      could not be expected to relocate in this way; (iv) there had been  an
      inadequate assessment of the Appellant's private life claim.


  24. In relation to the first point, the Judge was aware that the Appellant
      had  a  British  citizen  child  and  did   factor   that   into   her
      determination. At [33] she stated that she had  first  considered  the
      best interests of the Appellant's daughter who was British as was  the
      child's mother. The argument in this case therefore is  not  that  the
      Judge failed to consider she had a duty under section 55 of  the  2009
      Act or failed to consider that she was dealing with a British  citizen
      wife and child. The argument is that the Judge's  treatment  of  these
      issues was inadequate. This  is  a  reasons  based  challenge.  It  is
      difficult to resist the conclusion however that for  all  its  length,
      the challenge is no more than a disagreement with the result.


  25. The Judge began her findings at [22] onwards. The Appellant had had no
      leave to be in this country for six years. I do not place  any  weight
      on the argument that there has been undue delay by the  Respondent  in
      this case. During that time,  the  Appellant  had  made  a  series  of
      applications which were apparently without merit as they  were  either
      rejected or refused by the Respondent. That necessarily  involved  the
      Respondent in  a  considerable  amount  of  time  in  assessing  those
      applications but the Appellant  continued  to  reside  in  the  United
      Kingdom without leave when  he  could  have  returned  to  Nigeria  to
      regularise his status. That he has been able to stay is because of his
      actions in making applications without merit. It is not because of any
      default on the part of the Respondent. The Appellant may well not have
      regard himself as an over stayer but the plain fact of the  matter  is
      that he was an over stayer and was not entitled to be here.


  26. As the Judge correctly pointed out at [25] there could  have  been  no
      expectation when the Appellant and his wife began  their  relationship
      that the Appellant could remain in the United Kingdom to pursue it.  A
      married couple does not have the right to  choose  where  to  exercise
      their married life. Both the Appellant  and  his  wife  had  extensive
      connections to Nigeria. The Judge set those out in  some  detail.  The
      Appellant's wife in her statement referred vaguely to being unable  to
      return to Nigeria where her life was  threatened.  Although  much  was
      made by counsel for the Appellant of the Judge's apparent  failure  to
      take into account the factors whereby the Appellant could  not  return
      to Nigeria, little by way of substance was produced to show what these
      factors were over and beyond what was already before  the  Judge.  The
      Judge took those factors into account but dismissed them a  course  of
      action which was open to her. It was  not  a  case  of  past  ties  to
      Nigeria; the Appellant's  family  were  still  there  and  these  were
      present ties. The argument that the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons why the Appellant and his wife could relocate to Nigeria is  I
      find an argument that carries no weight but  is  a  mere  disagreement
      with the result.


  27. The core issue in this case is the treatment by the Judge of the  best
      interests of the Appellant's daughter, the issues (i) and (ii) I refer
      to at paragraph 23 above. The Judge noted that the  daughter  was  not
      yet one at the date of the hearing. As the  authorities  indicate,  at
      that age the focus of a child's interests will be on its  parents.  By
      definition there would be no  evidence  of  a  child's  ties  to  this
      country whether friendships, health or education because of  the  very
      young age of the child. It is difficult to  see  therefore  how  given
      such a young child, it could be said that it would be unreasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom with the  Appellant.  The
      Judge found that it was reasonable to expect the child to leave.  This
      is the test under Section EX.1 and whether the Judge referred  to  the
      section in terms is irrelevant, what is important is whether the Judge
      was aware that that was the test. A fair reading of the  determination
      shows that she was so aware.


  28. The skeleton argued that the Judge had not made clear at [32] that the
      Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter.
      This is not a good point. The  Judge  makes  clear  in  the  following
      paragraph at [33] that she is treating  the  three  individuals  as  a
      family. There is  no  adverse  issue  raised  as  to  the  Appellant's
      relationship with his daughter. The  Judge  records  for  example  the
      child care the Appellant carries out, see [13] although it  should  be
      pointed out that  no  medical  evidence  to  justify  the  Appellant's
      presence was submitted see [27].


  29. The issue in relation to Zambrano is a different one. The issue  there
      is whether a European Union citizen, in this case the child  would  be
      forced to leave the European Union because of the removal of a parent.
      The issue of compulsion has been recently considered by the  Court  of
      Appeal in the case of Patel [2017] EWCA Civ 2028. It would be an error
      to start with the desirability of maintaining family life and  jumping
      from that to the conclusion that there was requisite compulsion  on  a
      child to leave the United Kingdom. The correct approach, as the  Court
      of Appeal made clear at paragraph 77, is to ask is  the  situation  of
      the child such that if the non-EU citizen parent  leaves  the  British
      citizen will be unable to care for the child so that the child will be
      compelled to leave.


  30. The Court of Appeal made clear that by posing the question in this way
      they were following a line of authority from the CJEU  which  did  not
      seek to develop new principles but rather was giving  guidance  as  to
      the application of Zambrano. Consideration of the respect  for  family
      life although a relevant factor could not be a trump card  enabling  a
      Tribunal to conclude that a child would be compelled to leave  because
      Article 8 was engaged and family  life  would  be  diminished  by  the
      departure of one parent.  Family  life  would  be  diminished  by  the
      departure of one parent in the great majority of cases.  The  question
      was whether all things considered the departure of  the  parent  would
      mean that the child would be compelled to follow. In Patel, the  Court
      of Appeal pointed out that if one parent left the  British  parent  in
      that case would have been  perfectly  capable  of  looking  after  the
      child. There was no real evidence to the contrary.


  31. In the case before Judge Herlihy there  was  some  evidence  from  the
      Appellant that he had to get up at night to look  after  his  daughter
      but his wife was currently  on  maternity  leave  and  expecting  upon
      return to be paid a good salary at HSBC bank. There had to be  a  full
      enquiry into the facts and full consideration of the details but  that
      did not mean that the Judge had to write a very large number of  pages
      before it could be said that she  had  satisfied  those  requirements.
      What was important was that the Judge should set out the salient facts
      of the case and analyse them accordingly. This the  Judge  did.  There
      would be no compulsion in this case upon the British citizen child  to
      leave the United Kingdom if the Appellant were to  leave  since  there
      was a British citizen parent who could adequately care for  the  child
      in the Appellant's absence. The point made by  the  Appellant  in  his
      onward appeal relating to Zambrano is not one that I uphold.


  32. There is one further outcome which to a certain extent flows from  the
      Zambrano point. That is whether the Appellant could return to  Nigeria
      to make application for entry clearance from there. That was not dealt
      with in terms  in  the  determination  but  was  relied  upon  by  the
      Respondent in submissions to me, see paragraph 19 above. There  is  no
      particular reason to suppose that the  Appellant's  absence  would  be
      unduly long were he to return to Nigeria and apply from  there.  Since
      he has no leave at the present time it  is  not  a  mere  bureaucratic
      requirement that he should return to apply, at  present  it  might  be
      argued that the Appellant is "queue jumping" by making his application
      in country.


  33. The important issue was whether it  would  be  contrary  to  the  best
      interests of the child if the Appellant were removed from  the  United
      Kingdom and she and the Appellant's wife chose to join  the  Appellant
      in Nigeria. The Judge found for the cogent reasons she gave that there
      would be some disruption to  the  daughter's  life  but  it  would  be
      limited  and  family  life  could  continue  in  Nigeria   where   the
      Appellant's wife and daughter had strong links. Although the Appellant
      takes issue with the argument that he has  strong  links  in  Nigeria,
      given the large number of family members he has it is difficult to see
      how it could be said he has not got strong links. He claimed  that  he
      was not in contact with them but that was clearly not accepted by  the
      Judge and the Appellant's disagreement with the Judge's conclusion  on
      that point does not indicate any error of law. The  Judge  indeed  was
      concerned to point out the contrast between the lack of family members
      the Appellant had in the United Kingdom and the large number of family
      members he had in Nigeria, see [26].


  34. The skeleton argued that the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  SF  Albania
      [2017] UKUT 120 was applicable in this case. In SF the  Tribunal  made
      clear that weight had to be given to the Respondent's own  immigration
      directorate instructions (IDIs) because there was no longer  a  ground
      of appeal that a decision was not in accordance with the law.  It  may
      well be that the reason why the Respondent's initial reply under  rule
      24 to the grant of permission  (that  there  could  be  a  fresh  oral
      hearing to consider whether the Appellant should succeed under section
      117B (6)) was because of the uncertainty surrounding  the  content  of
      the IDIs. However, as I have indicated the Respondent did  not  pursue
      that line of argument before me.


35. It is fair to say, whether pursuant to MA Pakistan or  the  IDIs,  that
    very strong reasons are required to show why it would be reasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  very
    strong reasons found by the Judge in this case were in  part  the  very
    young age of the child, the fact that family life  could  be  continued
    elsewhere  and  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  both  had  strong
    connections to Nigeria. Ultimately the assessment of whether  a  factor
    is or is not a strong one is a matter for the trial Judge who has heard
    the evidence. It is not the function of an appellate Tribunal to second-
    guess a matter decided upon by the First-tier. The function on an error
    of law hearing carried out by the Upper Tribunal is to  decide  whether
    the Judge has given adequate reasons for her  decision  such  that  the
    losing party knows why they have lost. For the reasons which I set  out
    at some length above, I consider  that  the  Judge  did  give  adequate
    reasons for her decision and that the  grounds  of  onward  appeal  and
    submissions made to me amount to no more than a disagreement  with  the
    result. I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal and make  no  anonymity
    order.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Signed this 4th of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 4th of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
