

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/10054/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Determination & Reason Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                     |On 14 November 2018               |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 WAQAS AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


               DETERMINATION AND REASONS: case remitted to FtT

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell, promulgated on 11 July 2017, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of leave on human rights grounds.

 2. The grounds of appeal are primarily on the  lines  that  the  FtT  gave
    insufficient weight to the UK citizenship of the appellant's child.

 3. Permission was refused by the FtT but granted by the UT,  on  the  view
    that there was arguable error of approach to the  question  whether  it
    would be reasonable to  expect  the  UK  citizen  child  to  leave  the
    country.

 4. In a rule 24 response dated 25 July 2018 the respondent  accepted  that
    the decision should be set aside for error of law and invited the UT to
    remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

 5. Unfortunately, the terms of that reply were not drawn to the  attention
    of a judge, and the case was listed for hearing in the UT.

 6. The appellant did not attend.  Mr George Burt, who is not  a  qualified
    representative but a friend of the appellant, was present.

 7. Mr A Govan,  Senior  Presenting  Officer,  confirmed  the  respondent's
    position, as above.

 8. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of this case is such that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2002 Act and Practice  Statement
    7.2 to remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.  The member(s) of the  FtT
    chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Buckwell.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            8 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




