

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10130/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 17th August 2017                     |On: 21st August 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AAT
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Nigeria born in 1972.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal turns  on  the  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  the
    Appellant's minor son. I am concerned that  identifying  the  Appellant
    could lead to the identity of the child being revealed  in  the  public
    domain.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2006 with leave to enter as
    a student. In June 2009 he made an in-time application  to  extend  his
    leave. This was refused by the Respondent on the 15th July 2009.  There
    was no further contact between the Appellant and the  Respondent  until
    on the 25th June 2015 the Appellant made an application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds. The Appellant had married a naturalised
    British citizen, a Dr A, and now he wished to remain here with her. The
    Respondent initially refused and certified the claim with reference  to
    s94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  but  the
    certification  was  subsequently  withdrawn   after   the   Appellant's
    representatives launched judicial review  proceedings.    In  a  letter
    dated 23rd March 2016 the decision to refuse was  maintained.  Although
    it was expressly accepted that the Appellant met the  suitability  [10]
    and eligibility requirements [16] set out in Appendix  FM  it  was  not
    accepted that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside of the UK and the matter fell  to  be  refused  with
    reference to paragraph EX.1.  Leave was further refused on private life
    grounds. The Respondent did not consider there to  be  good  reason  to
    grant leave under Article 8 and so leave was refused.


 4. By the date that the appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's family life case had developed in that he and his wife  had
    celebrated the birth of their first child. The little boy was  born  in
    January 2017 and is a British citizen.

 5. The  determination  of  the  appeal  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    promulgated on the 4th April  2017.    The  Tribunal  agreed  with  the
    Respondent's assessment that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    Dr A moving to Nigeria (her country of origin) or in  the  family  life
    being re-established there.  There is no challenge to that  conclusion.
    Next, the Tribunal turned to assess the significance of the  fact  that
    the Appellant now has a  British  child.  At  paragraph  8  (viii)  the
    Tribunal properly directs  itself  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect this child to leave  the  UK.   The  determination
    then cites numerous cases relating to children  and  Article  8  before
    concluding that it would indeed be reasonable.  Finding that the public
    interest in removing persons without  leave  to  remain  outweighs  the
    Appellant's right to a family life with  his  family  in  the  UK,  the
    Tribunal then dismisses the appeal.


    Error of Law

 6. The  grounds  can  be  shortly  stated.  At  paragraph  8   (xxvi)  the
    determination says the following:

         "In AN & Ors v Minister for Justice and Equality [2013] IEHC 480 (a
         non binding decision of the High Court of Ireland) the Judge  noted
         that the suggestion in Sanade "that it is not possible to require a
         British Citizen to relocate outside of the European Union" followed
         on from a submission made by the Respondent at that time.  If  that
         was a concession before the Tribunal in Sanade, it is  certainly  a
         concession that has long since been withdrawn".

 7. Mr Hussain submits this paragraph to encapsulate the error in  approach
    by the Tribunal in this case.   In its  assessment  of  proportionality
    the Tribunal was bound by terms of statute, namely section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship
           with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.


 8. By virtue of s117D of the same Act, a British child is  a  "qualifying"
    child  in  the  context  of  s117B(6)(a).  It  is  accepted  that   the
    Appellant's child is British.


 9. The only remaining question was therefore whether it is  reasonable  to
    expect that child to leave the UK.  As the  determination  points  out,
    there is a  considerable  body  of  caselaw  on  this  matter,  and  in
    particular on the effect of that provision  on  children  who  are  not
    British but are nevertheless  "qualifying" by virtue  of  their  seven-
    years long residence.   In such cases,  the  Tribunal  is  required  to
    weigh the public interest into its consideration of whether  the  child
    might reasonably be expected to leave the country with the  parent  who
    is facing expulsion.     That  is  in  effect  the  approach  that  the
    Tribunal has taken in this case.  Mr Hussain points out, however,  that
    this child was not one of those children. He is British,  and  as  such
    different considerations apply.    In  particular,  the  ratio  of  the
    concession made in Sanade. Mr Hussain took issue  with  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion that this was "certainly a concession that  has  long  since
    been withdrawn".

10. He was right to do  so.  There  was  nothing  before  the  Tribunal  to
    indicate that the concession in Sanade - to the effect that it will not
    be "reasonable" to expect a British child to leave with a parent facing
    expulsion - has "long  since  been  withdrawn".  On  the  contrary,   a
    statement to very similar effect  remains  the  Respondent's  published
    policy to this day. At section 11.2.3 of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes'  (August  2015),
    under the heading  "Would  it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    Citizen child to leave the UK?" the  following  answers  are  given  to
    caseworkers:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship".

(emphasis added)

11. It should be noted that the terms  "parent"  and  "primary  carer"  are
    distinguished, and separated by an  "or".  The  clear  import  of  that
    policy statement is that where a parent of a  British  child  is  being
    required to leave the EU,  the case must  always  be  assessed  on  the
    basis that it would be unreasonable to expect the British Citizen child
    to leave the EU with that parent.


12. Mr Harrison queried whether that policy statement had been  brought  to
    the Tribunal's attention.  If  it  was  not,  that  is  an  unfortunate
    omission: UB (Sri  Lanka)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  85.   I  am  nevertheless
    satisfied that it is a matter of which the Tribunal might reasonably be
    expected to be aware, given that it is guidance that has been expressly
    adopted and endorsed on a number of occasions by the  Court  of  Appeal
    (see for instance MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705) and Upper Tribunal
    (PD and Others [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC)). This section in  particular  has
    recently received some attention from the  Vice  President  in  SF  and
    others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC).     It
    follows that I accept Mr Hussain's submission that the  Tribunal  erred
    in its approach to the significance of the child's British nationality.
    The 'concession' in  Sanade,  an  expression  of  the  law  as  it  has
    developed since Zambrano has not been withdrawn at all; it continues to
    be reflected in the Respondent's own published guidance.

13. What is the significance of that  guidance?   This  case  involves  the
    family life of  a  husband,  wife  and  a  very  young  child.  As  the
    Respondent acknowledges it would be plainly be  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of the child - and absent any criminality disproportionate  -
    to separate that family unit. Realistically, there are  therefore  only
    two options: expect  mother  and  child  to  go  to  Nigeria  with  the
    Appellant, or allow him to remain in accordance with the principles  in
    s117B(6). Applying the terms of the policy, which I take  to  represent
    the Respondent's case on where the balance should  be  struck,  I  find
    that it would not be reasonable to expect  this  child  to  leave  this
    country.   There is accordingly no public interest in  the  Appellant's
    removal and his appeal must be allowed.

      Decisions


14. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved material errors in  approach.  It  is  set
    aside.


15. The decision is remade as follows:  "the appeal is allowed".


16. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            18th August 2017


