
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10006/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 January 2018                    |On 8 March 2018                       |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     DR
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Vencatachellum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1989.  He is said to have
    arrived in the UK in 1998 as a visitor.  He has overstayed ever  since.



 2. On 29 August 2017 the respondent made a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim, following a decision to make a deportation order  against
    him pursuant to section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on  the  basis
    that his presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good.   The
    further rationale  for  that  decision  is  revealed  at  [21]  of  the
    respondent's decision whereby she stated that he had been convicted  of
    an offence which has caused serious harm and that he  is  a  persistent
    offender.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence at a hearing on 3 November 2017.  He
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. The basis upon which permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Lawrence's
    decision was sought and granted  relates  to  his  having  refused  the
    appellant's application for an adjournment of the  hearing.   That  was
    essentially also the basis upon which matters were advanced before  me,
    although some reference on behalf of the  appellant  was  made  to  the
    evidence before Judge Lawrence, and what further  evidence  could  have
    been provided.

 5. So far as the appellant's offending is concerned, to summarise, he  has
    committed offences since 2005, being offences of dishonesty,  violence,
    possession of drugs (both Class A and B) and breach  of  various  court
    orders.  In particular, on 15 April 2015 he was convicted in the  Crown
    Court at Wolverhampton for possession of a  blade  or  sharply  pointed
    article, and wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm.  He  received
    a sentence of 12 months' imprisonment on each count, but suspended  for
    24 months.

 6. On 3 April 2017 in the Crown Court at Wolverhampton he was convicted of
    a breach of that suspended sentence, and remanded  in  custody.  It  is
    important to point out that in terms of the  breach  of  the  suspended
    sentence, he was ordered to serve a term of imprisonment of four months
    which was un-served in relation to the offences for which  he  received
    the suspended sentence.

 7. On  24  May  2017  he  was  convicted  again  in  the  Crown  Court  at
    Wolverhampton for possession of a knife or a  sharply  pointed  article
    and  battery  for  which  he  received  a  sentence  of   six   months'
    imprisonment for possession of the knife and five months'  imprisonment
    for battery.  Those sentences were made to run consecutively, making  a
    total  sentence  of   eleven   months'   imprisonment,   although   the
    respondent's decision letter wrongly states at [17] that the  sentences
    were concurrent.  There was also a matter of possession of cannabis for
    which he received a concurrent sentence of one month's imprisonment.

 8. The offence of battery involved an attack on his partner,  CN,  causing
    what the sentencing judge described as a "nasty disfigurement"  to  her
    eye.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Judge Lawrence referred to the Tribunal having received a  letter  from
    the appellant's then solicitors stating that  they  had  only  received
    instructions on 30 October 2017 (the hearing was listed for 3  November
    2017), that the respondent's bundle had not been received and inquiries
    needed to be made "before an appeal can be lodged" (the judge's words).
     Judge Lawrence noted that the application had been refused  (prior  to
    the hearing) on the basis that the respondent's decision disclosed  the
    case and that that had been served on the appellant on 29 August  2017.
    Judge Lawrence said at [5] that nothing  further  was  heard  from  the
    appellant's solicitors after that refusal of the application.

10. At  [7]  he  referred  to  the  appellant's  oral  application  for  an
    adjournment.  It records that the appellant said that he had spoken  to
    a solicitor "with an Asian sounding name" that he could  not  pronounce
    but she had informed him that she was active  in  pursuing  information
    from Children's Services and could not therefore attend.  He said  that
    he thought the hearing was listed for a case  management  hearing,  and
    asked for the hearing to be adjourned.

11. Judge Lawrence said that he informed the appellant that  "he  knew  his
    case" when the decision was served on  him  in  August  2017.   It  was
    further said that the appellant had had since  July  2016  (a  previous
    decision) to prosecute his case.  Although the appellant said  that  he
    knew nothing about immigration which was why he had not been active  in
    preparing his case, that did not sit with the use  of  the  term  'Case
    Management Hearing'.   The  appellant  told  Judge  Lawrence  that  the
    solicitor that he had approached had asked him to use that term.

12. It was noted that the appellant said that he had prepared a  statement,
    had photographs taken with his children and had e-mails that he  wished
    to rely on.  These were provided to the judge who considered them.   It
    appears that the appellant confirmed to  Judge  Lawrence  that  he  was
    basing his case for remaining in the UK on his  relationship  with  his
    children and that alone.

13. Judge Lawrence then concluded at [8] that the documents provided by the
    appellant addressed those issues.  He then refused the application  for
    an adjournment and put the case back  to  the  afternoon  so  that  the
    documents could be copied and served on the Presenting Officer.

    The grounds and submissions

14. The grounds contend that the judge was wrong when he said that  nothing
    further was heard from  the  appellant's  solicitors  after  the  first
    application for an adjournment.   In  fact,  they  wrote  again  on  31
    October 2017.  The requests for an adjournment were made on  the  basis
    that the appellant had  only  recently  instructed  solicitors  (on  30
    October 2017) and that they had not had sufficient time to  advise  him
    and prepare for his hearing.   He  had  not  had  legal  representation
    before then, having lodged his notice of appeal himself.   He  had  not
    received  the  respondent's  bundle  of  documents  and  had  not   had
    sufficient time to collate important documentary evidence in support of
    his claim, including reports from  his  probation  officer  and  Social
    Services.

15. It is further contended that the appellant had not had ample notice  of
    the hearing as the notice of hearing was dated  9  October  2017  which
    would provide insufficient time to obtain expert reports and compile  a
    bundle of documents ready for submissions seven days in advance of  the
    hearing.  Further, it is contended that the reasons  for  refusing  the
    application for an adjournment on the second occasion, namely that  the
    Home Office bundle should have been served on the appellant "days ago",
    would still have provided  the  appellant  with  insufficient  time  to
    address the Secretary of State's allegations.

16.  Ms  Vencatachellum's  submissions  reflected  the  grounds.   It   was
    submitted that the appellant's partner, ST, to whom he is now  engaged,
    would have been in attendance, and wanted to  give  evidence  had  they
    understood that the hearing before Judge Lawrence was the full hearing.
     The appellant had understood that it was a  case  management  hearing.
    The judge's decision was arrived at on the basis of the  non-attendance
    of any witnesses.

17. Submissions were made in terms of  the  appellant's  private  life,  he
    having spent most of his life in the UK, arriving when he was  aged  9.
    Although it was accepted that his relationships  are  complicated,  and
    that there is a restraining order in respect of a former partner, the e-
    mail that was before the judge, to which he referred  at  [28],  states
    that she is not opposed to supervised contact between the appellant and
    her children.  It was submitted that the appellant ought to  have  been
    entitled to adduce evidence in relation to his  relationship  with  his
    children.

18. Mr Bramble submitted that the issue came down to one of  'fairness'  to
    the appellant.  He accepted that  there  was  some  indication  in  the
    documents before him that there were people prepared to  speak  on  his
    behalf as witnesses.  He referred to the respondent's 'rule  24'  reply
    which  nevertheless  suggested  that  the  judge  had  dealt  with  the
    adjournment application appropriately.

    Assessment

19. There were two applications for an adjournment made in advance  of  the
    hearing before Judge Lawrence, one on 30 October 2017 and the second on
    31 October 2017.  The first was refused on the basis that the appellant
    had had ample notice of the hearing, according to  the  endorsement  on
    the Tribunal's file cover and the written instruction within the  file.
    The second was refused on the basis that the renewed application merely
    reiterates the earlier application.  It states  that  the  respondent's
    bundle should have been served on the appellant days  ago  and  in  any
    event the case he had to address was set out in detail in the  decision
    letter dated 29 August 2017.

20. It is as well to set out the basis upon which the  application  for  an
    adjournment was made in the letter dated 30 October  2017.   It  states
    that  the  solicitors  were  only  instructed  by  the  appellant  that
    afternoon and were still without a full  set  of  papers  in  order  to
    advise the appellant.  The letter continues that the appellant had said
    that whilst he was aware that the matter was listed for  hearing  on  3
    November 2017, he mistakenly believed the appeal was listed for  a  CMR
    only, and only learnt of the appeal being listed  for  a  full  hearing
    after he faxed a copy of the notice of hearing to the solicitors.   The
    letter goes on to state that they are without the  respondent's  bundle
    of documents and the appellant had said that he  had  not  been  served
    with a copy of  the  same.   It  states  that  the  appellant  had  not
    previously instructed solicitors.

21. The letter continues  that  in  addition  to  the  appellant's  mother,
    girlfriend and other relatives wishing to attend to  give  evidence  in
    support of his appeal,  the  appellant  had  three  children  with  two
    previous partners  "who  are  British  citizens".   The  appellant  had
    instructed that immediately before  his  incarceration  he  was  having
    contact with all three children and had an extremely good  relationship
    with them.  The appellant had informed them that all of his  children's
    mothers support his appeal and were willing to  provide  statements  to
    that effect.  The solicitors also understood from  the  appellant  that
    Social Services had been involved with two of  his  children  following
    the incident that led to his conviction on 15 April 2015.

22. The letter concludes by asking that the hearing be adjourned so that he
    could obtain reports from Social Services with whom  the  children  are
    already involved, assessing their best interests, and that reports from
    the Probation Service relating to the  appellant's  rehabilitation  and
    risk of reoffending could be  obtained,  as  well  as  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle.  The letter concludes by stating that as a  result
    of the appellant's continued detention, at that time at an  immigration
    removal  centre,  he  had  experienced  difficulties   in   instructing
    solicitors to assist him with the appeal  and  now  had  to  rely  upon
    friends to assist him with seeking legal representation.

23. In considering Judge Lawrence's  decision,  it  is  apparent  that  the
    appellant gave  inconsistent  evidence,  reacted  adversely  to  cross-
    examination, and appeared to minimise his  offending.   Judge  Lawrence
    concluded that he was not a witness of truth and stated at [47] that he
    would "[tell]  any  lie  to  suit  his  particular  existing  immediate
    circumstance".  In this regard he noted that the appellant had  adopted
    a multitude of names  and  dates  of  birth.   His  assessment  of  the
    appellant as a witness was not however simply, or even mainly, based on
    that fact.  It seems to me that Judge Lawrence had very good reasons to
    consider that the appellant was not a truthful witness.

24. His lack of credibility plainly undermined his  claim  that  he  has  a
    relationship with his three  children.   In  addition,  Judge  Lawrence
    referred at [25] to a card that purported to come from the children but
    plainly was produced by an adult.

25. He similarly was entitled to be sceptical about the  appellant's  claim
    that he is in a relationship with ST and that they are  engaged  to  be
    married.  It is also to be noted that the appellant had badly assaulted
    one of his previous partners CN and in  respect  of  whom  there  is  a
    restraining order 'until further order'.

26. The question is however, should the appeal have been adjourned for  the
    reasons advanced.

27. It is not difficult to understand why Judge Lawrence decided to  refuse
    the application for an adjournment.  The appellant had  had  notice  of
    the respondent's decision well before the  hearing.   The  decision  is
    dated 29 August 2017.  Notice of the hearing  was  sent  to  him  on  9
    October 2017 when he was detained, for the hearing on 3 November  2017.
    The appellant seems to have waited until almost the last moment  before
    instructing a legal representative.  Indeed,  until  Ms  Vencatachellum
    appeared to represent the appellant before me, it does not appear  that
    he had taken any steps to instruct a representative in relation to  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  That suggests a consistent  pattern
    of inactivity on the part of the appellant.

28. I bear in mind that in relation to the hearing before  Judge  Lawrence,
    the appellant was in detention.  That however, does not  mean  that  he
    was unable to obtain legal representation, either on his  own  or  with
    the assistance of anyone else with whom he is  said  to  have  a  close
    relationship in the UK.  In addition  however,  on  the  basis  of  the
    documents that Judge Lawrence had before him, and  which  he  assessed,
    namely e-mails and statements from ST,  her  mother,  and  CN  (who  he
    assaulted) there was information which supported the contention that he
    has a relationship with his children in the UK.  Those  three  children
    are all under the age of six.

29. I do not conclude that it was essential for Judge Lawrence to have  had
    before him any  risk  assessment  from  Children's  Services,  such  an
    assessment being required before the appellant is able to have  contact
    with his two children whose mother is CN.   Furthermore,  I  have  some
    scepticism about whether any such report would  be  favourable  to  the
    appellant in terms of advancing his appeal.

30. Nevertheless, I do consider that Judge  Lawrence's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's appeal, and his relationships in the UK, was an  unbalanced
    one in the sense that he did not have before him evidence which  could,
    conceivably, have affected his decision, namely evidence from witnesses
    about his relationship  in  particular  with  his  children.  The  best
    interests of those children must be to the fore in  any  assessment  of
    the issues.

31. On that basis,  and  reflecting  on  the  issue  of  'fairness',  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Lawrence was wrong to  refuse  to  accede  to  the
    application for an adjournment, and that this compromised the  fairness
    of the proceedings.  In those circumstances, his decision must  be  set
    aside.  A further consequence is that the appeal must  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

32.  However,  the  appellant  must  be  in  no  doubt  that  it   is   his
    responsibility to ensure that his appeal is ready to proceed when it is
    listed.  Failure on his part to ensure that  the  appeal  is  ready  to
    proceed, whether in terms of legal representation or the production  of
    relevant reports or the calling of witnesses, is  unlikely,  given  the
    history referred to above, to result in any future  Tribunal  resolving
    adjournment issues in his favour.  If it was not clear before, it  must
    be clear now that it is up to him to ensure that the appeal is ready to
    proceed.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, with  no  findings
    of fact preserved.

    Because this appeal involves minors, the following anonymity  direction
    is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Kopieczek
    7/03/18
