
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10449/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 April 2018                        |On 30 April 2018                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               MR HAMZA TAHIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  25  February
    1998. The appellant is therefore now an adult.

2.   In this appeal I will  continue  to  refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations at the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).

Background

3.   The appellant claims to have been solely dependent on Mr Tahir  Mushtaq
    (the sponsor), the appellant's father. This  is  despite  having  lived
    with his mother in Pakistan for a number of years.  He claims that  the
    sponsor has had sole responsibility for him and therefore that he meets
    the requirements of paragraph 297 (1) (e)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The ECO considered the  application  under  paragraph  297  but  having
    considered the requirement that the appellant's father had to have sole
    responsibility for him considered that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that there were any  serious  compelling  circumstances  that
    made his exclusion undesirable.  The respondent was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had provided evidence that the sponsor  was  making  "the
    important decisions relating to his upbringing" such as those  relating
    to his personal care, education, health and faith.   Nor  did  the  ECO
    consider there to be any exceptional circumstances which  rendered  the
    decision inconsistent with the appellant's right to respect for  family
    and private life as enshrined in law  by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR).   The  application  was  therefore
    refused by the ECO.

4.   The appellant appealed that refusal and his appeal was reconsidered  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager on 13 September 2016.  The Entry  Clearance
    Manager concluded, having had regard to both Article 8 of the ECHR  and
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  that
    the decision was nevertheless in accordance with the law.

5.    The  appeal  against  the  refusal  came  before  Judge  Callow   (the
    Immigration Judge) on 4 July 2017.  The  Immigration  Judge  summarised
    the respective cases and noted that in his  judgment  the  sponsor  had
    been  solely  responsibility  for  making  "all  important   decisions"
    concerning the appellant's education and health and "he alone" had been
    financially providing for all members of  the  family.   The  ease  and
    frequency of electronic communications means showed  that  the  sponsor
    was in daily communication with  his  family.   The  Immigration  Judge
    rightly recognised that, following the commencement into force  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, findings that the appellant qualified  under  the
    respective Immigration Rule were insufficient by themselves to  justify
    success in the appeal.  The only ground of appeal that  was  valid  was
    that the respondent's  decision  breached  the  appellant's  rights  to
    respect for his private and family life under Article 8.  He recognised
    that respect should be accorded to the assessment made by the Secretary
    of State, but where the Rules were met, or appeared to  be  met,  there
    must be a significant indication as to why the public interest would be
    adversely affected by the grant of leave to an individual who  met  the
    requirements of the Rules, to justify refusal.  The  Immigration  Judge
    had regard to the  case  of  Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.   That  case
    demonstrated  in  the   Immigration   Judge's   view   that   necessary
    consideration need only be given to Article 8 where the Rules had  been
    met, or appeared to have been met,  there  were  adequate  reasons  for
    allowing the appellant to stay in the UK for him to allow the appeal on
    that  basis.   However,  the  Immigration  Judge  also  set   out   the
    requirements of Section 117A-B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (2002 Act).  The Immigration Judge considered that  the
    provisions  of   those   sections   were   the   only   "countervailing
    considerations" to which he had to have regard in deciding whether  the
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights  was  justified.  He
    concluded that the interference with the appellant's Article  8  rights
    was not justified on these facts. Accordingly, he  allowed  the  appeal
    but made no anonymity direction. The Immigration Judge decided to  make
    no fee award as the  appeal  had  succeeded  as  a  result  of  further
    evidence of the circumstances appertaining at the date of the  decision
    to refuse, which could have been produced before  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

6.   In the appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  respondent  takes  issue  with
    the application of the Rules to the facts of this  case,  pointing  out
    that both parents were involved in the upbringing of the appellant  and
    it would be wholly exceptional therefore for one of them to have  "sole
    responsibility".   Even  if  only  one  parent  was  involved  in   the
    appellant's upbringing this did not mean that  that  parent  had  "sole
    responsibility".

7.   On a renewed application for permission to appeal, on 12  January  2018
    Judge  Macleman  concluded  that  the  grounds  raised  were  at  least
    arguable.  He pointed out that the appellant had  applied  just  before
    his 18th birthday to join his father but that it was arguable that  the
    judge had erred in concluding that his  father  did  indeed  have  sole
    responsibility.  Accordingly, he gave permission to appeal.

8.   At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    respondent's representative Ms Ahmad relied on the leading case  of  TD
    Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  0049.   She  pointed  out  that  the   test   was
    conclusively stated in that case.  Both parents must be involved in the
    upbringing of the child and it would be an  exceptional  case  for  one
    parent to have "sole responsibility".  The test was one of control  and
    direction of the child's upbringing.  Ms Ahmad pointed  out  that  that
    test was plainly not satisfied on these facts.

9.   Mr Chohan, on the other hand, pointed out that the case was  indeed  an
    unusual one.  There was such frequent contact between father and  child
    that this satisfied the "sole responsibility" test in paragraph 297  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The frequency of contact was such  because  the
    family had been separated involuntarily.  The father had  settled  with
    the mother but the mother had had  to  return  to  Pakistan  due  to  a
    bereavement.   The  appellant's  father  made  all  decisions  of   any
    importance including which school he should attend and paid the  school
    fees.   The  control  and  direction  of  his  upbringing  was   plain.
    Accordingly, the test was satisfied.

10.  Sections 117A-B of the 2002 Act do not apply because the appellant  had
    not been a burden on taxpayers and would be  supported  financially  by
    his father.  He also had learned some English.

11.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law.

My conclusions

12.  Having carefully considered  this  matter  and  applied  the  case  law
    including the case of TD Yemen referred  to  above,  I  find  that  the
    appellant did not fall within the  exceptional  category  of  a  person
    whose upbringing was solely controlled and directed by his father.  The
    reasons the  Immigration  Judge  gave  for  so  finding  are  set  out,
    according to him (see paragraph 14), in paragraphs 4 and 8 to 9 of  his
    decision. However, when one reads those  paragraphs,  the  only  really
    relevant findings are at 8,  where  the  Immigration  Judge  finds  the
    sponsor to be the sole breadwinner, not an  unusual  situation  and  in
    paragraph 9, where  he finds that the  sponsor made "... All  important
    decisions concerning his education and health". He also found that  the
    sponsor paid  all  the  costs  on  the  Pakistan  property,  where  the
    appellant's mother lived with the appellant another  brother,  together
    with the costs on the English property, where  the  appellant's  father
    lived with an elder son. He found that the sponsor "made all  important
    decisions concerning education health" but gave  no  reasons  for  that
    finding. However, as the  respondent  points  out  in  her  grounds  of
    appeal, elsewhere in his  decision  the  Immigration  Judge  found  the
    responsibility to have been shared,  pointing  out  that  other  family
    members were involved in the upbringing of the appellant. In  paragraph
    14 the Immigration Judge found that the mother "assisted... in  day-to-
    day matters". The lack of any reasoning to support the conclusion  that
    the sponsor was solely responsible for the appellant's  upbringing  and
    indeed responsible for all education and other decisions suggests  that
    this conclusion was not one the Immigration Judge could properly  reach
    on the evidence. More specifically, the grounds of appeal contend  that
    the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  address  the  extent  of  the
    mother's input into the appellant's life. He had after all  lived  with
    the mother continuously for approximately 10 years by the date  of  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal. The  conclusion  that  the  sponsor  was
    solely responsible  for  the  appellant  was  not  supported  by  clear
    findings but in any event I doubt on these facts  that  the  conclusion
    was one of properly open to the Immigration Judge on the evidence given
    the high threshold set by paragraph 297 (1) (e).

13.  Therefore,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  find  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 (1) (e) were not met on the balance of  probabilities  at
    the date of the application. It follows that this order  to  have  been
    the starting position for consideration of the human rights appeal.

14.  The Immigration Judge then embarked on a long analysis of  the  current
    state of human rights law. However, in my view, Article 8 did not  save
    the appellant. As the Immigration Judge rightly observed, it is only if
    the appellant met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  that  it
    would be proper to address the appeal under Article  8  (see  paragraph
    17).  The fact that the appellant appeared not to a friend  the  public
    interest considerations in  sections  117A  -  D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not mean that his application ought
    to succeed. They were merely neutral factors. Success or failure  under
    the rules was closely aligned to the question whether the appellant  to
    succeed under Article 8. The appeal under Article 8 was the sole appeal
    ground before the Immigration Judge.

15.  There is a plethora of recent authority, for example Kopoi [2017]  E  R
    (D) 58 and Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757, that  tends  to  suggest  that
    there is no obligation on the state  to  grant  entry  clearance  to  a
    foreign national to commence  or  resume  family  life  in  the  UK.  I
    appreciate the circumstances in which this family came  to  be  divided
    were unfortunate and accidental, but that does not  mean  there  is  an
    obligation on the respondent to grant clearance in this case. The  case
    of Onuorah emphasises the states right to control entry clearance  into
    its territory and effective immigration control  means  refusing  those
    who do not qualify under the rules from entering. It is  a  mistake  to
    confuse the question whether the "gateway" has been gone  through  with
    the issue of proportionality which is only considered if  that  gateway
    is gone through. The Tribunal need only consider the proportionality of
    the decision if the applicant established the right to  form  a  family
    life in the UK in the first place.

16.  I am not satisfied on these facts that the appellant has shown  he  had
    any right to come into the UK to form or re-form family life  with  his
    father. Even if he had, it would be proportionate for the respondent to
    enforce  immigration  controls  by  insisting  that  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. He has lived with his mother for
    many years.  The appellant did not  qualify  within  rule  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

17.  A limited interference with the family life formed between  members  of
    this family was surely justified by the need to  enforce  and  maintain
    effective  immigration  control.   The  respondent  was   rightly   not
    satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the Immigration Rules were
    met and in the  circumstances  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

18.  For these reasons I have concluded there was a material  error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I have  decided  to  set
    aside that decision and re-make the decision.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal against  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
allowed.  I substitute a decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  against
the respondent's refusal of entry clearance.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 24 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Immigration Judge made no fee award.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 24th of April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

