


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/10328/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th March 2018                            |On 4th April 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     D T
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barri, Solicitor from Chapeltown Citizens
Advice Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 18th October 2004.  He
       applied, for the first time, to join his father in the  UK  who  has
       limited  leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee  in  January  2015.  This
       application was refused as it was not accepted  that  the  appellant
       and his father were related  as  claimed.  The  appellant  reapplied
       supplying DNA evidence to show that he was related as claimed to his
       father but on 16th September 2015 the application was refused on the
       basis he had not shown he was part of his father's family  unit  and
       so  could  not  show  compliance  with  paragraph  352D(iv)  of  the
       Immigration Rules. His appeal against the decision of 16th September
       2015 was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  GRJ  Robson  in  a
       decision promulgated on the 15th May 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Chamberlain in a decision dated 21st November 2017 on the basis that
       it was arguable that the  First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
       failing to consider and properly apply BM & AL (352D(iv);meaning  of
       "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 55 due to only considering  the
       number of days the appellant and his father spent together  and  not
       the surrounding circumstances.

    3. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. At the start of the hearing we  drew  the
       attention of the  parties  to  the  Home  Office  guidance:  "Family
       reunion: for  refugees  and  those  with  humanitarian  protection",
       version 2 published on 29th July 2016 which at page  18  deals  with
       the issue of children conceived to male refugees prior to flight but
       born post-flight in the country of origin  which  states  that  they
       should be seen as part of any pre-flight family.

    4. After hearing submissions on error of law we  informed  the  parties
       that we found the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law.  It  was
       agreed by both parties that the appeal could be  remade  immediately
       on the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  After  hearing
       submissions on re-making from Mr Melvin we informed the parties that
       we would remake the decision by allowing it. We set out our  reasons
       for our decisions below.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. Mr Barri argued for the appellant that the First-tier Tribunal erred
       in law as the appellant was living with  his  father  from  December
       2006 to July 2007 when they were separated.  Paragraph  352D(iv)  of
       the Immigration Rules requires the appellant to have lived with  his
       father at the time when the family split. The appellant lived  on  a
       day to day basis in his father's home with  his  father's  wife  and
       father's mother at the time his father fled  to  claim  asylum.  The
       method of assessing whether they were part of the unit by looking at
       the number of days the appellant and his father spent together would
       be prejudicial against those who worked away from  the  family  home
       and was not legally  correct  when  the  guidance  in  BM  &  AL  is
       considered.

    6. Further, it is submitted, there clearly is family life  between  the
       appellant and  his  father,  and  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
       interferes with that family  life  as  this  cannot  take  place  in
       Eritrea due to the grant of refugee status  to  his  father.  It  is
       submitted that this  interference  was  not  proportionate,  as  the
       relevant Immigration Rule could be met,  and  so  refusal  of  entry
       clearance is a breach of Article 8 ECHR and the First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law by finding otherwise.

    7. Mr Melvin accepted that the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal was
       short. He argued however that the factual  basis  for  the  decision
       based on the number of days the appellant spent with his father  was
       correct on the sponsor's own evidence. He submitted that the  First-
       tier Tribunal had not found  that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
       living in the sponsor's home was true; and even if the appellant had
       been living with the sponsor's family for the claimed period of time
       he would not have met the Immigration  Rules.  The  entry  clearance
       officer had raised in the refusal that he was not satisfied with the
       appellant's lack  of  supporting  documentary  evidence,  but  these
       concerns had not really been dealt with by the First-tier  Tribunal.
       Mr Melvin also raised the issue as to why  the  sponsor's  wife  had
       travelled earlier than the appellant's first application to join his
       father but accepted that this issue  had  not  been  raised  in  the
       refusal notice.

Conclusions - Error of Law

Requirements for leave to enter or remain as the child of a refugee

      352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
      parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:
        (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
        granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and
        (ii) is under the age of 18; and
        (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
        civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and
        (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at
        the time that the person granted asylum left the country of their
        habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and
        (v) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by virtue
        of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F of the
        Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their own right;
        and
        (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom entry
        clearance for entry in this capacity.

    8. The only issue in this appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       whether the appellant was part of his father's family unit when  his
       father left his country of formal habitual  residence  in  order  to
       seek asylum,  and  thus  whether  he  could  comply  with  paragraph
       352D(iv) of the Immigration Rules set out above.  DNA  evidence  has
       shown he is his sponsor's biological son, and this  is  accepted  by
       the respondent.

    9. The reported case of  BM  &  AL  holds  that  the  question  of  the
       definition of a 'family unit' for  the  purposes  of  para  352D(iv)
       Immigration Rules is a question of fact.  Further,  it  is  said,  a
       family unit is not  limited  to  children  who  lived  in  the  same
       household as the refugee. We find it was therefore an error  of  law
       by the First-tier Tribunal to  consider  that  the  issue  could  be
       determined simply  by  calculating  the  number  of  days  that  the
       appellant and his father spent  under  the  same  roof  particularly
       given that the appellant's father had a  profession,  in  this  case
       being a soldier, which required him by necessity to live  away  from
       his home much of the time. This was a failure to follow the guidance
       in BM & AL to consider all of the facts of the case and not to limit
       the definition to those who had lived in the same household.

   10. We are strengthened in our opinion  that  a  focus  only  on  actual
       physical cohabitation in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
       wrong by the  fact  that  the  respondent's  own  guidance  ("Family
       reunion: for  refugees  and  those  with  humanitarian  protection",
       version 2  published  on  29th  July  2016)  advises  that  children
       conceived before the (male)  refugee  fled  their  country  to  seek
       asylum and born after they left should be seen as part of the family
       unit. Clearly such children would not have any physical cohabitation
       in the same dwelling house.

   Submissions - Remaking

   11. Mr Melvin submitted that there was insufficient  evidence  that  the
       appellant lived with the sponsor's family between 2006 and 2007  and
       so was part of the  family  unit.  He  argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had  not  found  that  the  sponsor's  evidence  should  be
       accepted as credible in the conclusions section of the decision, and
       the  entry  clearance  officer  had  found  the   evidence   to   be
       insufficient. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

Conclusions - Remaking

   12. The appellant's history, as presented by his sponsor and father,  is
       that the appellant lived with his mother, to whom he,  the  sponsor,
       was not married, from his birth in October 2004 until December 2006.
       During this time  the  appellant's  father  was  a  soldier  in  the
       Eritrean military. He provided financial support to the  appellant's
       mother and visited them when he was on leave. The appellant's father
       married another woman in January 2006 and subsequently  had  another
       child in Eritrea with his wife. In December 2006 the appellant moved
       to live in his father's home as he was not safe with his mother. The
       appellant's father continued to work  as  a  soldier  and  so  lived
       mostly in barracks. The appellant's father visited the appellant for
       two days in December 2006 and approximately three days in July  2007
       whilst on home leave from his work as a soldier.

   13. The appellant's father and sponsor left Eritrea on 6th July 2007  to
       claim asylum, and  has  lived  in  the  UK  since  April  2009.  The
       appellant's father's wife and oldest daughter were  able  to  escape
       Eritrea and join him in the UK in 2013 but the appellant  could  not
       go with them. There is no  evidence  of  communication  between  the
       appellant and his father, who is illiterate. However, in  June  2014
       the appellant was able to escape from Eritrea and went  to  live  in
       the IR Diena China Camp, Zone One, Addis Ababa, a UN refugee camp in
       Ethiopia where he remains until now. The appellant's father  visited
       him in Ethiopia in 2014 and provided photographs of them together to
       the First-tier Tribunal. The whereabouts of the  appellant's  mother
       is unknown.

   14. We find that the history as outlined above was found to be  truthful
       and credible by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  was  asked  to
       accept the credibility of the  sponsor,  see  paragraph  28  of  the
       decision, and who based the decision on that evidence being accurate
       in the findings at paragraph 35 to 41 with no comment  that  it  was
       not credible.

   15. We find that the history, taking all of the circumstances as set out
       above into account, means that the  appellant  was  a  part  of  his
       father and sponsor's family unit at the time when  his  father  left
       Eritrea, his country of habitual residence to seek  asylum.  He  was
       based in his father's home with father's wife and other child for  a
       settled period of more than six months prior to his father's  flight
       as a refugee. This was not a time-limited or temporary  arrangement.
       There is no evidence  that  the  appellant  has  been  part  of  any
       different family unit since he joined his father's one  in  December
       2006.

   16. The other aspects of paragraph 352D are accepted as being  met,  and
       as a result we find that the Immigration Rule is met and thus  there
       is no public interest in refusing entry clearance to the  appellant.
       We  therefore  find  that  to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  is   a
       disproportionate interference with his  right  to  respect  for  his
       family life with his father, and as a result a breach of  Article  8
       ECHR.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3.  We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on human  rights
      grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  28th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of our decision to re-make the decision in the  appeal  by
    allowing it, we have considered whether to make a fee  award.  We  have
    had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
    Immigration Appeals. We have decided to make no fee  award  because  we
    were not asked to make one by the appellant.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley                                    Date:  28th  March
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


