
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10492/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 November 2017                      |On 30 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                 mr Ali Raza
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richardson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 25 August 1990.
     He appealed against the respondent's decision dated  21  October  2015
    refusing his application for further leave to remain.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 1 March  2017,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Alis (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the
    respondent's decision because he found that striking a balance  between
    the interests of the appellant and his wife and that of  the  state  in
    upholding its immigration policy, it would not be  disproportionate  to
    require the appellant to leave.

 3. The grounds conceded the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
    Rules but nevertheless, the manner in which he did not meet the  Rules,
    that  is,  the  immigration  status  requirement,  was   relevant   and
    potentially determinative of the appeal on Article  8  grounds  outside
    the Rules.  In particular, with regard to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

 4. The grounds  claimed  that  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40,  was  also  of
    relevance.  The appellant's accepted ability to meet the  Rules  if  he
    was to seek entry clearance  from  abroad,  dictated  that  the  public
    interest in removing him was so diminished that  his  appeal  ought  to
    have been allowed.

 5. In his analysis of Agyarko the judge said at [48]:

         "The Supreme Court was not saying that if an application was  bound
         to succeed there would be no public interest in removal.  The court
         suggested that it might make a difference as  against  did  make  a
         difference."

    The grounds claimed that by focusing on the word "might"  at  [48]  the
    judge to some extent missed the point and ignored  the  expectation  in
    Chikwamba that cases where an appellant should  be  compelled  to  seek
    leave from abroad would be rare.

 6. Judge Grant-Hutchison granted leave on 18  September  2017.   She  said
    that the judge considered the argument at the hearing that the accepted
    ability of the appellant to meet the Immigration Rules,  save  for  the
    immigration status requirement, was  highly  relevant  and  potentially
    determinative of the appeal on Article 8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.
    That argument was founded on [51] of Agyarko.

         "If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
         unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at
         least if an application were made from outside the UK,  then  there
         might be no public interest in his or her removal."

    The ratio in Chikwamba as expressly preserved by the Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko strongly supported an argument that  the  appellant's  accepted
    ability to meet the Immigration Rules if he was to seek entry clearance
    from abroad dictated that the public interest in removing him was  such
    that his appeal ought to have been allowed.  Judge Grant-Hutchison  was
    of the view that by focusing on the word "might" it was  arguable  that
    the judge missed the point and ignored  the  expectation  in  Chikwamba
    such that he arguably erred in his assessment.

 7. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response was  dated  8  October  2017.
    That claimed that the judge was open to find when  considering  Agyarko
    that if a case was bound to succeed,  that  did  not  mean  the  public
    interest would not be considered. It was open for  the  judge  to  find
    that the appellant should make the application from abroad.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Richardson relied upon the grounds.  There was no skeleton argument.
     The only issue was that the application was made at a  time  when  the
    appellant had no leave.  Given the fact that  the  appellant  satisfied
    the Immigration Rules in all other respects  apart  from  his  lack  of
    immigration status at the time of the application,  the  appeal  should
    have been allowed.

 9. Mr Tufan  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  exceptional  about  the
    circumstances.  The appellant had formed a relationship here at a  time
    when his immigration status was known to be precarious to both parties.
      See  Rajendran  (S.117B  -  family  life)  [2016]  UKUT  138   (IAC).
    Precariousness was a criterion of relevance to family life as  well  as
    private  life  cases.   The  appellant  had  delayed  in   making   his
    application until August 2015, whereas he had ceased his  studies  some
    twelve months before he  submitted  his  application.   His  leave  was
    curtailed by the respondent on 21 January 2015.  The appellant and  his
    wife embarked on a relationship  in  the  knowledge  that  he  was  not
    attending college and had failed to do anything  about  his  situation.
    The judge found that his  status  was  precarious.   See  [45]  of  the
    decision.

10. Mr Richardson submitted that Chikwamba is authority that it is only  in
    comparatively rare situations  that  an  Article  8  appeal  should  be
    dismissed on  the  basis  that  it  would  be  proportionate  and  more
    appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

11. Mr Richardson submitted that the ratio in Chikwamba  preserved  by  the
    Supreme Court in Agyarko   strongly  supported  an  argument  that  the
    appellant's accepted ability to meet the Immigration Rules if  he  were
    to seek entry clearance from abroad, dictated that the public  interest
    in removing him was so diminished that his appeal ought  to  have  been
    allowed.  Mr Richardson submitted that in focusing on the word  "might"
    at [48] of his decision, the judge to some extent might have missed the
    point and ignored the expectation in Chikwamba.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. I find that the judge did not miss the point.  He carried out a careful
    analysis of the parties' circumstances in light of the appropriate case
    law. He took into account the precariousness of their family situation.
     Their relationship had commenced at a  time  when  the  appellant  had
    ceased his studies and failed to do anything about his lack of  status.
    I do not accept that the judge erred in making his finding at [48] that
    the Supreme Court suggested  that  it  "might"  make  a  difference  as
    against "did" make a difference.   Chikwamba  refers  to  comparatively
    rare  cases,  in  particular  family  cases  involving  children.   The
    appellant and his wife have no children.

13. The quote from Agyarko at [51] has been taken  out  of  context  in  Mr
    Richardson's   submissions.   [51]   was   primarily   concerned   with
    consideration of the weight of the public interest, comparing automatic
    deportation of a foreign criminal as deserving considerable  weight  to
    be attached as compared to  there  being  no  public  interest  in  the
    removal of a person otherwise certain to be granted leave to  enter  if
    applying from  abroad,  notwithstanding  unlawful  presence  here.  The
    Presenting Officer before the judge accepted  the  appellant  satisfied
    the financial and English language requirements  and  further  accepted
    that if he had made an in-time application that he would have satisfied
    the Rules. See [8] of the decision. There  was  no  concession  on  the
    particular facts of  the  appellant's  case  that  if  he  returned  to
    Pakistan  to  make  an  out  of  country  application   that   he   was
    ".....otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter....."  as per [51]
    of Agyarko such that  in  such  circumstances  the  judge  should  have
    allowed the appeal.

14. The judge clearly looked at the circumstances of the appellant and  the
    sponsor in considerable detail. The judge found  there  were  no  "very
    significant difficulties" in terms of  EX.1(b).  See  also  Agyarko  at
    [60].

15. Having analysed the same and having set the circumstances  against  the
    case law, the judge found that whilst it might make a difference,  (see
    decision  at  [48]),  nevertheless  in  the  particular  circumstances,
    bearing in mind the balance between the interests of the individual and
    that  of  the  state  in  upholding  immigration  policy,  it  was  not
    disproportionate to require the appellant to leave. What the judge  had
    to do was carry out a balancing exercise; he  did  so.  The  fact  that
    family  life  had  been  established  in  the  full  knowledge  of  the
    appellant's lack of status affected the weight to be attached  to  such
    family life. See Agyarko at [50].

16. I find the judge was entitled to come to his findings and conclusion on
    the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the Tribunal contains no error of law and shall  stand.



No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 24 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




