
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10376/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              daniel ryan vihm
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Australia, date of  birth  10  March  1982
    appeals against the Respondent's decision, dated 16  October  2015,  to
    refuse entry clearance as a partner under Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules.
    The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain (the Judge) who, on 6 May  2016  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds bearing in mind the original decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer.

2.   The judge dismissed the appeal, it being accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had not at the relevant time met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules albeit that he might now at a later date be able to  do  so.   It
    followed that any appeal under the Immigration Rules must fail but  the
    outcome was potentially germane to the consideration of Article 8  ECHR
    outside of the Rules. The Appellant did not appear. Notice  of  Hearing
    was given on 5 December 2016 to the Appellant's last notified  address.
    No request was made for an adjournment. I  decide  to  proceed  in  the
    absence of the Appellant; there being no  unfairness  or  injustice  in
    doing so.  There were no representatives on the Tribunal records.

3.   The Judge's decision is not wholly structured but it is clear that  the
    Judge did assess the Article 8 claim and did consider what evidence had
    actually been advanced in support of the family life and  private  life
    issues that might be raised.  The particular position  was  that  there
    was an absence of meaningful evidence on those issues  put  before  the
    Judge.  It is therefore perfectly sustainable for  the  Judge  to  have
    taken the view that the evidence was not sufficient to  show  that  the
    Respondent's decision was disproportionate.  The position is  that  the
    Appellant had not submitted grounds of appeal addressing Article  8  at
    all nor was it apparently argued at the hearing before  the  Judge,  in
    writing at least; because neither party was represented.  Nevertheless,
    where there is an appeal against an immigration decision  the  position
    is that the appeal is against the whole decision and arguably the basis
    on which permission to appeal was given is mistaken in the  sense  that
    the Judge did actually address Article 8  reasons  and  concluded  that
    Article 8(1) was  not  engaged  because  of  an  absence  of  evidence.
    Therefore, even if it is thought to be a cursory consideration  of  it,
    the fact is that the Appellant had not done  what  was  necessary    or
    established those rights were  engaged   or  that  the  impact  of  the
    decision  would  be  material  or  significant  to  the   extent   that
    established Article 8(1) was engaged.

4.   In the circumstances the Judge went on to consider Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  and  could
    only have done so if he had been considering family  life/private  life
    rights.  In the circumstances therefore I conclude that  there  was  in
    paragraphs 16 to 19 of the decision sufficient to show that  the  Judge
    had considered the matter as he needed to do.

5.   Ms Ahmed relies upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ  387  ,  in  particular  paragraphs  31  to  33,  which
    helpfully recite the legal context in consideration of the  Immigration
    Rules and the  issue  of  whether  there  were  compelling  reasons  to
    consider the matter outside of the Rules.  The position  was  that  the
    Appellant says that he now meets the requirements of the Rules and,  if
    he does so, his remedy is to make a fresh application on that basis.  I
    do not find when it is such a provision as the  financial  requirements
    there is any reason demonstrated why Article  8  should  be  considered
    outside of the Rules other than the legal requirement to do so  if  the
    criteria for doing so are  met.   In  the  circumstances  there  is  no
    substance in the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal Decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

No  anonymity  order  was  made  and  none  is  demonstrably  necessary   or
appropriate.

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore no fee award is to be made.


Signed                                  Date 14 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

