
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/10968/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision and Reasons          |
|On 19 July 2017                       |Promulgated                          |
|                                      |On 11 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                 KIHAL NABIL
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss B Joshi, Legal Representative instructed by A
                    Bajwa & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by Mr Kihal Nabil against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge G Andrews (FtTJ), promulgated on 12 April 2017, to dismiss
   the appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his application for  leave
   to remain in the United Kingdom (UK) on human rights grounds.

2. The FtTJ based her decision upon the following factual matrix, which  was
   not challenged by Mr Singh for the purposes of the instant appeal.

3. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Algeria  born  on  17  January  1974.  He
   entered the UK on 24 December 1995 on a forged French ID card and claimed
   asylum. On 14 April 1997 his asylum claim  was  refused,  his  subsequent
   appeal was dismissed and he became appeal rights  exhausted  by  14  July
   1999. The Secretary of State reviewed her refusal of the asylum claim and
   affirmed her decision in 2014. A subsequent  application  lodged  by  the
   Appellant to remain in the UK on human rights was refused  leading  to  a
   further application being made in December 2014, the refusal of which was
   the subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

4. Before the FtTJ the Appellant argued that he had been resident in the  UK
   for 21 years and thus qualified for leave on private life  grounds  under
   paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In evidence the Appellant gave
   an account of his movements following his arrival  and  a  witness  -  Mr
   Harper - confirmed that he had known the Appellant since 2002.

5. The FtTJ took into account supporting letters from persons purporting  to
   know the Appellant, but noted that none of that evidence  indicated  that
   he had been resident in the UK continuously since 1995. The FtTJ  further
   noted that Mr Harper had only known the Appellant since  2002.  The  FtTJ
   considered documentary evidence relating to the period  between  2005  to
   2008 and the incident of regular reporting to immigration officials since
   July 2015. The FtTJ was satisfied the Appellant had lived continuously in
   the UK from 24 December 1995 until July 1999 and since 2002, but she  did
   not accept he had proven residence in the UK between 1999  to  2002.  The
   FtTJ observed that there was a  paucity  of  evidence  relating  to  that
   period and the absence of witness testimony and stated, "if the appellant
   genuinely lived in the UK between July 1999 and 2002, I would expect  him
   to be able to produce some evidence of this" [17].

6. The  FtTJ  further  observed  the  concession  made  by  the  Appellant's
   representative that the Immigration Rules could not  be  met,  given  the
   Appellant had not lived continuously in the UK for a period of  20  years
   prior to the date of application as specified  by  the  Immigration  Rule
   itself and further  observed  that,  as  at  the  date  of  hearing,  the
   Immigration Rules could not be met given her finding that  residence  had
   not been proven between 1999 to 2002. The  FtTJ  further  concluded  that
   there were no very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration
   to Algeria on return and gave reasons at [23].

7. Having reached these conclusions, the FtTJ proceeded to consider  Article
   8 outside of the Immigration Rules - the focus being on private life. The
   FtTJ followed the step-by-step approach enunciated in Razgar and  rightly
   observed that the appeal turned on the issue of proportionality. The FtTJ
   had regard to the public interest and weighed into the balance factors on
   both sides at [30] to [32] and concluded that no compelling  reasons  had
   been shown to warrant a grant of leave outside of the Immigration  Rules.
   Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

8. Permission to appeal against the decision of the  FtTJ  was  granted  "on
   the strength of the first ground the second ground is also arguable  (not
   alone)", following a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal.  I  shall
   consider them in turn.

9. The first ground is that  the  FtTJ  made  an  unsustainable  finding  by
   holding that, for the purposes of calculating whether the  Appellant  met
   the threshold for engagement  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, she erred in concluding that residence had not been proven between
   1999 to 2002. The grounds suggest that the FtTJ failed to  consider  that
   the Appellant could not have left the  UK  absent  a  passport  and  that
   during that period a civil war was  raging  in  Algeria.  It  is  further
   suggested that the FtTJ "failed  to  attach  weight  to  the  Appellant's
   credibility" and "failed to give weight to the  fact  that  there  is  no
   evidence as to the contrary of the appellant's residence  throughout  his
   entry from 1995 until present" (sic).

10. I confess that Ground one is not entirely easy  to  follow.  Miss  Joshi
   (who is not the author) attempted to elaborate upon it  in  her  skeleton
   argument and oral submissions.  In  amplifying  the  grounds  Miss  Joshi
   submitted that the FtTJ's decision was unreasonable. She  criticised  the
   FtTJ for failing to reach  credibility  findings  or  failing  to  attach
   weight to the Appellant's evidence, and she argued that it was  not  open
   to the FtTJ to rely solely on a lack  of  documentary  evidence  for  the
   relevant period. She finally submitted "on instructions"  that  the  FtTJ
   incorrectly referred to the Appellant reporting  from  2008  rather  than
   2007.

11. I consider that Ground one without  expressly  saying  so  is  a  thinly
   veiled irrationality challenge. Essentially what is being argued  is,  in
   my view, a mere disagreement with the FtTJ's findings and conclusion.

12. I deal with Miss Joshi's last point, first. It has  not  been  shown  by
   reference to the evidence that the FtTJ was mistaken in stating that  the
   Appellant had been reporting from 2008 and, in any event, if she was, the
   error is not material. While the FtTJ is  criticised  for  not  expressly
   stating her conclusion on credibility,  it  is  plain  given  the  FtTJ's
   factual findings that she accepted  some  of  the  Appellant's  evidence;
   rejected some of it and gave adequate reasons  for  doing  so  that  were
   entirely open to her on the evidence at [17].  It  does  not  necessarily
   follow that the FtTJ was bound to accept the Appellant's evidence on face
   value that he was resident in the UK from 1999 to  2002,  solely  because
   she accepted his earlier period of residence. There was some  support  of
   the latter by other forms of evidence and thus the FtTJ was  entitled  to
   note the absence of supporting evidence in respect of the former. It  was
   a matter for the FtTJ to assess what weight to attribute to the  lack  of
   supporting evidence and it has not be shown that  the  FtTJ's  assessment
   was unreasonable or perverse.

13. The grounds further suggest that the Appellant could not have  left  the
   UK, but this fails to recognise that this is an Appellant who had  access
   to  false  documents;  the  FtTJ  was  fully  aware  of  the  Appellant's
   immigration history and the submissions made on behalf of  the  Appellant
   made no suggestion that he was unlikely to have returned to  Algeria  due
   to a civil war. In my judgement, the FtTJ correctly decided the appeal on
   the basis of whether residence in the UK for  the  requisite  period  had
   been proven. I am satisfied that the FtTJ's decision is  fully  supported
   by the evidence and is not irrational or perverse.  Accordingly,  I  find
   that Ground one is not made out.

14.  The  second  ground  briefly  challenges  the  FtTJ's   assessment   of
   proportionality. It is expressly  acknowledged  that  this  challenge  is
   dependent on the first ground succeeding, which I have  found  does  not.
   Nevertheless, the issue of proportionality was considered  in  detail  by
   the FtTJ and she gave cogent and sustainable  reasons  for  answering  it
   adversely to the Appellant. I am also satisfied that  it  was  reasonably
   open to the FtTJ to conclude that there were no additional  factors  that
   were sufficiently  compelling  to  merit  consideration  outside  of  the
   Immigration Rules; the Article 8 assessment was  properly  conducted  and
   the relevant factors considered.

15. I therefore conclude that the FtTJ did not err in law. I  thus  exercise
   my discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
   Enforcement Act 2007 not to set it aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                       Date: 18 September 2017




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Bagral


