
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10181/2017
                                                               HU/10183/2017
                                                               HU/01175/2018
                                                               HU/11234/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2019                 |On 13th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                         Joshy [V] (first Appellant)
                        Lincy [T] (second Appellant)
                          [A J1] (third Appellant)
                          [A J2] (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of India whose appeals were  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence in a decision  promulgated  on  13th
    July 2018.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought and granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Blum in a decision dated 3rd December 2018.  It was said that the judge
    may have misapplied the test in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  715  or
    that test itself was now in question following KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
    53.  All the grounds were said to be arguable.

 3. The grounds of application refer to the SSHD's own  published  guidance
    where it was pointed out that strong reasons would be required in order
    to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than seven years.
     Paragraph 12 of the grounds says that the starting point  is  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect a child who  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven  years  to  leave  here  unless  there  are
    powerful reasons for concluding otherwise.  In the instant  case  Judge
    Lawrence had applied the reverse approach requiring the  Appellants  to
    show that there were strong reasons for remaining in the UK  which  was
    clearly wrong.

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me on the above date.

 5. Before me Ms Jones  for  the  Home  Office  explained  there  had  been
    developments.  The Secretary of State's  response  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24 were  that  the  Respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    Appellants' application for permission to appeal because the  Secretary
    of State had decided to grant the Appellants limited leave to remain.

 6. Ms Jones explained that she had had  a  conversation  with  the  agents
    concerned and had made it clear to them that this was the Secretary  of
    State's position and given what she had said to the agents no criticism
    should be made of them for not attending  the  hearing.  In  passing  I
    would only observe that no matter what assurances were given to them by
    Ms Jones the agents should undoubtedly have attended the hearing.

 7. Ms Jones agreed that there was an arguable error in law in the  judge's
    decision as stated in the grounds.

 8. It seems clear to me that the judge did err in law in not applying  the
    approach of MA (Pakistan).  Given that the Appellants have been granted
    limited leave to remain I do not consider it would be useful to set out
    the matter in any  detail.   In  short,  the  judge  did  refer  to  MA
    (Pakistan) (paragraph 13) and in a number of other paragraphs  but  did
    not apply the correct test and as said  in  the  grounds  had  in  fact
    inverted the test to put the onus on the Appellant.

 9. I agree with the grounds of application which say that the judge simply
    applied the wrong test.  That being so there is an error of law in  the
    decision resulting in it having to be set aside.

10. Absent representations for the Appellants I am simply setting aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.   No  findings  of
    the First-tier are to stand.

11. Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal where, if the  appeal  proceeds  (given  the
    grant of leave I would expect the agents and Home Office to be in early
    contact about this), the next  Judge  will  be  able  to  consider  the
    implications off what is said in KO (Nigeria).

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. No anonymity order is made.


Signed    JG Macdonald                           Dated 6th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald







