
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10540/2017
     HU/10543/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 26, 2018                        |On October 4, 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [K M]
                                  AZIZA [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moran (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order is made.

 2. The appellants are nationals of Syria currently  residing  in  Lebanon.
    The appellants applied for entry clearance as the brother and mother of
    the sponsor respectively.

 3. The respondent refused their applications in decisions dated  July  24,
    2017 as it was considered that the appellants could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules because  they  could  not  demonstrate  that  the
    second-named appellant required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday duties nor had it been  demonstrated  the  sponsor  could  not
    provide the necessary practical and financial help for both appellants.
    The respondent refused the applications on article 8 grounds because he
    was not satisfied there were any exceptional circumstances  that  would
    enable either application to succeed outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  16,  2017.
    The grounds referred to the fact  that  these  appellants  had  applied
    together with the sponsor's wife and daughter  and  their  applications
    had  been  allowed  and  the  decision  to  refuse  their  applications
    contravened section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 5. Their appeals  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ross
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on February 6, 2018 and in a  decision
    promulgated on March 5, 2018 the Judge dismissed  their  appeals  under
    article 8 ECHR.

 6. The appellants appealed this decision  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lever  on  April
    24, 2018. Permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on May
    24, 2018 and on July  2,  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted
    permission to appeal. In particular, he commented that it was  arguable
    the Judge was wrong to refer to a concession  regarding  the  sponsor's
    ability to adequately maintain and accommodate at the date  of  hearing
    given what had been said in the skeleton argument and  with  regard  to
    ground four he found that ground to be weak.

 7. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent in this appeal  and  at
    the commencement of the hearing Mr Tufan confirmed the application  was
    opposed.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8. Mr Moran adopted his grounds of appeal and stated that the numbering of
    his grounds reflected their importance.


 9. Mr Moran argued:

      a) The Judge had failed to make a proper assessment of the first-named
         appellant's claim bearing in mind he was a only 12 years of age at
         the date of hearing. In particular, paragraph 21 of the decision
         failed to set out any of the first-named appellant's circumstances.
      b) The Judge wrongly considered the issue of whether there was family
         life existing between the sponsor and the second-named appellant.
         They had been living together as a family before the sponsor fled
         and was granted refugee status in the United Kingdom. There was no
         proper assessment of dependency in paragraph 18 of the decision and
         in particular there was no assessment of the emotional support
         offered and their cultural circumstances he submitted that the
         Judge had applied too strict a test.
      c) The Judge failed to consider the position at the date of hearing
         and ignored evidence that was before the Tribunal. The Judge should
         have considered the evidence at the date of hearing.
      d) The Judge failed to take into account when considering
         proportionality whether either section E-ECDR of Appendix FM or
         paragraph 319X (ii) were met. The Judge should have taken
         compliance with these sections into account when considering
         proportionality.


10. Mr Tufan rejected the arguments advanced by Mr Moran and submitted that
    with regard to the first-named appellant there was no risk of harm as
    both he and his mother had refugee status in Lebanon and the second-
    named appellant was receiving medical treatment. There was no evidence
    that the first-named appellant was not being educated nor that the
    second-named appellant was not being  medically treated. Their
    applications could not be granted simply because they would be better
    off in the United Kingdom. The Judge had found that article 8 ECHR was
    not engaged and had found that the appellants had failed to demonstrate
    a "high degree of dependency". He submitted that the words used by the
    Judge did not undermine the decision of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ
    31. He referred the Tribunal to Britcis v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368.


11. Mr Moran argued that the appellant did not actually have refugee status
    because Lebanon was not a signatory to the Convention and there was a
    wealth of evidence that demonstrated problems facing Syrian refugees in
    Lebanon. The Judge simply did not consider all the evidence and the
    fact the second-named appellant could access hospital treatment was not
    the issue when considering personal care. He accepted that neither
    appellant could satisfy the Immigration Rules because at the date of
    application there was neither suitable financial support nor suitable
    accommodation. However, he submitted that at the date of hearing the
    accommodation issue had been resolved and there was a "hope" that work
    could be obtained.

    FINDINGS

12. The background to the current appeal  is  that  these  appellants  made
    applications to join the sponsor at the same time as the sponsor's wife
    and child made an application under the Immigration Rules to  join  the
    sponsor.

13. The evidence before the Tribunal was that prior to the sponsor arriving
    in the United Kingdom he, the appellants together  with  his  wife  and
    child all lived together.

14. The sponsor's  wife  and  child  were  granted  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 352A and D HC 395. The Immigration Rules did not permit these
    appellants to join the sponsor without  meeting  specific  requirements
    set out either under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or  paragraph
    319X HC 395. Paragraphs 352 A and D HC  395  did  not  apply  to  these
    appellants.

15. In considering the applications put forward  by  these  appellants  the
    Judge had regard to the sponsor's statement and oral evidence  together
    with a large bundle of documents  that  had  been  submitted  on  their
    behalf by Mr Moran. At paragraph 7 of the decision the  Judge  referred
    to the fact that an expedited  hearing  had  been  sought  because  the
    appellants were living in difficult circumstances in  Lebanon  and  the
    second-named appellant was in very poor health and  needed  care  on  a
    daily basis.

16. The Judge recorded at paragraph 8 that the  sponsor  conceded  that  he
    could neither maintain or  accommodate  the  appellants  and  that  the
    application was based on article 8 ECHR with specific reference to  the
    best interests of the first-named appellant and the  general  needs  of
    the appellants themselves. The Judge noted the  second-named  appellant
    had been pictured in hospital and at a clinic and that the sponsor  had
    last seen the appellant's in August 2015. The sponsor  told  the  Judge
    the appellants were registered as refugees in Lebanon. At paragraph  10
    of the decision the Judge noted the medical report which  set  out  the
    second-named appellant's medical condition. This evidence persuaded the
    Judge that there was medical care available in Lebanon  and  that  they
    were being cared for by the United Nations.

17. Mr Moran argued that the Judge erred in his approach to the Immigration
    Rules. The Judge considered the Immigration Rules at paragraphs  13  to
    16 of the decision. Mr Moran accepted that at the date  of  application
    the appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules because the sponsor
    could neither provide adequate maintenance nor accommodation. Mr  Moran
    submitted in Ground Four of his grounds of appeal that the Judge should
    have considered which key requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  were
    met but I am satisfied that the fact neither appellant met the Rules at
    the date of application was sufficient when considering proportionality
    in the sense that this would be the starting point when carrying out  a
    proportionality assessment. However, whilst I  accept  that  the  Judge
    would had to consider the personal circumstances of each  appellant  in
    that proportionality assessment this is different to arguing the  Rules
    were met.

18. The Judge's assessment of article 8 can be found from paragraph  18  of
    the decision onwards. The Judge had to decide whether there was  family
    life in existence between the appellants and the sponsor.

19. Contrary to Mr Moran's submission that the Judge failed to have  regard
    to the circumstances I am satisfied that at paragraph 80 the Judge  had
    regard to the various factors that were today advanced by Mr Moran. The
    Judge noted the second-named appellant had medical problems  and  found
    that medical care was being provided in Lebanon and being paid  for  by
    the United Nations. The Judge went on to consider the position  of  the
    first-named appellant and concluded that he could  neither  demonstrate
    he was dependent on the sponsor nor that family  life  existed  between
    them because he lived with his mother and was supported by the UN.

20. Despite reaching this conclusion the Judge went on to consider the case
    on the basis that there may be family life  and  at  paragraph  20  the
    Judge accepted that it would be hard for the family to be separated  in
    the way it currently was but went on to find that  the  sponsor's  wife
    and child had been  admitted  under  different  Rules  and  that  these
    appellants could not benefit from the same Rule.

21. Mr Moran criticised  the  Judge's  approach  in  paragraph  21  of  the
    decision and submitted that the Judge failed to properly  consider  the
    individual  circumstances  of  the  first-named  appellant.  Mr   Moran
    submitted that the Judge ignored both the child's circumstances and the
    sponsor's evidence but I find that paragraph 21 of the Judge's decision
    should not be looked at in isolation to the rest of the decision.

22. I am satisfied the Judge was aware of the current circumstances  facing
    both appellants and the Judge had regard to the  fact  both  appellants
    were being supported and cared for by  the  United  Nations.  Mr  Moran
    challenged the Judge's wording in paragraph 18 of the decision but that
    submission overlooks the fact that the Judge was clearly aware of their
    circumstances and the Judge made a clear finding that not only were the
    appellants were being cared for by the United Nations but also that the
    sponsor did not provide any assistance over and above the contact  that
    was described in paragraph 9 of the decision.

23. The first-named appellant was living with his mother and as  the  Judge
    correctly pointed out it was in his best interests  to  live  with  his
    mother and currently that is what this appellant was doing. His finding
    in paragraph 21 was  therefore  a  finding  open  to  him  as  was  his
    conclusions that the United Kingdom was not  required  to  provide  him
    with either education or healthcare. There was no evidence  before  the
    Judge  that  the  first-named  appellant  was  not  being  educated  or
    medically provided for.

24. The Judge  went  on  to  consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Mr Moran argued that the Judge  should
    have made a  finding  there  was  adequate  maintenance  available  but
    conceded that the sponsor's evidence at the hearing amounted to no more
    than a "hope" that financial support would be available.

25. Appeals under article 8 ECHR fact sensitive and the Judge hearing  such
    appeals will be aware  that  in  allowing  such  appeals  he  would  be
    granting the appellants discretionary leave  to  remain.  There  was  a
    balancing act carried out by the Judge and the Judge was not  persuaded
    that these appellants should have that discretion  exercised  in  their
    favour and it is not the role of the Upper Tribunal  to  substitute  an
    alternative  decision  unless  a  material  error  in  law   has   been
    demonstrated.

26. Having carefully considered the grounds  and  submissions  advanced  by
    both representatives I am satisfied that the decision  reached  by  the
    Judge was one that was open to him.










    DECISION

27. The appeal is dismissed and I uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     29/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no alteration to the fee direction made by the First-tier Judge.

Signed                              Date     29/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
