
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10003/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Atakora [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Praisoody (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Graham, promulgated on 17th May 2018, following a hearing at Birmingham
    on 16th April 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge  purported  to
    dismiss  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  although  the  body  of  the
    determination suggests an intention to have allowed the appeal.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  He was born on 3rd December 1977.
     He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  25th  August
    2017 refusing his application to remain in the UK on the basis  of  his
    British children living in the UK and his  parental  relationship  with
    his partner's British children.

 3. By a decision dated 17th May 2018,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. In the grounds of permission, it is stated that the grounds are clearly
    arguable (at paragraphs 22 to 30) because it was the judge's  intention
    to allow the appeal.  Immediately above the  judge's  signature  it  is
    recorded that the appeal is dismissed.  The slip rule cannot be used to
    correct what appears to be a straightforward typing error given that it
    affects the ultimate decision on the appeal: Katsonga [2016] UKUT  228.
    It would also not be appropriate to set aside Judge Graham's  decision,
    which contains findings which the Appellant will wish to retain.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me on 27th September 2018, both Ms Praisoody  and
    Ms Pal were in agreement, and consented to this matter  being  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal Judge for the decision to be  corrected
    so that precisely that, which was the intention of the  judge,  namely,
    to allow the appeal, can be stipulated under  the  heading  "decision".
    This would follow from the body of the  determination,  which  ends  at
    paragraph 29 with a clear intention to allow the appeal, based as it is
    on a careful and detailed consideration  of  both  the  facts  and  the
    applicable law.  However, I do not see why that is necessary as  it  is
    open to this tribunal to make a finding of an error of law and  to  re-
    make the decision.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved a  material  error  of
    law because it purported to dismiss the appeal when the  intention  was
    to allow it.  I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal of Mr. [A].

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

 8. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th October 2018
