
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/10598/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 September 2018                    |On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                             Peter BRYan Bailey
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Cleghorn, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyz, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Australia who applied for leave to remain
    as a partner of someone present and settled in the United Kingdom.  His
    application was refused and he appealed  and  following  a  hearing  at
    North Shields, and in a decision promulgated on 6 March 2018, Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Hands dismissed  his  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    but on 22 May 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted  permission  to
    appeal of a renewed application. Her reasons for so doing were: -

         "1.      It  is  arguable  that  the  First-Tier   Tribunal   (FTT)
         misunderstood the financial evidence relevant to both  the  Sponsor
         and the Appellant as explained in grounds 1 and 4.

          2. Grounds 1 and 4 seem to be stronger than grounds 2 and 3 but  I
             give permission to appeal on all grounds."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Neither the existence of a material error of law  within  the  decision
    nor the appeal itself were resisted by  Mr  Diwnyz  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.

 5. The grounds assert that the Judge materially erred in failing to  apply
    the correct Rules, properly consider Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules
    (and section 117B), consider the Article 8 rights  of  the  Appellant's
    husband's parents and properly deal with the authority of  Chikwamba  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

 6. I share the analysis of both representatives before me today.

 7. Judge Hands incorrectly directed herself with regard  to  appendix  FM.
    She mistook the Appellant's case for an entry clearance case. This  was
    not an entry clearance case as both the Appellant and his Sponsor  have
    resided in the United Kingdom together for three and a half years. This
    misdirection,  which  is  clear  throughout  the  decision,  materially
    impacts on the outcome. Instead of referring herself  to  section  EC-P
    under appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  which  related  to  entry
    clearance cases the  Judge  should  have  focused  upon  E-LTRP,  which
    relates to leave to remain.

 8. Both parties accepted that had she focused on the  correct  Immigration
    Rules, given her findings at paragraph 28 of her decision  in  relation
    to the Appellant's salary the Immigration Rules were met and  in  light
    of that when considering the position under Article 8 the  refusal  was
    disproportionate in all the circumstances.

 9. I also find that to be the position.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                                 Date:   24  September
2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
