
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/10578/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 March 2018                          |On 13 April 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                           rudolph terence english
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     G Kiai, Counsel instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 19 July  2017  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge B  A  Morris.   The  decision  dismissed  the
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance as a partner  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Guyana and was born  on  21  April  1972.
    The sponsor in this matter is Mrs Claudette Glasgow, a British citizen,
    born on 4 October 1947 in Guyana.  Mrs Glasgow came to the UK  in  1998
    with her  former  husband  and  subsequently  obtained  settlement  and
    British nationality.

 3. The appellant and sponsor met  in  Guyana  in  2009  when  the  sponsor
    returned for a wedding.  The couple began a  relationship  and  in  the
    summer of  2011  the  sponsor  spent  six  weeks  in  Guyana  with  the
    appellant.  In due course the couple decided to marry and the appellant
    again returned to Guyana in order for the wedding to take place  there.
    The marriage took place on 1 September 2012, the appellant having  been
    in Guyana for five weeks and returning to  the  UK  a  week  after  the
    wedding.  An application for entry clearance as a partner was made on 8
    December 2015.  This was refused by the respondent on 23 March 2016.

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris on 4 July 2017.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not find that the  appellant  and  sponsor
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  That led to the  appeal
    being refused under the Immigration Rules and outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR.  The reasoning of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is contained in [11]-[20] of the decision, as follows:

         "11. I have considered all the evidence in this  case,  whether  or
             not I  specifically  refer  to  it.   I  have  not  considered
             evidence in isolation but by reason  of  the  format  of  this
             decision matters are considered  in  separate  paragraphs.   I
             repeat and adopt here any comments upon  the  evidence  and/or
             submissions which I have set out above.

         12.  I have borne in mind the requirements of Sections 117A - D  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  inserted
             by the Immigration Act 2014.

         13.  The short chronology in this appeal appears  to  be  that  the
             Sponsor was born in Guyana on 4 October 1947 and came  to  the
             United Kingdom on 18 June 1988 with her  then  husband.   They
             had four children together but divorced in  March  1991.   The
             Sponsor is now  a  British  citizen.   In  the  school  summer
             holidays of  2009,  the  Sponsor  returned  to  Guyana  for  a
             friend's wedding and was introduced to the Appellant  at  that
             wedding.  The Sponsor returned to the United Kingdom after her
             six week stay.  She returned to  Guyana  in  summer  2011  and
             spent six weeks there with the  Appellant.   She  returned  to
             Guyana in the summer school holidays in 2012 and  married  the
             Appellant  on  1  September  2012.   The  Sponsor  then   next
             travelled to Guyana on 22 March 2015 for the  funeral  of  her
             sister and she returned to the United Kingdom on 7 April 2015.
              The Appellant and Sponsor have not seen each other since that
             date.  On 7 April 2015 the Appellant made an application for a
             visit visa which was refused on 15 April  2015.   The  current
             application was made on 8 December 2015 and was refused on  23
             March 2016 and is the basis of this appeal.

         14.  Following the marriage on 1 September 2012, no application was
             made for settlement until  8  December  2015.   The  appellant
             gives no explanation for  a  period  of  three  years  passing
             before the application for settlement was made and I find this
             undermines the credibility of this claim.

         15.  On 7 April 2015 the Appellant made an application for a  visit
             visa, stating that he planned to visit for  one  month.   Such
             application demonstrates the Appellant's intention  to  return
             to Guyana.  The Appellant  has  provided  no  explanation  for
             making an application for a one month visit visa in April 2015
             and I find this matter undermines the credibility of his case.

         16.  Further, the Sponsor stated in oral evidence that she  had  no
             knowledge of the Appellant making an application for  a  visit
             visa in April 2015.  I have no explanation from the  Appellant
             as to why he would  not  have  informed  the  Sponsor  of  his
             application for a visit visa if, as he maintains, they were in
             regular contact and in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
             I find this mater undermines the credibility of his claim.

         17.  The Sponsor states  that  following  the  wedding  she  became
             unwell due to an infection  in  a  replacement  knee  and  she
             remained in  hospital  for  several  weeks.   In  her  witness
             statement she states that in  2013  she  went  to  a  firm  of
             solicitors in Birmingham in order to make an  application  for
             the Appellant to join her.  As I have  already  stated  above,
             there is no explanation from the Appellant as to  why  he  was
             not making an application to join the Sponsor or  why  it  was
             the Sponsor making enquiries about such an application and the
             Appellant did not appear to be making any enquiries at all.  I
             find this matter undermines the credibility of the Appellant's
             case.

         18.  In the Appellant's bundle are telephone statements  from  July
             2015 and August 2015.   There  are  several  copies  for  each
             month.  These statements show calls to Guyana but  to  various
             mobile  numbers  and  to  a  land  line.   There  are  further
             telephone statements  in  the  Respondent's  bundle.   In  the
             notice of appeal it is stated that the Appellant is  intending
             to send other documents which were not yet available and  such
             documents would be "proof of ownership  of  phone  numbers  in
             Guyana".  Thus,  the  Appellant  was  aware  of  the  need  to
             establish the ownership of various telephone numbers in Guyana
             but at the hearing I had no documents  to  show  ownership  of
             telephone  numbers  in  Guyana.   Consequently,  I   have   no
             documentation with  which  to  identify  any  telephone  calls
             between the Appellant and Sponsor on the telephone statements.
               I  find  this  matter  undermines  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's claim.

         19.  In the Appellant's  bundle  are  MoneyGram  documents  showing
             money sent to Guyana from the United  Kingdom.   Of  the  four
             post office receipts for MoneyGram transactions, only  one  is
             shown as being sent to the Appellant.  Two of  the  four  show
             female names and the fourth transaction does not show the name
             any recipient. In her witness statement,  the  Sponsor  states
             that she has been sending money on  a  regular  basis  through
             MoneyGram transfers to the Appellant.  The documents before me
             do not show regular transfers  of  money,  nor  do  they  show
             regular transfers of money to the Appellant.  I find that this
             matter  undermines  the  credibility  of   the   Sponsor   and
             credibility of the Appellant's claim.

         20.  By reason of all the matters set out  above,  and  taking  the
             evidence as a whole, as I do, I find that  the  Appellant  has
             not  shown,  on  a  balance   of   probabilities,   that   the
             relationship with the Sponsor is  genuine  and  subsisting  or
             that they intend to live together permanently  in  the  United
             Kingdom."

 5. At the hearing before me the appellant's grounds  were  argued  on  two
    main bases, the first being that of  procedural  irregularity  and  the
    second being a failure to take a correct approach to  the  evidence  by
    way of rationality or adequacy of reasons.

 6. The procedural  irregularity  ground  concerned  the  reliance  by  the
    respondent  at  the  hearing  on  the  visit  visa  application.    The
    respondent's refusal decision had not referred to any such  application
    and it had not been raised at any point in the proceedings prior to the
    morning of the hearing.  The appellant objects  to  the  judge  placing
    weight on a document produced in those circumstances.

 7. The difficulty with this ground is that the appellant  was  represented
    at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and  his  representative
    can be taken to have acted appropriately when faced with the respondent
    seeking to admit this new document.  Nothing here  indicates  that  the
    appellant's legal adviser objected to the admission of the  visit  visa
    or to the respondent making adverse submissions on it or to  the  judge
    being entitled to consider the document and  potentially  make  adverse
    findings upon it.  Nothing indicates that there was any application  or
    discussion of whether there should be an adjournment in order  for  the
    appellant to be able to comment on this document or for the sponsor  to
    be able to do so on more notice.  It also cannot be said that the visit
    visa application was an entirely new matter as regards the appellant as
    he knew he had made the application and was specifically asked about it
    at question 28 of his partner entry clearance application.

 8. In those circumstances, no  procedural  irregularity  can  be  said  to
    arise.  It was open to the First-tier Tribunal to take the  visit  visa
    application into account and to draw an adverse inference from it where
    the sponsor knew nothing about  it  when  she  was  at  the  same  time
    claiming to be in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
    appellant; see [16].

 9. At paragraph 3 of the grounds the appellant argues that the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the particular aspects of the evidence in isolation
    rather than as a whole.  That ground is not  arguable  given  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicated clearly at [11] that all of the  evidence
    in the case was considered, whether specifically referred to or not and
    that the evidence was not considered "in isolation but by reason of the
    format of this decision matters are considered in separate paragraphs".
     Nothing in the ensuing consideration indicates that the judge did  not
    follow this appropriate self-direction.

10. Further, it is not my view that there is an error of law in the judge's
    assessment that there was  a  three  year  delay  in  making  an  entry
    clearance  application  for  the  appellant  and  drawing  an   adverse
    inference from this.  The appellant  maintains  that  she  visited  the
    appellant for the wedding in 2012, remaining for the  majority  of  the
    time before the wedding rather than after, being in Guyana for  only  a
    week after the marriage itself.  Her  evidence  as  to  having  a  knee
    problem and  complications  following  an  operation  are  certainly  a
    partial explanation but do not cover  the  entire  period  between  the
    marriage and the entry clearance application over  three  years  later.
    The appellant's evidence about her mobility did not oblige the judge to
    find that she was unable to travel or could not be expected to  do  so.
    The judge was equally entitled to find that, in fact, the appellant was
    able to travel where she did so for a relative's funeral.

11. Further,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  obliged  to  accept  the
    sponsor's unsupported evidence  as  to  having  approached  a  firm  of
    solicitors in 2013 in order to make  an  application  but  having  been
    negligently  advised  by  them;  see  BT  (former  solicitor's  alleged
    misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311 which sets out:

         "If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations about the
         conduct of former representatives there must be evidence that those
         allegations have been put to the  former  representative,  and  the
         Tribunal must  be  shown  either  the  response  or  correspondence
         indicating that there has been no response."

12. The appellant also objects to the  judge's  findings  at  [18]  -  [19]
    concerning  the  telephone  statements,  calling  cards  and  MoneyGram
    documents.  The  appellant  maintains  that  these  findings  were  not
    permitted by the ratio of Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan
    [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal found:

         "(ii)     Evidence  of  telephone  cards  is   capable   of   being
             corroborative of the  contention  of  the  parties  that  they
             communicate by telephone, even if such data cannot confirm the
             particular number the sponsor was calling in  the  country  in
             question.  It is not a requirement the parties also  write  or
             text each other:"

13. Firstly, that ground has to be seen in the light of the next  paragraph
    of the headnote of Goudey which reads as follows:

         "(iii)   Where  there  are  no  countervailing  factors  generating
             suspicion as to the intention of the  parties,  such  evidence
             may be sufficient to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  the
             claimant."

14. In this case, as above, and as found to  be  sound  above,  there  were
    "countervailing factors generating suspicion as to the intention of the
    parties" and in that context the First-tier Tribunal was not obliged to
    accept evidence of telephone cards as corroborative of the  intervening
    communication between the appellant and sponsor.

15. Further, the telephone evidence did not show clearly that  the  sponsor
    was contacting the appellant Guyana. Her evidence was that  she  had  a
    number of relatives there. She stated in her witness statement that she
    would provide details as to which telephone  numbers  belong  to  which
    person but did not do so for the appeal; see  [18].   The  findings  at
    [19] are unobjectionable where the money  transfer  documents  had,  at
    best, a limited probative value and it was fully open to the  judge  to
    find that they did not show that there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor.

16. I accept the appellant's contention that at [15]  the  judge  fails  to
    provide a reason as to why making a visit entry  clearance  application
    in 2015 was something capable of showing that  the  appellant  did  not
    intend to live permanently in the UK with the sponsor. That finding  is
    not sufficiently well reasoned. It can be an  entirely  neutral  matter
    for the appellant to make a visit visa  application  some  nine  months
    prior to making his entry clearance application as a spouse.  Also,  it
    cannot be correct that a sponsor based in the UK is not an  appropriate
    person  to  make  enquiries  for  legal  advice  in  the  UK  about  an
    application to come to the UK.  Therefore, the judge's comment at  [17]
    that the credibility of the case was undermined by the sponsor  seeking
    legal advice rather than the appellant is also an error.  It is not  my
    view, however, that when the decision as a whole is read carefully  and
    fairly, that these two points alone are sufficiently material such that
    the outcome of the appeal could have been  different.  The  judge  gave
    cogent and sustainable reasons on core  issues  for  finding  that  the
    marriage was not genuine and subsisting and the force of those  reasons
    is not displaced by these two matters.

17. For all of these reasons, therefore, I do not  find  an  error  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 10 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
