
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/10913/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 January 2018                         |On 19 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MD PABEL HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkin of Counsel instructed by Allied Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bart-Stewart promulgated on 28 April 2017 brought with  the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted on 27 November 2017.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and Mr  Hussain  is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Mr Hussain as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born  on  1  September  1992.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 13 June 2012 as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student with entry clearance valid from 31 May 2012 until  12  November
    2013.  On 23 October 2013, before the expiry of his leave,  he  applied
    for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student  which  was  granted,
    valid until 30 May 2017.


4.   However, on 26 September 2014 the Appellant was served with an  IS151A.
    This informed him that a decision had been taken to remove him from the
    United Kingdom.  This decision had  been  made  on  the  basis  of  the
    Respondent's conclusion that the Appellant had used  deception  in  the
    course of his application for variation of leave to remain made  on  23
    October 2013. The deception was alleged to  be  by  way  submitting  in
    support of the application an English language  certificate  issued  by
    Educational Testing Service (ETS)  pursuant  to  a  test  taken  on  17
    September 2013 at Eden College International, which had  been  verified
    to have been obtained by deception through the use of a proxy tester.


5.   The Appellant lodged a judicial review against  this  decision.   I  am
    told today, however, that the judicial review application was withdrawn
    before a decision had been made on whether or not to  grant  permission
    to apply for judicial review in order for the  Appellant  to  make  the
    instant human rights application, the refusal of which is  the  subject
    of this appeal.


6.   On 14 April 2015, by way of form  FLR(M),  the  Appellant  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to Ms Razia Sultana Ahmed,
    a Bangladeshi citizen, born on 10 August 1996 and settled in the United
    Kingdom.  It was said in the application that  Ms  Ahmed  had  obtained
    settlement as the dependant of her British citizen father and had lived
    in the United Kingdom for approximately four and a half  years  at  the
    time of the application.  The Appellant and Ms Ahmed were married on  6
    October 2014 in a civil ceremony and had been cohabiting since February
    2015.  Information was also provided in respect of  Ms  Ahmed's  income
    which exceeded the threshold required under the Immigration Rules.


7.   The Appellant's application for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage, which it was acknowledged amounted to a human  rights  claim,
    was refused for reasons set out  in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') dated 3 November 2015.


8.   The Respondent gave consideration to the application under Appendix  FM
    of the Rules. The Respondent noted the history of the Appellant's  case
    and that he had been found by the Respondent to have used deception  in
    respect of an earlier application.  On that  basis  it  was  considered
    that the Appellant did not satisfy the  'suitability  requirements'  in
    respect of leave to remain as a partner, with particular reference to S-
    LTR.1.6 - "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not fall within paragraphs SLTR.1.3-1.5), character,  associations,  or
    other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK".


9.   It was otherwise  accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the  eligibility
    requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).  It is to be  noted  that
    this particular provision in  respect  of  eligibility  relates  to  E-
    LTRP.1.2-1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1.  It is  clear  that  this  provision  was
    being looked at by the Respondent instead of  the  provision  under  R-
    LTRP.1.1(c)  because  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  all  of  the
    requirements  of  E-LTRP  because  he  was  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
    Immigration Rules by reason of the curtailment of his leave.  He  could
    only therefore succeed in his application under the Rules if  he  could
    satisfy the Respondent in respect of the exception of  paragraph  EX.1.
    In this regard the Respondent found that there were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the Appellant's partner  being  continued
    outside the United Kingdom.


10.  I emphasise at this stage - it will become apparent  later  why  -  the
    Appellant had to satisfy EX.1 only because he could not  bring  himself
    within the eligibility requirements in respect of 'immigration status',
    because he had no immigration status at  the  time  that  he  made  his
    application. This circumstance had its origin in  the  cancellation  of
    the Appellant's earlier leave.


11.   The  Respondent  also  decided  that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances in the case to warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules
    whether by reference to Article 8 or otherwise.


12.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


13.  Before the First-tier Tribunal much of the focus of the appeal  was  in
    respect of the allegation that the Appellant had employed deception  by
    using a proxy tester in his ETS examination at Eden College.  The Judge
    found in the Appellant's favour in this  regard.   The  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Respondent had discharged the evidential burden upon
    her of establishing deception. In those circumstances,  of  course,  it
    would not therefore have been incumbent upon  the  Appellant  to  offer
    anything by way of an 'innocent explanation'.


14.  In respect of Article 8, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  concluded  that
    there was no evidence of any insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Bangladesh; taking this into account, and with regard  to
    the public interest considerations, the Judge found that requiring  the
    Appellant to leave the UK would not be disproportionate.


15.  Notwithstanding this latter conclusion, the Judge allowed  the  appeal.
    This was a curious outcome given that the appeal  was  a  human  rights
    appeal.  Irrespective of the  favourable  finding  in  respect  of  the
    allegation of cheating, the Judge's conclusion that the removal of  the
    Appellant would not be disproportionate should logically have  resulted
    in the appeal being dismissed.  It is entirely unclear  why  the  Judge
    determined the matter in this way. Nothing is  discernible  by  way  of
    explanation.  Moreover, it is not apparently a  mere  slip:  the  Judge
    went on to consider that a fee award was appropriate in  light  of  the
    fact that the appeal had been allowed.  One can only speculate that the
    Judge was in some way  'wrong-footed'  in  the  overall  conclusion  by
    reason of the favourable finding  with  regard  to  the  allegation  of
    cheating, or perhaps lost sight of the  fact  that  this  was  a  human
    rights appeal and not an Immigration Rules appeal against the  decision
    to curtail student leave.


16.  The Respondent challenges the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with
    primary focus on the Judge's approach to the question of the allegation
    of using a proxy tester.  The Respondent's Grounds of Appeal  emphasise
    the case of SM & Qadir and associated litigation, and that  in  general
    terms the evidence provided by the Respondent in cases such as these is
    considered to be sufficient to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  and
    thereby  shift  the  onus  onto  an  applicant  to  offer  an  innocent
    explanation.  In some 14  paragraphs  of  grounds  it  is  only  almost
    incidentally, at paragraph 13, that  the  Respondent  pleads  that  the
    Judge found that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing
    family life from continuing in Bangladesh and that the removal  of  the
    Appellant was not disproportionate.


17.  In preliminary discussions before me today Mr Parkin  very  fairly  and
    properly acknowledged the nature of the apparent error on the  face  of
    the Decision in respect of Article 8 -  that  is  to  say  the  Judge's
    conclusion on the appeal being dissonant with  his  evaluation  of  the
    Article 8 claim.  Nonetheless, Mr Parkin argued that had  it  been  the
    case that the Judge was correct to conclude in the  Appellant's  favour
    in respect of the allegation of cheating, then that  would  effectively
    have altered the framework  upon  which  the  Article  8  consideration
    should have taken place.  I return to this aspect of the  case  in  due
    course: suffice to note for the moment that Mr Parkin's  position  thus
    adopted necessarily indicated that he relied upon the substance of  the
    finding with regard to  the  ETS  test,  and  to  that  extent  it  was
    necessary to give consideration to the Respondent's  primary  basis  of
    challenge.


18.  With regard to the ETS testing, the Judge made  detailed  reference  to
    the materials that were before him in this regard - which for the  main
    part were in  a  generic  format  with  the  usual  supporting  witness
    statements from various officers within the Home Office as regards  the
    scandal that had taken place in  respect  of  ETS  testing.   There  is
    nothing in the Decision to suggest that the Judge was not familiar with
    the manner in which these cases  have  been  considered  by  the  upper
    courts, or was in any way overlooking the generic  materials  that  had
    been provided.  Indeed, the Judge makes express reference to  the  case
    of Qadir within the body of his Decision.


19.  However, on the facts of this particular case the Judge  identified  an
    apparent discrepancy between the documents that had been produced  that
    were said to relate to the Appellant's testing - i.e. in respect of the
    case  specific  materials  rather  than  the  generic  materials.    In
    particular, the Judge identified that an ETS TOEIC test  centre  lookup
    tool had been produced for 17 September 2013 in respect of Eden College
    International showing the summary  of  the  tests  taken  both  on  the
    morning and the afternoon of that day.  The  tests  were  divided  into
    categories  of  'released',  'questionable',  and  'invalid'.   In  the
    morning session there had been 5 tests taken.  None of  them  had  been
    characterised  as  'invalid';  all  5   had   been   characterised   as
    'questionable'.  In the afternoon there had been 11 tests, all of which
    had  also  been  characterised   as   'questionable';   not   one   was
    characterised as 'invalid'.


20.  However, there was also produced an ETS SELT source  data  document  in
    respect of the Appellant with the test date given as 17 September  2013
    and the test centre stated  to  be  Eden  College  International:  this
    showed a result of 'invalid'.


21.  Plainly, there was a discrepancy between the notion of all tests  being
    taken at the centre on that day being returned as only  'questionable',
    and yet the Appellant's particular test being returned as 'invalid'.


22.  In the absence of any materials that  reconciled  the  discrepancy,  or
    otherwise tended  to  suggest  that  there  may  have  been  subsequent
    evaluations that might have  converted  a  questionable  test  into  an
    invalid test, it seems to me that it is entirely understandable why the
    Judge considered that overall the evidence produced by  the  Respondent
    in respect of this particular Appellant was not satisfactory - and  not
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden on the Respondent.


23.  I have attempted  to  explore  the  matter  in  some  detail  with  the
    representatives  during  the  course  of   the   hearing.   Mr   Tarlow
    acknowledged that he was not able to identify anything in the materials
    that would reconcile the apparent discrepancy.  In those circumstances,
    as Mr Tarlow indeed  in  due  course  acknowledged,  the  Secretary  of
    State's challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in
    respect of the testing must fail.


24.  That  then  leaves  the  issue  of  Article  8.   Plainly,  as  I  have
    indicated, the Judge must have fallen into error in allowing the appeal
    in circumstances where his  analysis  showed  that  he  had  reached  a
    conclusion that did not show a breach of Article  8  -  i.e.  where  no
    human rights ground had been established.

25.  Mr Parkin, in substance, simply invites  me  to  consider  either  that
    this error was ultimately not material or otherwise to  set  aside  the
    Decision and remake the decision in the appeal by allowing  the  appeal
    on the basis that the circumstances would indicate that  the  Appellant
    complied with the requirements of the Rules but for the curtailment  of
    his leave. He submitted that given that the appeal is under  Article  8
    and not under the Rules, and moreover given that the curtailment of his
    leave was found to have not been justified on the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge (because the evidence did not establish that he had
    cheated), the only reasonable conclusion would be that the  removal  of
    the Appellant was, and is disproportionate.


26.  In this regard I accept and acknowledge that, but for the  decision  to
    curtail his leave in September 2014, the Appellant would have continued
    to enjoy leave up to the point of his marriage and  indeed  up  to  the
    point of his application and the decision on his application.  In those
    circumstances  he  would  have  met  the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements of the Rules by reference to the so-called '5 year partner
    route', and would not have had to resort to reliance upon  EX.1,  under
    the '10 year partner route'.  Accordingly, I acknowledge and accept the
    premise  of  Mr  Parkin's  submission  to  the  effect  that  focus  on
    'insurmountable obstacles', or any consideration analogous to EX.1, was
    misplaced.


27.  When this analysis was put to Mr Tarlow he  acknowledged  that  he  did
    not really have an answer for it. Although he did not make any  express
    concession on the appeal, he  did  no  more  than  to  indicate  formal
    reliance  on  the  fact  of  the  refusal,  and  advanced  no   further
    submissions as to why the decision in the Appellant's appeal should not
    be remade in his favour.


28.  In all of the circumstances it seems to me  that  the  public  interest
    considerations of section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 are in substance subsumed within  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant  meets  the  substance  of  those
    Rules save, as I have indicated, for the circumstance of him not having
    leave to remain at the date that he made  his  application.   The  only
    reason he did not have leave to remain at that date was because of  the
    erroneous decision of the Respondent that he had used deception  in  an
    earlier application.  In all such circumstances in my judgment it would
    indeed  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  family   life
    established between the Appellant and his wife in the United Kingdom if
    he were to  be  required  now  to  leave.   I  reach  this  conclusion,
    notwithstanding the fact that it is clear that his wife is familiar and
    indeed  relatively  recently  familiar  with   the   circumstances   of
    Bangladesh, and indeed is a national of Bangladesh.  However,  for  the
    reasons given, I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed.


Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.


30.  The decision in the appeal is remade.  The appeal is allowed.


31.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore  reason  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all  the  circumstances  make  a  full  fee
award.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
