
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/10775/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2017                           |On 11 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. S.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smith, Solicitor, Quintessence Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant made an application for indefinite leave to remain in the
    UK on the basis of his long residency which was refused on  27  October
    2015.  He duly  appealed  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ["FtT"] and his appeal on Article 8 grounds came before Judge Walker at
    Taylor House on 22 December 2016 when it was dismissed.  The  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal which was refused by the FtT, but when  the
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal it was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer by decision of  20  September  2017.  The  grant
    reads as follows:-

         "Notwithstanding that the Appellant cannot benefit from statutorily
         extended leave, it is arguable that he was nonetheless residing  in
         the UK lawfully pending the final  determination  of  his  in  time
         application to remain on the basis of the EEA Regulations,  and  as
         such it is arguable that he meets the ten year  "lawful  residence"
         requirement.  It is also arguable that this is a relevant factor to
         take into account for the purposes of Article 8"

    and so the matter comes before me today.

 2. Having heard both parties  it  is  common  ground  that  the  grant  of
    permission  is  essentially  a  two-stage  identification  of  arguable
    propositions and I will treat it as such.

 3. The Appellant first entered the UK on 5 June 2005. He did  so  lawfully
    and his initial grant of leave was varied on  a  number  of  occasions,
    most recently expiring on 24 January 2014. That left him about eighteen
    months short of ten years lawful residence. Rather than seeking to vary
    his leave once more, the Appellant submitted an application for  a  EEA
    residence card asserting that he was an extended family  member  of  an
    EEA national.  That application was refused in  January  2014  and  his
    appeal against that refusal was dismissed by  the  FtT  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 April 2015.  His appeal rights were exhausted shortly
    thereafter.

 4. It follows from that chronology, as appears indeed to have been  common
    ground before Judge Walker in December 2016 that as at April  2015  the
    Appellant could not demonstrate that he was entitled to  the  issue  of
    the residence card for which he had applied. Whether that  failure  was
    because he could not demonstrate the appropriate  family  relationship,
    or,  because  he  could  not  demonstrate  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights,  is  for  the  purposes  of  today's  hearing
    immaterial - although it is  noteworthy  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    sought to explain it, and did not seek to  pursue  any  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision  of  the  FtT.  The  Appellant  was
    equally unable to demonstrate before Judge Walker that he  had  at  any
    subsequent date become entitled to the issue of such a residence card.

 5. When the appeal came  before  Judge  Walker  it  was  argued  that  the
    application for the issue of an EEA residence card, and the  subsequent
    pursuit of an appeal against the refusal, had  served  to  trigger  the
    operation of section 3C of the 1971 Act.  That argument in my judgement
    must fail, and in reality it should never have been advanced.   Section
    3C of the 1971 Act did not, and  could  not,  apply  to  the  Appellant
    because he was neither making an application for leave to remain,  nor,
    an application for a variation of existing leave to remain.

 6. In the context of the Article 8 appeal against  the  refusal  to  grant
    ILR, (which was the only ground of appeal open to the Appellant)  Judge
    Walker did look at the question of whether or  not  the  Appellant  had
    established that his Article 8 rights were  engaged  by  that  refusal.
    Although he did so briefly it is clear from his decision when read as a
    whole, and in particular paragraph 24, that the Appellant had failed to
    do so. That conclusion was undoubtedly correct, because  as  the  Judge
    had noted, the Appellant has provided no evidence to  suggest  that  he
    had established a "family life" for the purposes of Article 8 as at the
    hearing date in December 2016. He had also provided almost no  evidence
    of the extent of his "private life" as at that date. Indeed  the  Judge
    commented that the Appellant's witness statement simply stated that  he
    had been in the UK for twelve years, had not travelled outside the  UK,
    that he had been a law-abiding person, and that he had  contributed  to
    the economy at those times when he had permission to work. Although she
    did not perhaps go on to make it crystal clear what her finding was, it
    is difficult in those circumstances to see how the evidence relating to
    the Appellant's "private life" could possibly have engaged Article 8 as
    at that date. In those circumstances the Appellant's challenge  to  the
    decision is doomed to fail.

 7. Given the low threshold of engagement for Article 8 the Judge did go on
    to deal in the alternative with the proportionality balancing exercise,
    and in doing so she properly directed herself to the public interest in
    section 117A-D of the 2014 Act. Before me it is argued that  the  Judge
    erred  by  not  transposing  across  into  the   consideration   of   a
    proportionality balancing exercise the fact that the Appellant had been
    pursuing an appeal before the Tribunal in 2015, even  if  that  was  an
    appeal that was doomed to fail.  That argument must fail if  the  Judge
    was correct to conclude (as I am satisfied she was) that his Article  8
    rights were not engaged by the decision under appeal.

 8. Even if the Appellant's Article 8 rights were engaged by  the  decision
    under appeal, it is very difficult to see that  any  Tribunal  properly
    directing itself upon the relevant principles could have concluded that
    the decision under appeal was  disproportionate.  The  Appellant  quite
    clearly did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276A  of  the
    Immigration Rules at the date of his application.  He  had  adduced  no
    evidence to the Judge to establish the true nature and  extent  of  his
    "private life". Thus there were no witnesses who came forward  to  give
    evidence as to his role in the community,  or  his  role  as  a  fellow
    worker, or any other aspect of his life. His case in  relation  to  his
    "private life" was in truth the bald and undisputed proposition that he
    had physically been in the UK for twelve years, albeit he had only been
    entitled to be present in the UK for the initial eight and a half  year
    period. In those circumstances I am not satisfied that the Judge failed
    to take into account any argument that she ought  to  have  taken  into
    account in the proportionality balancing exercise.

 9.  I  am  satisfied  the  Judge  did  not  take  into  account   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise any matter that she should not  have
    taken into account.  The decision on the Article 8 appeal was one  that
    was well open to her, was properly reasoned, and displays  no  arguable
    error of law.  In those circumstances I confirm  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of decision

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
