
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10653/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 January 2019                    |On 8 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               MR abdul Hameed
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam (Solicitor), Salam & Co Solicitors
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Raiks, promulgated in Manchester following the hearing  there  on
    13th September 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  17th
    April 1988.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    24th April 2018 refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  his  long  residence  in  this
    country and his family and private life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is set out by  the  judge  at  the
    outset where he notes that:

         "The  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  dated  21st
         September 2017 was on the basis of his long residence  in  the  UK.
         Paragraph 276B allows for  a  person  to  potentially  qualify  for
         settlement after completing  a  period  of  ten  years'  continuous
         lawful residence in the UK." (Paragraph 2).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that although the application of the  Appellant  was
    made on the basis of paragraph 276B, the Respondent  had  refused  that
    application for two essential reasons.

 5. First, while she had applied in time for indefinite leave to remain  to
    remain  as  a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  on  30th  June  2016,  this
    application was refused on the same  date.   Thereafter  the  Appellant
    requested an in time administrative review on 11th July  2016  and  his
    stay was then extended by virtue of Section 3C of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 whilst the administrative review was pending.  The judge  goes  on
    to explain that:

         "However, the Appellant then submitted a fresh application for  ILR
         on the basis of  ten  years  long  residence  on  27th  July  2016.
         Therefore, and as for guidance referred  to  by  the  Secretary  of
         State in the refusal decision Section 3C was considered as ended on
         26th June 2016." (Paragraph 3).

 6. The second reason given by the Respondent in  the  refusal  letter  was
    that,

         "The Respondent having considered the general grounds of refusal of
         leave to remain, concluded that the  information  provided  by  the
         Appellant on 5th April 2011 when the Appellant was granted his Tier
         1 (General) Migrant  status,  had  been  incorrect,  and  that  the
         Appellant had failed to provide accurate information in respect  of
         his tax return at the time of that application, and  this  "had  an
         impact on the grant of his status." (Paragraph 4).

 7. The judge held that the Appellant could not succeed because his Section
    3C leave ended as soon as the Appellant had made a fresh application on
    27th July 2016.  As the judge  explained,  "The  administrative  review
    therefore ended the day before  this  on  26th  July  2017  as  it  was
    considered no longer pending as a result of this new  application.   At
    this stage the Appellant had resided in the UK for eight years and  ten
    months." (Paragraph 17).



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  had  misconceived  the
    nature of the application, which had nothing to do with the  fact  that
    the  Appellant  had  been  granted  a  Section  3C  leave,  after   the
    administrative review  process  was  triggered.   The  application  had
    everything to do with the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  applied  for
    indefinite leave in a second application on 27th  July  2016.   It  was
    this application that took two years for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    determine.  Had the application been determined earlier, the  Appellant
    would have no leg to stand upon, because the Appellant's  residence  in
    this country would not have amounted to ten  years.   However,  at  the
    time that it was decided, the Appellant had been in  this  country  for
    ten  years  and  six  months.   This  is  because  the  Respondent  had
    considered the application on 24th April 2018  and  the  Appellant  had
    therefore completed the ten year qualifying period so as to enable  him
    to succeed under paragraph 276ADE.  The grounds are  quite  well-argued
    in this respect.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 9th November 2018.  This was on the
    basis that the judge had not engaged with the IDI of the  Secretary  of
    State, which allowed for the claim to  be  put  in  the  way  that  the
    appellant was putting it.  Instead, the judge had focused on  the  fact
    that the Appellant's Section 3C leave had ended, and therefore he could
    not succeed.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 8th January 2019, Mr  Islam,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the grounds  of  application.   He
    was emphatic in his statement that  the  judge  had  simply  failed  to
    consider the fact that the  second  application,  although  ending  the
    Appellant's Section 3C leave, was not considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State until some two years later on 24 April 2018, when in fact it  had
    been made on 27th July 2016, and by that time the Appellant had clocked
    up ten years  and  six  months.   Therefore,  he  could  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE.

11. For his part, Mr Bates relied upon the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in
    Patel [2015] UKUT 0273, where the Upper Tribunal had stated that it was
    not open to a person who had not as yet completed a full ten  years  of
    lawful residence  in  this  country,  to  make  one  application  after
    another, and thereby get leave to remain by way of  operation  of  law,
    and then clock up the requisite ten years, so as to be able to stake  a
    claim to remain in this country.  In that case the Upper  Tribunal  had
    made it clear that "this would open Section 3C to abuse.  It would open
    the possibility of a  series  of  applications  leading  to  indefinite
    extension of the original leave." (Paragraph 17).

12. Mr Islam, replied to say that there was no bar to an  applicant  making
    his application as many times as he wanted.  Indeed, the IDIs makes  it
    quite clear that if a person were to amend their application more  than
    once on the same day, they should make it clear which application  they
    were relying upon.  The issue was not whether the  Appellant  had  made
    one application after another.  The  issue  was  that  the  application
    which he had made, namely the one on 27th July 2016, was not determined
    until 24th April 2018, and this was something that the  judge  did  not
    engage with.  At that time, the Appellant had clocked up ten  years  so
    as to make him eligible for the right to remain in this country.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.   There  is  some  apparent  justification  in  the  ingenious
    argument put forward by Mr Islam before this Tribunal.  It arises  from
    the IDI  which,  in  its  policy  on  "long  residence"  version  15.0,
    published on  3rd  April  2017),  has  a  heading  "Applications  being
    Considered More than 28 Days Before the Required Qualifying  Period  is
    Completed".  The paragraph under this heading goes on to say  that  "if
    you are considering  an  application  more  than  28  days  before  the
    applicant completes the required qualifying period for  long  residence
    you must refuse.  This is because the applicant has not  completed  the
    required period of leave in the UK".  Mr  Islam  has  argued  that  the
    reference to "considering an application" means that the relevant  date
    is the time when the Home Office made the decision with respect to this
    application.  The judge in this case did not engage with this argument.
     The decision, therefore, was one which  did  not  consider  everything
    that ought to have been considered.  It left unanswered the Appellant's
    argument.  That being so, this matter has been  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Raiks, under Practice Statement 7.2.(b), because "the nature or  extent
    of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal".

14. No anonymity direction is made.

15. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th January 2019

