
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10960/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 January 2017                         |On 06 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              mr khalil mukhtar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, IIAS (Levenshulme)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 1 August 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Lodge dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision made  by  the
    respondent on 27 October 2015 refusing his  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The grounds are  essentially  twofold.
    First  they  contend  that  the  judge  had  not  conducted  a   proper
    proportionality assessment of the appellant's Article 8  circumstances;
    second, they argue that the judge had erred in failing to weigh in  the
    balance the evidence of the witness Mr Amir Wahid who attended ready to
    give evidence.  It was pointed out that having noted  in  paragraph  12
    that Mr Wahid was in attendance and was available to give evidence  and
    that the Home Office Presenting Officer indicated  she  had  no  cross-
    examination, the judge should have attached weight to his evidence.

2.   I am not persuaded that the grounds singly or cumulatively, identify  a
    material error of law.  It is true that the judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's Article 8  is  relatively  short  and  does  not  expressly
    mention  Razgar and the five steps.  However,  it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's references in paragraph 25 and paragraph 26 to "proportionality
    assessment" and considering the judge's decision as a  whole,  that  he
    conducted a sufficiently adequate  balancing  exercise  and  that  this
    properly followed his earlier  examination  of  whether  the  appellant
    could meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Rules had already  been  conceded
    by his Counsel on that occasion (Mr Usmar, see paragraph 14), but  very
    properly, in view of the two-stage approach enjoined by leading  cases,
    the judge considered the appellant's circumstances under the Rules.  In
    this context it was entirely within the range of  reasonable  responses
    for the judge to conclude that the appellant had not shown (as required
    by paragraph 276(1)(vi)) that there were very significant obstacles  to
    his integration in Pakistan.

3.   As regards the judge's assessment of Article 8 outside  the  Rules,  it
    is clear that the judge correctly considered that if his claim  was  to
    succeed it would have to be on the basis of private  not  family  life.
    The appellant does not seek to argue that  his  relationship  with  his
    brother and friends constituted family life for the purposes of Article
    8(1).  In relation to private life, the judge expressly  accepted  that
    the appellant had established private life: see paragraph  25.   Whilst
    the judge did not state that he accepted  that  the  decision  appealed
    against amounted to an interference with the appellant's private  life,
    it is clear the judge proceeded with the case on the  basis  that  this
    was the case and so the only issue was proportionality.   In  assessing
    proportionality, it is fair to say that the judge  does  not  expressly
    set out a balance sheet of factors for and against.   Even  so,  it  is
    abundantly  clear  that  he  not  attach  significant  weight  to   the
    appellant's private life ties, and why,  namely  because  the  bulk  of
    these had been formed when his immigration status was precarious.

4.   Mr Moksud took issue with  what  he  termed  'the  selective  approach'
    taken by the judge to identifying and balancing. the relevant  factors,
    with the judge only addressing those identified in s.117B of  the  NIAA
    2002.  However it is difficult to see what relevant factors there  were
    beyond those that were addressed by the judge.  By the appellant's  own
    account, a very important factor was his health and the fact that he is
    HIV positive.  Yet the judge dealt in detail with this issue, referring
    to  the  relevant  case  law  principles  and  the  key  facts  in  the
    appellant's case - in particular  that his HIV was not advanced and was
    been managed by  NHS  treatment  and  that  the  appellant  would  have
    available to him similar treatment in Pakistan.  In terms of the length
    of time the appellant had spent in the UK and his relationship with his
    brother and friends, the judge correctly noted that he was  obliged  by
    s.117B(5) of NIAA 2002 to attach little  weight  to  his  private  life
    because it had been established at a time his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.  The judge also took into account the appellant's financial
    situation and his competency in English, as he was obliged to do by the
    provisions of s.117B.  The grounds fail to identify other factors  that
    should have been considered significant.

5.   Turning to the second ground, it is correct to say that  if  a  witness
    is proffered for examination  but  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    elects not to cross-examine him, that at the very least obliges a judge
    to refer to this witness's evidence and, if  it  is  not  accepted,  to
    explain why.  The difficulties here  for  the  appellant's  appeal  are
    twofold.  First, the judge did take into account the witness's  witness
    statement -  or  at  least  his  statement  at  paragraph  19  must  be
    understood to include the witness statement, since the  description  he
    gives of the  letters  he  took  into  account  certainly  includes  Mr
    Wahid's.   Second,  the  witness  statement  was  extremely  brief  and
    generalised. Mr Wahid's statement says the  appellant  is  his  friend,
    that he has known the appellant since he (Wahid) came to the  UK,  that
    they have both worked together; that  his  full  support  is  with  the
    appellant; that the  appellant  was  supporting  the  rule  of  law  by
    furnishing evidence against his in-laws; that the appellant's life will
    be in danger if he returns. He gave no specific example of threats from
    the in-laws and provided no particulars of date or time etc.  Nor  does
    Mr Wahid's witness statement  provide  any  indication  that  he  could
    provide  more  particulars  orally.  Importantly,  there  has  been  no
    additional witness statement  served  in  support  of  this  ground  to
    identify what else the witness would have been able to confirm.

6.   In my judgment it is reasonable to infer that judge  took  the  witness
    statement into account but considered that evidence of this order, even
    if it had been given orally, could not establish that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant  integrating  in  Pakistan.
    That was a position entirely open  to  the  judge  since  he  noted  at
    paragraph 18 that the prosecution case against the appellant's  in-laws
    in the UK was concluded in 2010 and since  that  date  he  has  had  no
    contact with that side of the family and that it  was  not  even  clear
    from the evidence whether there were still any members of his ex-wife's
    family in Pakistan.

7.   It is also pertinent that the main  thrust  of  the  evidence  from  Mr
    Wahid and his other witnesses in any event went to his claim to face  a
    real risk on return of persecution or ill-treatment.  However the judge
    had already given a perfectly legitimate reason for not considering the
    evidence in this context,  that the appellant had chosen not to make an
    asylum or humanitarian protection claim.

8.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law and that his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must
    stand.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

