
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10570/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 19 August 2021                            |On: 3 September 2021           |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RDS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Azhar, counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese, promulgated on 18 January  2021.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 3 February 2021.

Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is reiterated  below  for  the
    benefit of the respondent's minor child.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom aged 5  on  a  visit  visa
    during 2002. No application was made on his behalf  to  regularise  his
    stay until 2 April 2015 when he  applied  for  settlement  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. That application was refused however, the respondent
    was granted limited leave to remain until 10 December 2017 owing to his
    family ties in the United Kingdom. He  was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain until 25 November 2020.

 4. The  respondent  has  acquired  two  convictions.  The  first  was  for
    possession of an  imitation  firearm  during  2017  which  attracted  a
    community disposal. On 1 November 2018, he was convicted of  conspiracy
    to supply controlled drugs, namely cocaine, heroin and cannabis and was
    sentenced to a total of 40 months' imprisonment.

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State  signed  a  deportation  order  against  the
    respondent on 6 June 2019. An accompanying notice of decision explained
    that it was  not  accepted  that  the  respondent  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relation with his British daughter R who  was  then
    aged 1 year and 8 months. Nor was it accepted that it would  be  unduly
    harsh for R to live in Jamaica or remain in the UK while the respondent
    was deported to Jamaica. It was accepted  that  the  respondent  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner, T but not that it
    would be unduly harsh for her to live in Jamaica or remain  in  the  UK
    without  the  respondent.  Consideration  was  given  to  whether   the
    respondent could meet the private life exception  because  he  had  not
    been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, his  convictions
    indicated that he was not socially and culturally integrated in the  UK
    and it was not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles
    to his integration. The Secretary of State could not  detect  any  very
    compelling  circumstances  such  that  the  respondent  should  not  be
    deported.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent,  his
    partner T, his mother and sister S gave  evidence.  Reliance  was  also
    placed on a report from an independent social worker, Angeline Seymour.
    It was accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that the respondent
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  child.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal concluded that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  both  the
    child and partner to go to Jamaica or remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    respondent.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    give adequate or any reasons regarding his findings and secondly,  that
    the  judge  materially  misdirected  himself  on  the  current  caselaw
    regarding the threshold required for undue harshness to be established.



 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 9. The respondent filed a Rule 24  response,  opposing  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal and which robustly defended the decision under appeal.

The hearing

10.  I heard succinct submissions from both representatives  which  I  have
    taken into account in full.

11. In essence, Mr Melvin relied on the original grounds.  In  relation  to
    the first ground, he emphasised that the judge's  reasons  for  finding
    that it would be unduly harsh for the respondent's child to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom without him occupied  just  two  paragraphs  of  the
    decision and reasons. Furthermore, he noted that the judge's assessment
    of the report of  the  independent  social  worker  was  limited  to  a
    throwaway comment at the end of the decision. As for the second ground,
    while the judge had mentioned HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ  1176,  he  had
    not applied  this  judgment  in  full,  with  particular  reference  to
    paragraph 56 which set out the range of circumstances to be  considered
    in relation to Exception 2.

12. Ms Azhar valiantly attempted to defend the decision  and  reasons.  She
    took me to the independent social worker's report,  made  reference  to
    the judge's record of the evidence he heard and argued that  the  judge
    made findings which were supported by the  evidence.  As  for  HA,  the
    judge had referred to the case at [24] and stated at [25] that  he  had
    applied it. She invited me to find that there was no error  of  law  in
    the decision and reasons.

13. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the  decision  and  reasons
    was materially flawed owing to the judge's failure to provide  adequate
    reasons. I expand below.

Decision on error of law

14. It is uncontroversial that it is incumbent on a judge to give  adequate
    reasons on material matters. In this case, the appeal turned on whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the respondent's daughter to accompany him
    to Jamaica and/or whether the respondent's removal was likely  to  have
    an unduly harsh impact on her. The judge's finding on the latter  point
    were contained in one sentence, as follows:

    "I am of the view that the effects of the appellant's deportation  from
    the UK would be unduly harsh on his daughter who  recently  has  become
    accustomed to living with both parents and for this to be cut  at  this
    time would in my view be detrimental  to  her  progress  and  emotional
    state of mind."

15. In making the foregoing finding, the judge gave no reasons and referred
    to none of the evidence before him.  While  there  was  an  independent
    social worker's report, a considerable appellant's bundle  and  several
    witnesses had attended the hearing and some this  evidence  might  have
    supported the judge's findings, he did not  draw  the  strands  of  the
    evidence together.

16. While the judge accepted the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  as  to  the
    respondent's relationship with his  partner  and  child  and  "attached
    weight" to the social worker's report, there was no  analysis  of  this
    evidence nor explanation of what  detriment  would  be  caused  to  the
    child. The judge's reasons in relation  to  why  the  child  could  not
    accompany her father to Jamaica were similarly lacking. It may well  be
    that the judge took into consideration the non-exhaustive  factors  set
    out in HA in arriving at his conclusions, however if he did  so  it  is
    not apparent from the decision.

17. The decision and reasons disclosed material errors of law without which
    it cannot be said that  the  judge  would  have  arrived  at  the  same
    conclusion.

18. Mr Melvin urged me to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms
    Azhar did not object to this disposal. While mindful of statement 7  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statements of 10 February 2010,  it  is
    the case that the parties have yet to have an adequate consideration of
    this deportation appeal at the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be
    unfair to deprive them of such consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 4 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date 25 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

