
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10121/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 12th October 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                JAMILA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lemer instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa ('the Judge) promulgated  on  5  November
       2019 in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
       rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal the operative part of  the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "2.    The judge has arguably erred in law by  failing  to  make
                findings on the issues before  her  which  included  whether
                there were very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
                reintegration in Pakistan upon return, alternatively whether
                there were exceptional circumstances which would enable  the
                appellant  to  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  of
                Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE."


Error of law

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on the 1 January 1955 who
       applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her
       family and private life.
    4. Having considered both the documentary and oral  evidence  the  Judge
       sets out her findings of fact  from  [55]  of  the  decision  to  the
       challenge outside the Immigration Rules.
    5. On behalf of the appellant Mr Lemer submitted  the  grounds  raise  a
       wide range of issues in support  of  the  claim  the  Judge  did  not
       address all relevant matters. It was submitted the essential question
       in this appeal was whether a person could care for the  appellant  on
       return to Pakistan but that the Judge had focused upon  the  position
       in the United Kingdom as demonstrated by the findings at  [56],  [60]
       and [73]. It is argued this distracted the Judge from considering the
       real issue which was the appellant's position on return.
    6.  It  was  submitted  that  the  findings  in  relation  to  both  the
       appellant's medical condition and support that will be  available  in
       Pakistan were not reasonably open to the Judge for  the  reasons  set
       out in the grounds.
    7. It asserted the Judge failed to give adequate reasons in  support  of
       the findings  rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence  that  sufficient
       assistance and support is required but not  available  on  return  to
       meet her health and care needs.
    8. I find it is important to read this decision as a whole to understand
       the manner in which the evidence was given and considered. The  Judge
       sets out her  core  findings  between  [72  -  74]  which  cannot  be
       considered in isolation from the rest of the determination.
    9. In these paragraphs the Judge writes:

           "72.   For the reasons given above, I reject the assertion  that
                the appellant's health conditions has seriously deteriorated
                since she entered the UK in  July  2018.  I  find  that  the
                family  members  in  the  UK  very  well  knew   about   the
                appellant's health conditions which they described as  being
                serious even when she was  in  Pakistan.  Indeed,  the  oral
                evidence of the appellant's daughter-in-law  confirmed  that
                the appellant has serious health concerns because  the  last
                few visits, she had issues and was not the  same  person  as
                she used to be years ago. They  had  to  push  her  to  take
                medication.  When asked why the appellant came  on  a  visit
                visa on  a  temporary  basis  as  opposed  to  a  settlement
                application, the witness replied she does not  know.  Whilst
                put to the  witness  that  the  appellant  came  here  on  a
                temporary  visa  when  she  could  have  made  a  settlement
                application given the serious concerns  why  no  application
                was made to come here permanently. She replied because  this
                time when she came  her  health  deteriorated  from  bad  to
                worse. The witness was asked if the  condition  was  bad  or
                serious by no application was made before it  got  worse  to
                which she replied now since she has been looking  after  the
                appellant, she was knocked like this. Her mental state  does
                not seem right to her.


           73.    I find it reasonable to conclude  that  the  family  knew
                very well the appellant's health conditions were serious and
                yet they waited for her nephew Asad to leave  Pakistan  then
                the appellant came here as a visitor and  six  months  later
                submitted  a  settlement   application.    On   a   holistic
                assessment of the evidence, I cannot accept that  there  has
                been  a  marked  deterioration  in  the  appellant's  health
                conditions  which  led  her  to  submit   a   human   rights
                application in January 2019.


           74.    It clearly is the case that the appellant has a  home  to
                return to and also has family members in  the  form  of  her
                sister  Rahila  and  her  husband.  The  evidence  was  that
                Rahila's husband also used to live with the appellant in her
                home on occasions. I find no satisfactory evidence has  been
                put forward to suggest that the appellant would not be  able
                to live in Pakistan with the help and support of Rahila  and
                her husband either in her  home  or  at  Rahila's  husband's
                house in Sohawa. I cannot  accept  the  assertion  that  the
                appellant will be returning as a lone female."

   10. This is a human rights appeal which required the Judge,  having  made
       her factual findings, to balance the competing interests to ascertain
       whether  the  respondent  had  established  that  her  decision   was
       proportionate to any interference with a protected right. In relation
       to that aspect the Judge writes at [75 - 79]:

           "75.    Section 117B(5) confirms that little  weight  should  be
                given to a private life established by a person when in  the
                UK with a precarious immigration status. The  appellant  has
                had a precarious immigration status in that she entered  the
                UK as a visitor and has  only  ever  had  limited  leave  to
                enter, so this does apply to her. This relates  to  private,
                as opposed to family life.


           76.    I find that family life can be maintained through  visits
                to Pakistan and through modern means of  communication.  The
                appellant entered the UK as  a  visitor,  and  she  did  not
                therefore have a legitimate expectation  of  being  able  to
                remain in the UK on the grounds of  either  having  enduring
                family life with the children or  on  the  basis  of  having
                established family life with her children since her  arrival
                as a visitor. I find that there is no satisfactory reason as
                to why she cannot return to Pakistan and continue to live in
                her own house with financial assistance from the sponsor and
                the practical and emotional  support  from  Rahila  and  her
                husband. I find that it is also relevant to take account  of
                the fact that the sponsor stated that  he  had  not  checked
                about professional care  and  said  that  there  it  is  not
                available and even if find someone there  is  the  issue  of
                things being stolen.


           77.    The appellant's two grandchildren confirmed that they had
                visited Pakistan on a number of occasions. Her granddaughter
                Huma confirmed that she has visited Pakistan 3/4  times  and
                her last visit was in 2017 when she went  with  her  parents
                and siblings. The reason for the  visit  was  to  visit  the
                appellant which was in February 2017 and they stayed  for  4
                weeks. The last visit in 2017 is quite relevant because  the
                appellant was reliant on her sister for her daily activities
                and that she needed somebody to take her to  the  toilet  as
                she needed help with  bathing.  Huma  stated  that  he  also
                helped along with her mother during that occasion. According
                to the grandson Ismaeel he stated that he  visited  Pakistan
                on two occasions  in  2015  and  the  second  visit  was  in
                2017/2018.


           78.    It is said that according to Dr Latif  the  appellant  is
                unfit to fly and therefore would make her fall into a  limbo
                situation and Ms Gherman relied on the  case  of  RA  (Iraq)
                [2019] EWCA  Civ  850  where  guidance  was  given  when  an
                individual is not capable  of  being  removed.  I  find  the
                appellant case is entirely  different  and  with  sufficient
                assistance there is no reason why she would not be  able  to
                fly.


           79.    Looking  at  all  the  circumstances  and  balancing  the
                respective interests of the parties, I find the decision  is
                proportion."

   11. The thrust of the challenge to the decision, both written  and  oral,
       claims the Judge failed to consider the  totality  of  the  evidence,
       made inappropriate speculative findings not based upon the  evidence,
       and failed to give sufficient reasons or explanation for the findings
       made.
   12. The Judge was clearly aware of the medical evidence provided and  the
       assertion that the Judge was not has no  arguable  merit.  The  Judge
       properly noted that the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a
       visitor and was aware of the appellant's immigration history  and  UK
       family composition.
   13. The Judge clearly took  into  account  the  evidence  of  the  family
       members both in relation to their claims concerning  the  appellant's
       medical condition, deterioration, and  lack  of  adequate  fair  care
       facilities in Pakistan, but did not find that the  claims  that  they
       made were credible and clearly was of the opinion that  the  evidence
       being led was that the family thought was more  likely  to  secure  a
       finding that the appellant will be able to remain with  them  in  the
       United Kingdom. Just because the Judge did not give the evidence  the
       weight the appellant and family would have  liked  it  to  have  been
       given does not mean it was not properly considered.
   14. The Judge was entitled to note that  no  application  had  been  made
       under the Adult Dependent Relative rule. The appellant's son claiming
       that he had not looked into it does not establish legal error in  the
       Judge's concerns. If the appellant's medical condition was such as to
       warrant an application on this basis no doubt the family  would  have
       looked into  it  and  such  an  application  made,  rather  than  the
       appellant entering the United Kingdom as a visitor.
   15. The  Judge  appears  to  have  been  concerned  that  the  chronology
       indicated that what had occurred was an  attempt  to  circumvent  the
       adult dependant relative rule.
   16. The Judge noted the appellant owns her own house, received  treatment
       for her medical condition in the past which was available  on  return
       to Pakistan. In relation to  the  assertion  the  appellants  medical
       condition taken a downturn whilst in the United  Kingdom,  the  Judge
       noted Dr Latif referred to antidepressants in a January  2019  report
       which indicated the appellant had received the same in Pakistan.  The
       Judge was entitled to express concern  about  the  lack  of  evidence
       regarding medical treatment received in Pakistan or evidence to  show
       the same would not be available to her on return, clearly  indicating
       the Judge was looking to the situation on return in addition  to  the
       position in the UK.
   17. It was particularly noted that Dr Latif makes  no  reference  to  the
       fact the appellant owns her own home and has relatives in Pakistan.
   18. Mr Tan in his submissions raised the point that although the grant of
       permission refers to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  at
       [21] the Judge writes:

           "21.   Miss Gherman confirmed that the only issue is  Article  8
                ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. Mr Swaby stated that the
                appellant came to the UK as  a  visitor  and  that  relevant
                adult dependent relative rule is an important aspect through
                which the Tribunal should consider Article 8."

   19. It is not made out the Judge erred in law in not considering 276  ADE
       when she was not asked to do so.
   20. To have  succeeded  in  an  application  under  the  adult  dependent
       relative rule the appellant would have been  required  to  have  been
       outside the UK and need long-term care  from  a  parent,  grandchild,
       brother, sister, son or daughter who is living permanently in the UK.
       The appellant would therefore have had to make the  application  from
       Pakistan which she did not do.
   21. It is also important that an applicant is able to prove  all  of  the
       following:

         . They need long-term care to do everyday personal  and  household
           tasks because of illness, disability or your age


         . the care they need is not available or affordable in the country
           you live in


         . the person they will be joining  in  the  UK  will  be  able  to
           support, accommodate and care for you  without  claiming  public
           funds for at least 5 years


         . they are 18 or over.

   22. The Judge does not dispute the appellant  has  medical  problems  and
       needs, nor that the family in the United Kingdom who are found to  be
       of means would not be able to accommodate and meet the  living  costs
       of the appellant in the United Kingdom without claiming public  funds
       for the requisite five year period, or that the appellant is over 18.
   23. The core finding is that  care  to  meet  the  appellant's  needs  is
       available and affordable to her in Pakistan. The Judge make  specific
       findings  in  relation  to  other  family  members  which,   although
       challenged in the grounds  of  appeal,  has  not  been  shown  to  be
       findings outside the range of those available to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.  It was for the Judge to give the evidence the  weight  she
       thought it deserved. The Judge was clearly not  satisfied  the  claim
       that no family support was available in Pakistan was credible.
   24. The Judge also specific notes at [76] that it was relevant  that  the
       sponsor confirmed he had not checked out professional  care  claiming
       it was not available and even if they found  somebody  there  was  an
       issue of things been stolen. If the family have not undertaken proper
       enquiries in relation to the availability of care for  the  appellant
       it is hard to see how they could say such care is  not  available.  A
       simple search of the Internet discloses a number of  commercial  care
       home providers in and around the appellant's home area.  These,  like
       many in the  United  Kingdom,  are  specialist  providers  for  those
       requiring care in  old  age,  either  in  their  own  home  or  in  a
       residential setting. The claim that any paid employee would steal the
       appellant's property is no more than speculation based upon an unfair
       generalisation that those who dedicate their  professional  lives  to
       caring for the elderly and those in need are thieves.  Whilst  it  is
       accepted there are individuals in the care sector who do not exercise
       the required degree of professionalism there was no evidence to  show
       that this was position in all of Pakistan.
   25. The appellant will therefore have failed in an application made under
       the adult dependent relative provisions as she would  not  have  been
       able to show that the care, she needs is not available or  affordable
       in Pakistan. The appellants care needs have been met in the past  and
       there was no evidence to show that they could not be in  the  future.
       The Judge was entitled to take this fact into account as part of  the
       proportionality exercise as she did.
   26. The Judge was also entitled to find  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
       person who will fall in limbo and any assessment of  whether  she  is
       fit to fly at the appropriate time will be  made  by  the  respondent
       when this issue arises.
   27. I find that the appellant fails to  establish  arguable  legal  error
       material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. While  the  appellant
       and family members disagree with the finding and want  the  appellant
       to be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom with  them,  article  8
       does not give a person the right to choose where they wish  to  live.
       The findings  are  adequately  reasoned,  and  weight  given  to  the
       evidence has not been shown to be irrational. It has not  been  shown
       the  conclusion  reached  is  not  one  within  the  range  of  those
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.

Decision

   28. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   29. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed........................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 November 2020
