
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/10201/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9th August 2017                    |       On 15th August 2017            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                mr elmaz mema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  15th
    October 2015 refusing his application for leave to remain on the  basis
    of his private and family life in the UK with his  partner,  a  British
    citizen, Ms E.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Callender Smith dismissed the
    appeal.  The Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

Error of Law

 2. There are two grounds in the application for permission to appeal.   In
    granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson considered that
    there was arguable merit in Ground  2  but  little  arguable  merit  in
    Ground 1.  In these circumstances Mr Khan indicated at  the  outset  of
    the hearing that he would pursue the second ground  only  and  not  the
    first ground.  It is contended in the second ground that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in his assessment of proportionality in failing to
    consider the impact on the Appellant's partner of his temporary absence
    from the UK whilst he pursued an application for entry clearance.

The Background

 3. The background as set out in the papers is that the Appellant claims to
    have arrived in the UK in May 2002 and he claimed asylum  on  21st  May
    2002.  This application was refused, his appeal against  that  decision
    was dismissed and he was considered to have exhausted his appeal rights
    on 17th January 2003.  The Appellant claimed that he met Ms E in August
    2009 and to have been in a  relationship  with  her  since  then.   The
    Appellant made an application for leave to remain under  Article  8  on
    15th December 2014, that application was refused on 31st December 2014.
     He made  further  submissions  on  14th  October  2015  based  on  his
    relationship with Ms E.  The refusal of that application is the subject
    of this appeal.

 4. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the
    oral and documentary evidence given by the Appellant  and  his  partner
    was generally cogent and credible.  However the judge  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant had supported himself from January 2003  until  2009
    when he met his  partner  and  thereafter  until  the  present  without
    working and only receiving financial help from  friends  [31-32].   The
    judge noted the Appellant's  partner's  mental  health  problems.   The
    judge considered that it  was  a  realistic  possibility  that  if  the
    Appellant returned to Albania to apply for entry clearance Ms E and her
    mother (with whom the Appellant currently lives)  could  combine  their
    two households and support each other until  he  returned.   The  judge
    found that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship akin to marriage [38] although as a  result  of
    immigration bail conditions the  Appellant  lives  with  his  partner's
    mother.  The judge accepted that for all practical purposes the  couple
    lived together although they are not always in the same  place  at  the
    same time.  The judge  accepted  that  there  are  "clearly  issues  of
    particular dependency between the Appellant's partner, because  of  her
    unhappy background, and the Appellant" [40].  The judge  did  not  find
    that these issues are

         "so grave as to create  the  kind  of  very  significant  obstacles
         (inside the Immigration Rules) or exceptional circumstances outside
         the Immigration Rules to permit the Appellant to remain in  the  UK
         without returning to Albania to regularise his immigration status."
         [41]

 5. The judge noted the Appellant's claim to be estranged from  his  mother
    and two sisters but considered that there was no objective evidence  of
    this.  The judge concluded that  it  would  be  proportionate  for  the
    Appellant to  return  to  Albania  and  go  through  the  proper  entry
    procedures to rejoin  his  partner  in  the  UK.   He  noted  that  the
    Appellant's partner will have the support of her mother with  whom  the
    Appellant has been staying for the last two years.  The judge noted  at
    paragraph 47 that the effect of his finding is that it is proportionate
    to expect the Appellant to return to Albania and seek  entry  clearance
    to return to his partner because the temporary  interruption  in  their
    relationship would not leave his partner unsupported due to the support
    she and her mother provide each other which provides a practical buffer
    or assistance to deal with a  situation  where  she  did  not  wish  to
    accompany him to Albania.

Error of Law

 6. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to Ground 2 because First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robertson considered that it is not clear from  the
    decision whether  the  judge  considered  the  possibility  of  further
    deterioration of the Appellant's partner's mental health  condition  in
    the absence of the Appellant and it is  not  clear  whether  the  judge
    accepted that there may be a deterioration nor  was  it  clear  whether
    there was any medical evidence  before  the  judge  to  establish  that
    deterioration was likely.

 7. In his submissions Mr Khan pointed to the findings made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant and his partner are in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship akin to  marriage,  that  they  are  living
    together and that there are issues  of  particular  dependency  between
    them [37-39].  He submitted that there seems to be an  acceptance  that
    the Appellant's partner is very vulnerable and that the Appellant  does
    provide her with support.  He argued that the judge erred in failing to
    consider the impact of  even  a  short  absence  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant would have on his partner.  He submitted that the judge erred
    in failing to explore this issue.  He submitted that the fact that  the
    judge accepted that the Appellant provides his partner with support and
    that there is particular dependency in this case meant that  the  judge
    could draw a conclusion that there would be an adverse  impact  on  his
    partner of a separation.

 8. In response Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  this  ground  amounts  to  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings. He contended that the  findings
    were open to the judge on the evidence. He submitted that  the  witness
    statements were silent on the issue of temporary separation  and  there
    was limited evidence on this point.  He submitted that the letter  from
    the Appellant's partner's  GP  just  confirms  that  she  suffers  from
    depression but does not assist in supporting the submissions now  made.
    In any event he submitted that the judge did in  fact  deal  with  this
    issue when he talked about the support the  Appellant's  partner  would
    receive from her mother at paragraphs 36 and 37.  He  argued  that  the
    judge considered whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    family life continuing in Albania at paragraph 41.  He  submitted  that
    these conclusions were right based on the  evidence  before  the  judge
    which did not reveal anything exceptional in this case.

 9. In response Mr Khan submitted that a proportionality assessment is very
    fact specific and the judge's conclusions at paragraphs 36 and 37  were
    not as clear as they should be.  The judge assumed that  the  partner's
    mental health needs could be met by her mother but  it  was  not  known
    whether the mother could  provide  the  same  level  of  care  as  that
    provided by the Appellant who provides his partner with  emotional  and
    moral support.

10. In my view there is no error of law in this decision.  The judge  makes
    an assessment under Article 8 through  the  prism  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as he was required to do.  Although the judge refers to EX.1  and
    EX.2 at paragraphs 45 and 46 in my view it is clear  in  the  'Findings
    and Reasons' section of the decision that it is through this prism that
    the facts have been considered.

11. The judge took into account the  Appellant's  partner's  mental  health
    problems and acknowledged that there is a particular dependency between
    the Appellant and his partner  because  of  her  difficult  background.
    However the judge clearly found at paragraph 41 that these  issues  are
    not so grave as to amount to  very  significant  obstacles  within  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is a clear finding  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider that the circumstances of this case amount  to  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant's family life with  his  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.

12. The judge noted at paragraphs 33 and 47 that  the  Appellant's  partner
    had indicated that she did not wish to accompany him  to  Albania.   In
    these circumstances the judge gave consideration to the prospect of the
    Appellant leaving the UK for a temporary period in order to  apply  for
    entry clearance to return to the UK.  In this context the judge, having
    acknowledged the particular dependency, considered the circumstances as
    they are where the Appellant lives  with  his  partner's  mother.   The
    judge noted that Ms E will have the support of her  mother,  that  they
    could combine their households and that it was open  to  them  to  seek
    local authority support [36, 37, 44].  Mr Khan was unable to  point  to
    anything specific in the evidence to demonstrate that there would be  a
    deterioration in the Appellant's partner's mental health as a result of
    the Appellant's temporary absence from the UK. He pointed to nothing in
    the evidence that the judge failed to take into account.

13. The conclusion that Ms E could seek her  mother's  support  during  any
    temporary absence was entirely open to him on the basis of the evidence
    before him.

14. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge reached a decision
    open to him on the evidence.  There is no material error of law in  the
    judge's  consideration  of  this  appeal  under  Article  8   and   the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




To the Respondent
Fee Award

As the appeal has been dismissed there is no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
