
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10163/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2020                              |On 27 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE JOHNSON
                 (sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A.M. KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KAMBER SINAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr R Roberts, Cromwell Wilkes Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a decision to which both judges have contributed.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malone by which he allowed Mr Sinaj's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's refusal to revoke a deportation order.

The facts

 3.  Mr  Sinaj  is  a  citizen  of  Albania,  born   on   27   June   1983.





 4. The lengthy immigration history is summarised in an earlier decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (and adopted in  a  previous  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal) as follows:

         "2. ... he first entered  the  UK  unlawfully  in  about  2000  and
         claimed asylum. His asylum claim was refused  but  on  30  November
         2001 he was granted exceptional leave to remain  until  18  January
         2003.

         3. In July 2003 the Appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  his
         asylum claim was refused on asylum and human rights grounds and his
         appeal rights were exhausted on 14 August 2003.

         4. On 8 August 2007 the Appellant was convicted at Maidstone  Crown
         Court of possession of an identity document  belonging  to  someone
         else. He was sentenced to 11 months' imprisonment  and  deportation
         was recommended.

         5. On 8 November 2007 the Appellant was removed from the  UK  under
         the Facilitated Returns Scheme.

         6. On 11 August 2008 the Appellant attempted to enter the UK  using
         a false name and on 26 August 2008 he was convicted at Luton  Crown
         Court of possession of a false identity document. He was  sentenced
         to 15 months' imprisonment and deportation was recommended.

         7. On 4 December 2008 the Respondent signed a deportation order and
         on 18 December 2008 the Appellant was removed to Albania.

         8. On 4 February  2011  or  at  some  earlier  date  the  Appellant
         returned to the UK unlawfully and  in  breach  of  the  deportation
         order. He admitted that he had entered the UK in a lorry in  August
         2010. On 17 February 2011  the  Appellant  was  again  returned  to
         Albania.

         9. At some time before  2015  the  Appellant  returned  to  the  UK
         unlawfully. On 31 December 2014 he met Ms Meena [K] at a New Year's
         Eve party.

         10. In May 2015 Ms [K] purchased a flat and began living there with
         the Appellant. On 6 October 2016 he then  returned  voluntarily  to
         Albania and in April 2017 he married Ms [K] in a  civil  [ceremony]
         in Albania.

         11. The Appellant then applied for the deportation to be revoked on
         human rights grounds. He also applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
         spouse. The revocation application was made in the UK  whereas  the
         entry clearance application was made to the local  Entry  Clearance
         Officer.

         12. On 14 March 2017 the  application  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order was refused by the Respondent."

 5. Thereafter, Mr  Sinaj  appealed  against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order. He relied on his relationship with Ms  [K].  She  is
    based  in  the  UK.  She  has  a  high  powered  job.  She  has  caring
    responsibilities in the UK for her elderly parents. She wishes to start
    a family with Mr Sinaj. The couple hope to undergo IVF treatment in the
    UK for that purpose.

 6. The appeal succeeded  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  this  was
    reversed by the Upper Tribunal. Swift J, sitting  as  a  judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, said this:

         "24. The matters that are relevant and which weigh in  the  balance
         relating  to  Ms  [K]'s  personal   circumstances   comprised   the
         following. Firstly, her working life in the United Kingdom. Ms  [K]
         has a skilled and well-paid job in IT. It is not a job  that  would
         be transferable were she to leave the United  Kingdom  to  live  in
         Albania. Second, there is reference in the  decision  to  Ms  [K]'s
         financial commitments. Yet, as we understand  it,  those  primarily
         arise from a property purchased in May 2015 after her  relationship
         with Mr Sinaj had commenced but of course at a time that Mr Sinaj's
         presence in the UK was unlawful. They must  have  been  commitments
         taken on by reference to her own income and resources.  If  Ms  [K]
         decided to leave the UK to live in Albania with Mr Sinaj, it  would
         be a matter for her whether to retain  the  property  or  sell  it.
         Next, there is reliance on the assistance that she provides to  her
         elderly parents. The evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
         that Ms [K] lives nearby her parents and assists them with  certain
         day-to-day matters such as attending doctor's appointments. Lastly,
         two matters relating to fertility treatment: the likely success  of
         such treatment were it to be undertaken in the United Kingdom  when
         Mr Sinaj was out of the United Kingdom; and the likely availability
         of such treatment for Ms [K] in Albania.

         25. We accept that taken together,  those  matters  are  consistent
         with a conclusion that the effect on Ms [K] of Mr Sinaj's continued
         absence from the United Kingdom by reason of the deportation  order
         made in 2008, would be harsh. But those matters are no  more  harsh
         than what might be  described  as  the  normal  consequences  of  a
         deportation order when that order involves splitting a  family.  We
         are entirely satisfied that those matters, taken together,  do  not
         reach the level of undue harshness  in  the  sense  that  has  been
         described by this Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) and accepted by the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).

         26. For these reasons  we  consider  that  this  appeal  should  be
         allowed. Once matters that  are  irrelevant  to  the  section  117C
         enquiry are removed from paragraph 124 of the Tribunal's  decision,
         the matters that remain are on a correct application  of  the  law,
         incapable of supporting a conclusion that section  117C(5)  applies
         in the circumstances  of  this  case.  It  follows  that  the  only
         possible lawful conclusion  available  is  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision to maintain the deportation  order  was  the  only
         lawful option available.  It  follows  that  the  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State must be restored."

 7. The Upper Tribunal drew attention to the fact that, by the time of  its
    decision, more than 10  years  had  passed  since  the  making  of  the
    deportation order. Accordingly, any further application to  revoke  the
    order:

         "would fall to be considered by reference to Paragraph 391A of  the
         Immigration Rules. Different considerations would  therefore  apply
         to the determination of any  such  application.  There  can  be  no
         certainty as to the outcome of any further  application,  but  were
         such an application to be made it would have to  be  considered  on
         its own merits and without regard to the particular  considerations
         that did apply when the Secretary of State reached his decision  on
         the application that was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before  us
         today."

 8. In February  2019  Mr  Sinaj  made  further  representations  that  the
    deportation order should be revoked by  reason  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights. He relied on his family life  with
    Ms [K], their wish to commence  fertility  treatment  in  the  UK,  the
    impact of the order on Ms [K], and the fact that 10  years  had  passed
    since the making of the deportation order. On 4 June 2019 the Secretary
    of State refused to revoke the deportation order. Mr Sinaj appealed. He
    contended that the refusal to  revoke  the  order  was  an  unjustified
    interference with his right to respect for family life.

Legal framework

 9. The principle established in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  required
    that the First-tier Tribunal should take the findings of fact  made  by
    Swift J as its "starting point."

10. The test to be applied when considering whether to revoke a deportation
    order is set out in paragraphs 390-392 of the Immigration Rules HC  395
    (as amended), read with paragraphs 398-399A. These provisions state:

         "Revocation of deportation order


         390  An application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
             considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
             following:


             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;


             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


             (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                  maintenance of an effective immigration control;


             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
                  compassionate circumstances.






         390A Where paragraph  398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be
             outweighed by other factors.






         391  In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
             conviction of  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
             deportation order against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
             course:


             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of  the
             deportation order when, if an application  for  revocation  is
             received, consideration will be given on a case by case  basis
             as to whether the deportation order should be maintained


             ...


             Unless... the continuation would  be  contrary  to  the  Human
             Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol  Relating  to
             the  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are  other  exceptional
             circumstances that mean  the  continuation  is  outweighed  by
             compelling factors.






         391A In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally  be
             authorised unless the situation has been  materially  altered,
             either by a change of circumstances since the order was  made,
             or by fresh information coming to light which was  not  before
             the appellate authorities  or  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
             passage of time since the person  was  deported  may  also  in
             itself amount to such a change of circumstances as to  warrant
             revocation of the order.






         392. Revocation of a deportation order does not entitle the  person
             concerned to re-enter  the  United  Kingdom;  it  renders  him
             eligible to apply for admission under the  Immigration  Rules.
             Application for revocation of the order may  be  made  to  the
             Entry Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.






         Deportation and Article 8


         A398 These rules apply where:


             ...


             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                  against him to be revoked.






         398  Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention, and


             ...


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months;


             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.






         399 This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b)... applies if-


             ...


             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and


                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.






         399A This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b)... applies if-


            (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life; and


            (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."


11. Where a Tribunal is considering, in a case concerning  the  deportation
    of a foreign criminal,  whether  deportation  can  be  justified  under
    Article 8(2) of the Human Rights Convention,  the  Tribunal  must  have
    regard to the considerations listed in sections 117B and  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. By section 117B(4) little
    weight should be given to a relationship that is established  when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully. Section 117C is reflected by paragraphs
    399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. Judge Malone, in setting out what he considered to be  "the  applicable
    law", referenced (aside from paragraph 390 of the  Immigration  Rules),
    paragraphs 390A, 391, 398, 399 and 399A (but not 391A).  He  considered
    that the test to be applied was  that  prescribed  by  paragraph  390A,
    namely that "it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    public interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed
    by other factors."

13. Judge Malone recognised that the Devaseelan principle required that  he
    should take the findings of fact made by Swift J as the starting point.
    Judge Malone added:

         "However, the situation has changed since it was looked at by Swift
         J. For example, time  has  passed  and,  as  at  the  date  of  the
         Appellant's application to revoke his deportation order,  namely  8
         February 2019, more than ten years had passed since it was made."

14. He drew attention to the observation of Swift  J  which  is  quoted  at
    paragraph 7 above. He recognised  that  Swift  J  had  found  that  the
    consequences of the deportation order being continued  would  be  harsh
    for Ms [K], but not unduly harsh. Judge  Malone  considered  that  "the
    situation has become far more serious for Ms [K]" such that it was  now
    unduly harsh, that the particular circumstances were  exceptional,  and
    that they outweighed the public interest in maintaining the deportation
    order against Mr Sinaj - that "would take too heavy a toll on  Ms  [K].
    It would be disproportionate."

15. In reaching this conclusion the First-tier Tribunal had regard  to  the
    impact on the couple's plans to pursue IVF,  the  impact  on  Ms  [K]'s
    employment, and the impact on her ability to care for her parents  (who
    Ms [K] "would have to abandon"). As to IVF, Judge Malone found that the
    "chances  of  a  successful  treatment  would  be  greatly  reduced  in
    Albania." As to her employment he  found  that  she  was  currently  an
    "accomplished businesswoman" who was not only  the  Technical  Director
    for Boeing Aerospace but also in charge of diversity and inclusion, and
    "the  only  woman  of  colour  working  for  Boeing  UK  in   Aerospace
    technology." There was no chance of her securing a remotely similar job
    in Albania. The couple "would be living in very real poverty."

Grounds of appeal, permission to appeal, and argument

16. In seeking to challenge the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Secretary of State argues that:

      1) By reason of  paragraph  399D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  it  was
         necessary for "very exceptional circumstances" to apply,  but  here
         there were no very exceptional circumstances;


      2) In any event, there were no new circumstances to justify  departure
         from the decision of the Upper Tribunal that the impact on  Ms  [K]
         of maintaining the deportation order would be harsh, but not unduly
         harsh.


17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Brien.
    Judge O'Brien gave the following reasons:

         "It is difficult to see how a  couple's  inability  to  conceive  a
         child if the partner [were to] remain in the United Kingdom  whilst
         the Appellant's deportation  was  maintained  constituted  anything
         other than the ordinary circumstances of deportation,  such  as  to
         constitute undue harshness. It is further arguable that  the  Judge
         failed to take into account the Appellant's repeated breach of  the
         deportation order as a matter  which  might  reinforce  the  public
         interest against which the  couple's  interests  must  be  weighed.
         These are arguable errors of law."

18. Mr Whitwell points out that the basic  factual  matters  considered  by
    Judge Malone in December 2019 were the same as those addressed by Swift
    J in February 2019, namely the impact on Ms [K]  by  reference  to  her
    job, parents and family aspiration. He asks,  rhetorically,  "what  has
    changed in [less than] a year?" The only change was that Ms [K] was  10
    months older. That being the case, Judge Malone had not identified  any
    new circumstance to justify his conclusion that the maintenance of  the
    deportation order would be "unduly harsh." In reaching this  conclusion
    Judge Malone did not take into account the fact  that  the  couple  had
    formed their relationship at a point when Mr Sinaj's presence in the UK
    was unlawful. Mr Whitwell further argues  that  Judge  Malone  did  not
    consider whether the couple could pursue IVF treatment in  Europe,  and
    that he rejected the  possibility  of  pursuing  treatment  in  Albania
    without any  evidence.  In  any  event,  an  inability  to  pursue  IVF
    treatment in the UK was the  natural  and  ordinary  consequence  of  a
    deportation order and was not unduly harsh.

19. For his part, Mr Roberts, in helpful and impressive submissions, argued
    that there was a relevant change in circumstances because it was now 10
    years since the making of the order. That impacted on the applicability
    of  rule  391(a).  Swift  J  had  explicitly  contemplated  that  fresh
    consideration of a revocation application would then  be  required.  Mr
    Roberts accepted that this did not mean that there was a presumption in
    favour of revocation  (see  SU  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1069 per David  Richards  LJ  at  [64])  but
    nevertheless contended that once the 10 year point had been reached  an
    appeal was "easier to argue". He readily accepted that Mr Sinaj had not
    been out of the UK for all of that period, but had instead thwarted the
    order and defied it by  returning  to  the  UK  twice  and  spending  a
    significant portion of time unlawfully in the UK. However, the 10  year
    requirement in paragraph 391(a) ran from the date of the order, whether
    or not the person left the UK, and it was not interrupted or  suspended
    during periods of unlawful return to the UK. The 10 year  period  would
    now have expired even if Mr Sinaj would never have  left  the  UK.  The
    enhanced ("very exceptional circumstances") test in paragraph 399D  did
    not apply because Mr Sinaj had now left the UK. He contended that Judge
    Malone had correctly identified the relevant legal  framework,  applied
    that framework correctly to the facts, and that he had been entitled to
    reach the conclusion that the appeal should be allowed on the specifics
    of this case.

20. Mr Roberts placed particular reliance on Ms [K]'s employment, which  he
    argued was a truly exceptional factor. Both her  achievements  and  her
    career were exceptional. To lose  the  one  person  who  has  Ms  [K]'s
    characteristics (see paragraph 15 above) would have  consequences  that
    go far beyond one woman. It  would  be  regressive  for  diversity  and
    contrary to the public interest. This was an important factor in  Judge
    Malone's decision and amply  justified  his  ultimate  assessment.  The
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal had failed to engage  with  this
    important issue and had instead sought to "airbrush it  out"  from  the
    case.

Discussion

Did paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules apply?

21. Before turning to the grounds of appeal it is necessary to clarify  the
    legal framework that here applied.

22. Judge Malone proceeded on the basis that the test  to  be  applied  was
    that prescribed by paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules. It may well
    be that this was common ground at the hearing before him.  But  it  was
    incorrect.

23. Paragraphs 390-392 set out the test  to  be  applied  when  considering
    revocation  of  a  deportation  order.  Paragraph  390  is  of  general
    application (and paragraph 392  sets  out,  generally,  the  effect  of
    revocation of a deportation order). Paragraphs 390A-391A then deal with
    different situations. Paragraph 391 deals with the case of a person who
    has been deported. This is explicit in paragraph 391 (see  the  opening
    words "[i]n the case of a person who  has  been  deported").  Paragraph
    390A, by contrast, deals with the case of a person who is subject to  a
    deportation order but who has  not  yet  been  deported.  That  is  not
    explicitly stated in paragraph  390A,  but  it  is  implicit.  That  is
    because paragraph 390A is triggered where paragraph  398  applies,  and
    paragraph 398 applies where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation
    "would  be"  contrary  to  Article  8  ECHR.  The  use  of  the  future
    conditional form indicates that the paragraph  is  concerned  with  the
    situation before deportation has taken place. The Court of  Appeal  has
    confirmed that this is so - see ZP (India) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 [2016] 4 WLR 35 per  Underhill  LJ
    at [18]-[27].

24. In this case, Mr Sinaj has  been  deported.  Paragraph  390A  does  not
    therefore apply. Instead, it is necessary to  work  through  paragraphs
    391-391A. There is, however, no  principled  reason  why  the  approach
    should be significantly different. The Court of  Appeal  has  confirmed
    that  there  is  no  fundamental  difference  between   the   practical
    application of the rules in these two different categories  of  case  -
    see per Underhill LJ at [24]:

         "It does not,  however,  in  my  view  follow  that  paragraph  391
         requires a fundamental difference in approach in considering  post-
         deportation revocation applications from that which is followed  in
         considering pre-deportation applications under paragraphs 390A/398-
         399A. It is true that the  structure  of  paragraphs  398  (at  the
         relevant time) and 391 is different. In the case of the former  the
         Secretary of State has set out herself to  formulate  the  approach
         required by article 8, whereas in the case of the  latter  she  has
         stated her policy but acknowledged that it should not  apply  where
         that would lead to a breach of the ECHR (in practice,  article  8).
         It is also true that there are some minor differences  of  wording.
         But the  difference  in  drafting  structure  does  not  require  a
         different approach as a matter of substance, since we know from [MF
         (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 1192, [2014] 1 WLR 544] that the exercise required by paragraph
         398 is the same as that required by article 8. Likewise, while  the
         use in the sweep-up exception  of  the  phrase  "other  exceptional
         circumstances [involving] compelling factors" no doubt implies that
         it is only in such circumstances  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
         general policy  will  be  displaced  by  article  8,  that  too  is
         consistent with the approach in  MF.  As  for  the  differences  in
         wording, they may be vexing to the purist but they are plainly  not
         intended to reflect  any  difference  of  substance.  The  exercise
         required in a case falling under paragraph 391 is thus broadly  the
         same as that required in a case falling  under  paragraph  390A  or
         paragraph 398. Decision-takers will have to conduct  an  assessment
         of the proportionality of maintaining the order in  place  for  the
         prescribed period, balancing the public interest in  continuing  it
         against the interference with the applicant's  private  and  family
         life; but in striking that balance they should take as a  starting-
         point the Secretary of State's assessment of  the  public  interest
         reflected  in  the  prescribed  periods  and  should   only   order
         revocation after a lesser period if there are compelling reasons to
         do so."

Application of paragraphs 391 and 391A of the Immigration Rules

25. By contrast with paragraph 390A, paragraph 391 is concerned with  cases
    where (as here) deportation has taken  place.  Subject  to  the  stated
    exceptions, it provides that the continuation of the deportation  order
    will be the proper course where:

      a) (as here) the person has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
         of less than 4 years, and


      b) 10 years have not yet elapsed since the making of  the  deportation
         order.


26. Mr Sinaj has  not  yet  been  absent  from  the  UK,  pursuant  to  the
    deportation order, for 10 years. He was deported on  8  November  2007,
    but he returned (unlawfully) on 11 August 2008. He was  removed  on  18
    December 2008 (by which time he had  spent  13  months  in  the  United
    Kingdom). He was again unlawfully in the United Kingdom between  August
    2010 and February 2011 (a period of six months), and he returned  again
    at some time before 2015 and remained until October 2016 (a  period  of
    at least 22 months).  He  was  therefore  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    approximately 3� years of the 10 years since  he  was  first  deported.
    However, paragraph 391 is not concerned with the period  of  time  that
    has passed since deportation. Nor is it concerned with  the  period  of
    time for which the deported person has remained out of the  UK.  It  is
    concerned only with the period of time since the deportation order  was
    made. That period is not interrupted or stopped if the  person  returns
    to the United Kingdom. Here, the deportation order was made  more  than
    10  years  ago:  "10  years  have  elapsed  since  the  making  of  the
    deportation order". It follows that the stipulation  in  paragraph  391
    that continuation of the deportation order will be the "proper  course"
    does not apply, and that, instead, consideration  should  be  given  to
    whether the deportation order should be maintained "on a case  by  case
    basis".

27. In considering whether the deportation order should be maintained on  a
    case by case basis it is  necessary  to  have  regard  to  the  general
    factors in paragraph 390. It is necessary also to apply paragraph 391A.
    That applies to "other cases", that  is  cases  other  than  the  cases
    prescribed by paragraph 391(a) and (b). That is why  Swift  J  observed
    that any further application that Mr Sinaj might make would fall to  be
    considered  by  reference  to  paragraph  391A.  This   requires   that
    revocation of the order will not  normally  be  authorised  unless  the
    situation has materially altered (but the passage of  time  can  itself
    amount to a change of circumstances).



Error of law by reference to paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules?

28. The Secretary of State relied on paragraph 399D which states:

         "Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the  United
         Kingdom in  breach  of  a  deportation  order  enforcement  of  the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances."

29. The Secretary of State argues that this is what happened here. Mr Sinaj
    has been deported. He re-entered the United Kingdom in  breach  of  the
    deportation order. Accordingly, by paragraph 399D  enforcement  of  the
    deportation order is to be regarded as being in  the  public  interest,
    and  it  must  be  implemented  unless  there  are   very   exceptional
    circumstances.

30. We do  not  consider  that  paragraph  399D  directly  applies  in  the
    circumstances of the present case. It does not appear in the section of
    the Immigration Rules that deal with revocation of a deportation  order
    (paragraphs 390-392). It appears in the section of the Rules that deals
    with "Deportation and Article 8". It contemplates a case where a person
    is seeking to challenge their removal pursuant to a  deportation  order
    (the "enforcement" and "implement[ation]") of the order, rather than  a
    case where a person is seeking to  revoke  the  order.  This  no  doubt
    explains why Mr Sinaj was advised to leave the United  Kingdom  and  to
    seek to enter from abroad when, in breach of the deportation order,  he
    had entered the United Kingdom and had established a relationship  with
    Ms [K]. The position as it stands now, and as it stood at the  time  of
    the application to revoke, is that  Mr  Sinaj  is  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of a deportation order.

31. Paragraph 399D does not  therefore  apply  to  the  case.  It  was  not
    necessary for Mr Sinaj to establish the high test of "very  exceptional
    circumstances" in order to revoke the deportation order.  We  therefore
    dismiss the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal insofar as they  are
    based on paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules.

Error of law by reference to change in circumstances?

32. It remains to be considered whether there had been any relevant  change
    in circumstances as required by paragraph 391A.

33. Further time had passed. This is in itself capable of  amounting  to  a
    change in circumstances. Moreover, the further passage  of  time  meant
    that the  10  year  point  had  been  reached  so  as  to  trigger  the
    application of paragraph 391A rather than 391(a). However, the  further
    passage of time did not impact on the underlying evidence (save to  the
    extent that he and his wife  are  older,  and  that  the  prospects  of
    successful IVF diminish with age). It did not  change  (for  better  or
    worse) the nature and quality of the private and family life  on  which
    Mr Sinaj and Ms [K] relied. There was no new feature  to  that  private
    and family life. None of the factual points on which Mr Sinaj relied in
    relation to the impact of the deportation order (and  particularly  the
    impact on Ms [K]) arose out of events that had taken  place  since  the
    decision of Swift J. The impact on Ms [K] of a refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order was no different in principle at the  time  of  Judge
    Malone's decision compared to the time of  the  decision  of  Swift  J.
    There was no significant additional impact on her as a  result  of  the
    passage of that period of time. Swift J had found that the  impact  was
    "harsh"  but  not  "unduly  harsh".  Judge  Malone   found   that   the
    consequences were "extreme" and "unduly harsh" and that it "would  take
    too heavy a toll"  and  "would  be  disproportionate."  However,  Judge
    Malone did not identity any new feature in the case that would  justify
    a change in the assessment of the impact on Ms [K] from that undertaken
    by Swift J. There was no new significant new  feature.  The  underlying
    facts were the same, save for the age of Mr Sinaj and Ms  [K]  and  any
    impact that had on the prospects for IVF.

34. We therefore consider that Judge Malone erred in law  in  finding  that
    there had been a relevant change in circumstances such that it would be
    unduly harsh to maintain the deportation order. That is  sufficient  to
    require a reappraisal of Mr Sinaj's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision. There are, however, additional linked  problems  with
    the conclusion that  maintaining  the  deportation  order  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the private and family  life  rights
    of Mr Sinaj and Ms [K].

35. First, Mr Sinaj and Ms [K] had established their relationship life at a
    time when Mr Sinaj was in the UK unlawfully. It  followed  that  little
    weight should be given to their relationship when analysing whether any
    interference with the relationship could be  justified  -  see  section
    117B(4)(b) of the 2002  Act.  The  same  applies  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's  private  life  by  virtue  of  sections  s.117B(4)(a)  and
    s.117B(5). Judge Malone did not take  into  account  the  fact  of  the
    relationship having been established when the appellant was in  the  UK
    unlawfully at the point at which he found that the  impact  on  Ms  [K]
    would be unduly harsh (albeit he did later refer to  the  point  -  see
    paragraph 39 below).

36. Second, although paragraph  399D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not
    directly  apply,  that  rule  reflects  and  "encapsulates  the  public
    interest in ensuring that a deportation order is not  only  implemented
    but fully effective. It is not effective  if  the  deportee  unlawfully
    returns to the UK while the order remains in force" - see SU  at  [41].
    Here, Judge Malone did not fully take into account Mr Sinaj's  defiance
    of the deportation order by  returning  to  the  UK  and  the  need  to
    vindicate the public interest in the full efficacy of the  order.  This
    was relevant to the balance to be struck under Article 8.

37. Third, Mr Sinaj had spent a  substantial  proportion  of  the  10  year
    period identified in paragraph 391(a) unlawfully in the  UK.  That  did
    not, for the reasons we have  given,  stop  the  10  year  period  from
    running. It did, however, mean that the order had not run its  intended
    course and its effect had been attenuated. This was  a  further  factor
    that was relevant to the balance to be struck.

38. Fourth, in considering the impact  of  the  deportation  order  on  the
    couple's wish to pursue IVF, Judge Malone  effectively  ruled  out  the
    possibility of pursuing IVF in Albania. There was, however, no evidence
    as to the availability and efficacy of IVF in Albania. The  burden  was
    on Mr Sinaj to establish the nature of  the  impact.  Evidence  on  the
    issue was likely to be readily available. Mr Roberts candidly  accepted
    that a conscious decision had been made  not  to  adduce  evidence.  In
    those circumstances it does not seem to us that  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to draw inferences in Mr Sinaj's favour in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence. Moreover no consideration was given  to  the  possibility  of
    pursuing fertility treatment in  Europe  (the  couple  had  spent  time
    together in Paris and Mr Sinaj had pursued the appeal from Germany). In
    any event, an inability to pursue fertility treatment  is  the  natural
    and inevitable  consequence  of  a  deportation  order.  In  Agyarko  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 [2017[ 1  WLR
    823 the Supreme Court upheld the conclusion of the judge in  that  case
    that the inability to pursue fertility treatment  in  the  UK  did  not
    amount to an insurmountable obstacle (within the meaning of Appendix FM
    to the Immigration Rules) to the pursuit of family life outside the  UK
    - see per Lord Reed JSC at [73].

39. Fifth, after reaching his conclusion that the continuation of the order
    would be disproportionate, the Judge said:

         "In coming to my decision, I have had regard to the matters set out
         in s.117A-D of  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.  The  maintenance  of
         effective immigration rules is in the  public  interest.  I  attach
         great weight to that principle. The Appellant speaks good  English.
         He would be financially self-sufficient if he were to return  here.
         He would be maintained by Ms [K] or would find suitable employment.
         His relationship with her was formed when he was here unlawfully."

40. It appears from this passage that the Judge considered that Mr  Sinaj's
    proficiency  in  English,  and  his  financial  self-sufficiency,  were
    significant factors to be weighed in the  balance  against  the  public
    interest in the maintenance  of  immigration  control.  However,  these
    factors were not capable of outweighing  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control. Rather, they  were  neutral  -  see
    Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC  58
    [2018] 1 WLR 5536 per Lord Reed JSC at [57]

Whether to revoke the deportation order

41. Both parties agreed that in the event we found that Judge Malone made a
    material error of law it would be appropriate for us to decide  whether
    or not to allow Mr Sinaj's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to revoke the deportation order. Neither side sought to  adduce
    further evidence on this issue.

42. We consider Mr Sinaj's appeal by reference to the  test  in  paragraphs
    390 and 391 of the Immigration Rules read with 391A and sections 117A-D
    of the 2002 Act. It is necessary to take  account  of  the  grounds  on
    which the order was  made,  any  representations  made  in  support  of
    revocation, the interests of the community, including  the  maintenance
    of an effective immigration control and the interests of the applicant,
    including any compassionate circumstances. In doing so it is  necessary
    to  determine  whether  there  has  been   any   material   change   in
    circumstances since the deportation order was made.

43. In the light of our reasons for finding that Judge Malone erred in law,
    we are not satisfied that any of the matters relied on by the appellant
    reveal that continuation of the deportation order would be contrary  to
    his (or Ms [K]'s)  Article  8  rights.  There  has  been  a  change  in
    circumstances since the deportation order  was  made:  ten  years  have
    passed. Mr Sinaj has met Ms [K], formed a  relationship  with  her  and
    married her. They wish to start a family together. At the time  of  the
    decision under challenge they were 10 months older than at the time  of
    the decision of Swift J. As Judge Malone put it, Ms  [K]'s  "biological
    clock is ticking." The maintenance of the deportation order  will  have
    an effect not just on Mr Sinaj but also on Ms [K].  However,  Mr  Sinaj
    was unlawfully in the UK at the time he commenced his relationship with
    Ms [K]. By reason of section 117B(4) "little weight" should be attached
    to the relationship.

44. For the reasons given by Swift J, the impact of the  deportation  order
    on Ms [K] is harsh, but not unduly harsh.

45. It follows that to the extent that  the  deportation  order  interferes
    with the couple's right to respect for private and  family  life,  that
    interference is proportionate to the importance of the maintenance  and
    enforcement  of  effective  immigration  control   and   is   therefore
    justified. It follows that the decision of the Secretary of  State  not
    to revoke the deportation order was likewise justified. It follows that
    the  decision  of  the   Secretary   of   State   must   be   restored.





Outcome

46. We consider that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law.
    Its decision is set aside and we re-make the decision by dismissing the
    appellant's                                                     appeal.






Decision

The Secretary of State's  appeal  is  allowed.   We  substitute  a  decision
dismissing Mr Sinaj's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

PP.    MR  JUSTICE   JOHNSON   sitting   as   an   Upper   Tribunal   Judge.
    26/03/20





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


