
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th of February 2018              |On 21st February 2018                |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                MR ASGHAR ALI
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 3rd of January 1979. He
      appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Beg
      sitting at Nottingham on 23rd of February 2017 in which she  dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 21st
      of October 2015. That decision was to refuse to  grant  the  Appellant
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on or about 31  of  May  2005
      using someone else's passport which had a visit visa in it. In 2009 he
      formed a relationship with KY and the couple married on 2nd of October
      2012. The Appellant had earlier  applied  on  1st  of  June  2012  for
      limited leave to remain as the  unmarried  partner  of  KY  which  was
      granted on 12th of November 2012 valid until 12th of May 2015. On 11th
      of May 2015 the Appellant made a human rights application for  further
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his  family  and
      private life with his spouse KY and her son M. It was the  refusal  of
      that application which gave  rise  to  the  present  proceedings.  The
      Appellant and his wife now have a son, H, who  was  born  on  20th  of
      August 2015.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was that he was in a  genuine  relationship  with
      his wife who was a British citizen.  The  couple  now  had  a  British
      citizen child, H and had  established  a  family  life  together.  The
      Respondent refused the application because she was satisfied that  the
      Appellant had previously submitted  an  English  language  certificate
      which was fraudulently obtained. The Appellant's application dated 1st
      of June 2012 for leave to remain had enclosed a TOEIC certificate from
      the  Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS).  Using  voice  verification
      software ETS were able to detect when a single person was  undertaking
      multiple tests. Having checked the  Appellant's  test  they  confirmed
      there was sufficient evidence to conclude that the Appellant's English
      language certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of  a  proxy
      test taker.


   4. The Appellant's May 2015 application was refused  under  paragraph  S-
      LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, that  an  application
      will normally be refused if the  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the
      United Kingdom is not conducive to the public  good  because  of  that
      person's conduct, character, associations or other reasons  making  it
      undesirable to allow them to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  As  the
      Appellant's application had fallen for refusal under  the  suitability
      requirements which were mandatory the Appellant could not benefit from
      the criteria set out  at  EX.1.  The  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. He had not
      lived in United Kingdom for at least 20 years, and  could  resume  his
      life in Pakistan.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The Judge gave her reasons at [22] to [51] of the  determination.  She
      found the Appellant had not been able to rebut the evidence  that  his
      English language test certificate was obtained by fraud and that as  a
      result the Appellant's conduct made his presence in the United Kingdom
      not conducive to the public good. She did not find the Appellant to be
      a credible witness finding that he had  lied  to  his  own  solicitors
      about whether he had arrived in United  Kingdom  on  a  genuine  visit
      visa. It was not credible that  the  Appellant  had  been  given  fake
      documents without his, the Appellant's, knowledge. The  Appellant  was
      complicit in arranging fake documents to come to this country  through
      an agent using someone else's passport which had a visit visa  in  it.
      The Appellant made no attempt to declare to an immigration officer  on
      arrival that the passport he was using was fake.


   6. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was in  a  genuine  relationship
      with his wife who had a son by her previous husband, who was 16  years
      old at the date of hearing. There were a large number of stamps in the
      Appellant's passport demonstrating that the Appellant visited Pakistan
      on a number of occasions. The Appellant had close family members there
      and  there  were  no  significant   obstacles   to   the   Appellant's
      reintegration into Pakistan.


   7. As  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
      Immigration Rules she proceeded to consider  the  matter  outside  the
      Rules. She set out the provisions of section 117B of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The  Appellant  had  established  a
      private life in this country in the full knowledge that  he  was  here
      unlawfully. Little weight could be attached to that  private  life  in
      the balancing  exercise.  In  assessing  the  proportionality  of  any
      interference with the Appellant's private and family  life  the  Judge
      noted the particular importance of assessing the best interests of any
      relevant child. The best interests of a child were to live with his or
      her parents. Removing the child with the parents did not  involve  any
      separation of family life. The child's early  years  were  focused  on
      itself and its caring parents.


   8.  The Judge envisaged that the Appellant would leave the United Kingdom
      and that the two children M and H would remain here  since  she  found
      that M was old enough to keep in contact with  the  Appellant  and  to
      visit him in Pakistan and that the Appellant would be able to keep  in
      contact with H from Pakistan as H grew up. The Appellant's wife  could
      choose to remain living in the United Kingdom or relocate to  Pakistan
      with the Appellant. It was argued that the Appellant would  be  unable
      to apply for entry clearance from Pakistan because his wife  would  be
      unable to meet the �18,600 financial threshold as she only worked part-
      time. The Judge found that was a financial requirement which had to be
      met by all applicants and that any  interference  in  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 rights would be proportionate. She dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   9. The Appellant appealed against that decision in rather muddled grounds
      arguing that Judge had failed to apply the correct legal  approach  to
      the case. The Judge had failed to apply the Upper Tribunal decision of
      Kaur [2017] UKUT 14. The Respondent's guidance to her  decision-makers
      on what factors  to  take  into  account  when  excluding  someone  on
      conducive grounds did not include the  use  of  a  false  identity  to
      facilitate illegal entry. The grounds disputed the  finding  that  the
      Appellant had employed a proxy test taker.
  10. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Black on 12th of September 2017. She considered that the decision  and
      reasons of the Judge had dealt with all of the issues raised  properly
      and fairly. The grounds amounted to a disagreement with  the  decision
      and failed to disclose any arguable  errors  of  law.  The  Judge  had
      carried out a balancing exercise of all relevant factors under Article
      8 and there were no arguable grounds.


  11. In grounds of onward  appeal  now  settled  by  counsel  who  had  not
      appeared at first instance but who appeared before  me  the  Appellant
      renewed his application for permission to  appeal.  The  first  ground
      argued that the Judge had failed to apply part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
      specifically section 117B (6). The Appellant was the father of a child
      who was British (H) and the public interest did not therefore  require
      the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  unless  it  was
      reasonable to expect H to leave the United  Kingdom.  Nowhere  in  the
      determination had the Judge said that it was  her  view  that  it  was
      reasonable to expect H to leave the United Kingdom. Instead the  Judge
      had proceeded to dismiss the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellant
      was one of H's caring parents and it would not be reasonable to expect
      H to leave the United Kingdom. The Tribunal had erred  by  failing  to
      allow the Appellant's appeal because there was no public  interest  in
      the Appellant's removal.


  12. The 2nd ground was that the Judge had  failed  to  ascribe  sufficient
      weight to the Appellant's relationship with his British  citizen  wife
      incorrectly applying subsection 117B (4) (b) of  the  2002  act.  This
      provides that little weight should be given to a  relationship  formed
      with a qualifying partner established by a person at a time  when  the
      person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The Respondent had granted
      the Appellant leave to remain in 2012 as his partner's  spouse  and  H
      was conceived during the currency of the Appellant's leave to remain.


  13. The 3rd ground challenged the Judge's finding that the  Appellant  had
      employed  deception  in   presenting   his   English   language   test
      certificate. The Judge had criticised the Appellant for not contacting
      ETS or his college to challenge the allegation of a proxy  test  taker
      but it was not ETS who had alleged the Appellant had perpetrated fraud
      it was the Respondent in her refusal letter. It was for the Respondent
      to have obtained the voice recording from ETS and obtain a  sample  of
      the Appellant's voice in order to ensure that  it  was  not  his.  The
      Upper Tribunal had been informed in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 229  that
      ETS had communicated its unwillingness to provide any voice recordings
      in the absence of judicial compulsion. There would be no value in  the
      Appellant approaching ETS in those circumstances.


  14. The further application for permission to  appeal  came  before  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Kekic on 5th of December 2017. In  granting  permission
      to appeal she found it arguable that in assessing proportionality  the
      Judge did not give consideration to section 117B (6) with  respect  to
      the younger child and the Judge appeared  to  have  proceeded  on  the
      basis that the Appellant's stay was precarious at a time when  he  had
      leave on the basis of his relationship. Judge Kekic indicated she  was
      less impressed with the  English  language  test  certificate  ground.
      There was no reply to the grant of permission from the Respondent

The Hearing Before Me

  15. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      in the Judge's determinations such that it fell to be  set  aside  and
      the decision remade. If there was  not  then  the  decision  at  first
      instance would stand. Both parties handed to me some case law, counsel
      handed in  extracts  from  the  Respondent's  Immigration  Directorate
      Instruction and some further submissions. These  argued  a  point  not
      raised in the grounds. When the Appellant made his application in 2012
      (submitting the false English language test certificate)  he  had  not
      needed to submit any evidence  of  the  English  language  requirement
      given the particular settlement route he was applying  under  at  that
      time.


  16. In oral submissions counsel indicated he relied on the Upper  Tribunal
      decision of Kaur. In the proportionality balancing exercise, the  best
      interests of a child had  to  be  assessed  in  isolation  from  other
      factors such as parental misconduct. The  best  interests'  assessment
      should normally be carried out  at  the  beginning  of  the  balancing
      exercise. The Judge had not applied the  provisions  of  section  117B
      (6). The Judge had not stated anywhere in the determination  that  she
      found it reasonable that either or both of the children  should  leave
      the United Kingdom. The Respondent was satisfied the Appellant  had  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who was settled  in
      United Kingdom and had one child within that relationship who had been
      born in the United Kingdom (M).


  17. The Appellant was granted leave under section D-LTRP.1.2.  Under  this
      provision limited leave was granted for  a  period  not  exceeding  30
      months with an eligibility to apply for settlement after a  continuous
      period of at least 120  months  with  such  leave.  Under  section  R-
      LTRP.1.1 an applicant must not  fall  for  refusal  under  suitability
      grounds but must meet either all of the requirements  for  eligibility
      or some only of the eligibility requirements and section EX1  applies.
      As the Appellant was  exempt  from  meeting  all  of  the  eligibility
      requirements he only had to meet some. In particular he did  not  need
      to meet either the immigration status  requirement,  being  in  United
      Kingdom in breach of immigration laws, or the  financial  requirements
      nor the English language requirement. Section EX.1 would apply to  the
      Appellant because it would have been unreasonable [as at 2012] for the
      Appellant's stepson M to be expected to leave United Kingdom.


  18. The grounds also argued that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      the Appellant and his family  life  with  KY  continuing  outside  the
      United Kingdom. Judge Beg rejected that argument  at  [50].  She  held
      that there was no credible evidence before her  that  the  Appellant's
      wife would be unable to legally live in Pakistan with  the  Appellant.
      The overall submission in relation to the  2nd  ground  was  that  the
      Appellant did not need to submit an English language test  certificate
      in 2012 since that was not an eligibility requirement and as  such  it
      did  not  matter  even  if  the  Appellant  had  submitted   a   false
      certificate.


  19. The 3rd ground  related  to  the  English  language  test  certificate
      itself. The Judge had taken against the Appellant that he had not gone
      back to his college to query the certificate but the college had  been
      closed down in 2013 before the  Respondent's  refusal.  The  Appellant
      should not have been expected to go back  to  ETS  because  the  Upper
      Tribunal in SM had confirmed there would difficulties with ETS issuing
      the voice recording.


  20. For the Respondent it was argued there was no material error of law in
      the decision. The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on a  false
      passport and submitted a false test result. The Appellant's wife could
      relocate to Pakistan, the child was not a trump card, the  Appellant's
      leave was precarious. Whilst the best interests of a child were to  be
      given significant weight it was not  the  end  of  the  matter,  other
      factors had to be considered. Little or no weight could  be  given  to
      the Appellant's private life or  family  life  with  his  spouse.  The
      children would not be required to leave the United Kingdom  it  was  a
      matter of choice for the Appellant's wife  who  could  stay  and  look
      after the  children  here.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
      Appellant's evidence about the English language test certificate.


  21. In conclusion counsel argued that there had been no findings  that  it
      was reasonable to expect either of  the  two  children  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. Any determination which did not apply the contents  of
      section 117B displayed a material error of law. There were no findings
      as to the children's best interests.  One  could  not  read  into  the
      determination that  the  Judge  thought  either  child  should  go  to
      Pakistan.

Findings

  22. There were a number of issues in this appeal which the  Judge  had  to
      decide. The first was  whether  the  Respondent  could  establish  her
      allegation that the Appellant had sought to deceive the Respondent  in
      2012 when  he  submitted  an  English  language  test  certificate  in
      circumstances where ETS  subsequently  confirmed  it  was  false.  The
      arguments raised against the Judge's finding that  the  Appellant  had
      indeed employed  deception  are  largely  a  disagreement  with  those
      findings. It is significant that when granting  permission  to  appeal
      Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  was  less  impressed  by  the  Appellant's
      challenge to the determination on this ground.


  23. The Judge was entitled to draw an adverse conclusion from the  failure
      of the Appellant to respond to the allegation that he had  employed  a
      proxy test taker. Even if there were difficulties in obtaining a voice
      recording and even if that might have involved judicial proceedings as
      the Upper Tribunal noted might be necessary in SM [2016] UKUT 229 that
      was no reason for the Appellant to sit back and  do  nothing.  It  may
      well be that the Appellant's college had been struck off the  register
      by  the  time  the  Appellant  was  informed   of   the   Respondent's
      investigations into the English language  test  certificate  but  that
      does not detract from the main point. The Appellant  appears  to  have
      made no effort to contact the college. Had he done so  he  would  have
      been able to answer questions about what steps he had taken to contact
      the college. He would have been able to reply to the Judge that he was
      unable to contact the college because the college  was  no  longer  in
      existence. Instead he could not answer the questions.  What  is  clear
      from [32] is that the Appellant did nothing.


  24.  It is not sufficient for the Appellant to say it would have  made  no
      difference because there was no  college  to  contact.  The  important
      point is  whether  the  Appellant  wished  to  demonstrate  that,  for
      example, he was shocked  and  surprised  by  being  told  his  English
      language  test  certificate  was  false.  The   Appellant's   inaction
      confirmed in the Judge's mind  that  the  Appellant  was  not  shocked
      because he the Appellant knew he had not undertaken the test  himself.
      It followed from that that the Appellant could not meet the  rules  in
      the 2015 application because he failed  the  suitability  requirements
      because of his use of a proxy test taker.


  25. The Appellant's argument is that one can disregard the  submission  of
      the false English language certificate in 2012 because  the  Appellant
      did not need to submit an English language certificate. This  argument
      is founded on the basis that the Appellant was  applying  for  limited
      leave to remain and was therefore exempt from some of the  eligibility
      requirements, including the  English  language.  He  was  not  however
      exempt from the  suitability  requirements.  Had  he  written  to  the
      Respondent at the time of his application in 2012 to say that  he  was
      including with his application a false  English  language  certificate
      fraudulently obtained, it would  be  no  surprise  to  find  that  the
      Respondent would refuse the 2012 application on  suitability  grounds.
      The Appellant  was  careful  not  to  tell  the  Respondent  that  the
      certificate he was submitting in 2012 was false.


  26. It is not important whether the submission of  the  false  certificate
      was or was not material to the application,  the  important  point  is
      that it  was  false.  The  Appellant  could  not  therefore  meet  the
      Immigration Rules and the Judge was correct to go on to  consider  the
      matter outside the Immigration Rules under Article  8.  She  correctly
      directed herself in line with the Razgar step-by-step approach and she
      indicated her awareness of section 117B by setting it out in  full  at
      [44].


  27. The Appellant's argument, ground one of his grounds of appeal, is that
      once it was established that neither of the two children, the  stepson
      now aged 17 and the Appellant's natural son  now  aged  2  years  were
      going to be required to leave the United  Kingdom  the  appeal  should
      have been allowed outright at that point. The Judge did  not  indicate
      that she considered it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave
      the United Kingdom indicating that it was a matter of  choice  whether
      the Appellant's spouse decided to join him.


  28. However, there was one  further  important  factor  which  had  to  be
      weighed in the balance and that was the Appellant's  past  conduct  in
      seeking  to  deceive  the  Respondent  by  obtaining  and   thereafter
      submitting a false English language test certificate. It  is  not  the
      case that provided the proceedings are not deportation proceedings (as
      these were not) that it is simply enough to say that a  person  has  a
      parental relationship with the British citizen  child  who  cannot  be
      expected to leave the United Kingdom. That  is  not  the  end  of  the
      matter (as was submitted to me). The Tribunal still  has  to  consider
      the wider public interest in an assessment of reasonableness, see  the
      case of AM Pakistan [2017] EWCA Civ 180 approving  the  dictum  in  MA
      Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


  29. In the former case the parents  had  shown  a  blatant  disregard  for
      immigration law choosing to remain illegally on the  expiry  of  their
      visas. They had not sought to regularise their status for  many  years
      and even when they did they had  remained  illegally  in  the  country
      after their applications had been refused. In the present case  before
      me the Appellant's misconduct is arguably worse than that since he has
      actively sought to deceive the Respondent. The Court of Appeal decided
      that it was inherent in the reasonableness test in  section  117B  (6)
      that  the  court  should  have  regard  to   wider   public   interest
      considerations and in particular the need  for  effective  immigration
      control. The wider public interest considerations can only  come  into
      play via the concept of reasonableness contained in the subsection.


  30. Judge Beg had to consider a  number  of  matters  when  assessing  the
      reasonableness of the interference with the Appellant's  family  life.
      She considered the best interests of the children as she was bound  to
      do, looking at them at the outset of her Article 8 considerations. She
      bore in mind the Tribunal's duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act  and
      quoted with seeming approval at [49] that the best  interests  of  the
      child would be to live with his or her parents.


  31. The Judge was aware of the arguments being  made  on  the  Appellant's
      behalf relating to the family life  because  she  summarised  them  at
      [49].  The stepson M, would be 17 in April 2017 (and thus  18  in  two
      months' time). H's primary focus was on his primary carer, his  mother
      with whom he lived. This demonstrated that the Judge did consider  the
      issue of best interests in isolation. The Judge noted at [48] that the
      best interests of the child could  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
      effect  of  other  considerations,  that  is  wider  public   interest
      considerations. The Judge had considered the  allegation  against  the
      Appellant of submitting a false document at some length and  evidently
      considered that it was a serious matter.


  32. The Appellant had been granted leave in  2012  and  the  child  H  was
      conceived during the period of that grant of leave but that grant  had
      been obtained by deception since if the Appellant had been honest with
      the Respondent in 2012 it is difficult to see how the Appellant  would
      have been granted leave. The proportionality assessment was  a  matter
      for the Judge. Another Judge might have come to a  different  view  on
      the same factual matrix as was before Judge Beg but neither be  wrong.
      Had there been no misconduct by the Appellant then it might have  been
      sufficient for him to say that this was not a deportation  appeal  and
      it was unreasonable  to  expect  either  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom. However there had been misconduct  by  the  Appellant,  which
      fundamentally undermined the system  of  immigration  control  as  the
      Judge was aware. She had specifically found that the Appellant did not
      meet the suitability requirements of the Rules and that  his  presence
      in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good. She had to
      balance that finding against the arguments being made by the Appellant
      as to his relationship with his stepson and his own son. Although  one
      might argue that the Judge  could  have  spelt  the  matter  out  more
      clearly the Judge gave adequate reasons for her findings in this case.


  33. I do not consider that the Judge materially erred in  law  in  finding
      that any interference in the Appellant's  Article  8  rights  (and  by
      extension the other members of the family) would be proportionate. The
      interference with the Appellant's wife's family life also involved  an
      assessment of the weight to be attached to it. The Judge was concerned
      that the Appellant had established his family life with his spouse  at
      a time when his immigration status was precarious and/or unlawful. The
      Appellant had limited leave to remain which  needed  to  be  extended.
      Given that he had broken the suitability requirements by submitting  a
      false English language certificate he could  have  had  no  reasonable
      expectation that he would be granted further leave to remain.


  34. His family life established with his spouse was at best precarious  if
      not unlawful given that it had been granted because of the concealment
      by the Appellant of a relevant fact. Deception had been  employed  and
      thus little weight could be afforded to  that  family  life.  For  all
      their length the grounds of onward appeal in this case  amount  to  no
      more than a disagreement with the findings of  the  Judge  which  were
      open to her on the evidence before her. I do not find  that  there  is
      any material error of law in  this  determination  and  I  uphold  the
      dismissal of the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 19th of February 2018


Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 19th of February 2018


Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


