
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/10733/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 August 2020                   |On 10 August 2020                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 SUSMITA [G]

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Londonium Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Povey  on  24
         April 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M
         B Hussain, promulgated on 3 December 2019 following  a  hearing  at
         Taylor House on 16 October 2019. Permission was granted only on the
         judge's arguable failure to properly deal with the  best  interests
         of the appellant's child and the proportionality assessment. It was
         not granted on the judge's refusal to adjourn to await the  outcome
         of the appellant's husband's application for leave.

      2. The appellant is an Indian national born on  9  October  1987.  She
         entered the UK as the dependant of a Tier 2  migrant  on  10  March
         2015 with leave until June 2017. An out  of  time  application  was
         then made for further leave on the same basis which was varied to a
         family/private life application. On 13 March 2019, that application
         was  refused  and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded.  Following  a
         judicial review claim, the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  her
         decision. Although she refused the application again, there was  no
         certification and the appellant  exercised  her  right  of  appeal,
         which led to these proceedings.

      3. The claim is  essentially  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  an
         application pending for indefinite leave to remain, that they  have
         a  child  born  in  August  2018  who   needs   to   have   further
         immunisations, that the  appellant  suffers  from  asthma  and  her
         health would deteriorate if she returned to  India,  that  she  has
         friends and relatives here and would find it  difficult  to  obtain
         employment in India. The claim was put in an ppl to the  respondent
         but no supporting evidence was made available to the Tribunal.

      4. Two days before the appeal hearing, the appellant's representatives
         sought an adjournment. The request was based on the fact  that  the
         appellant's husband's application for leave was pending and that it
         was in the interests of  justice  to  await  the  outcome  of  that
         application because if it were granted the appellant would then  be
         able to make an application as the partner of a settled person. The
         application was refused on the following day but renewed before the
         judge at the hearing a day later. The judge refused to adjourn  the
         appeal and the appellant's representative then  withdrew  from  the
         proceedings. The appellant was present and was asked if she  wished
         to give oral evidence but she simply requested that the  matter  be
         adjourned.  The  appeal  then  proceeded  essentially  without  her
         participation.

      5. The judge noted that the appellant and her husband had made various
         types of applications over the last few years. He  noted  that  the
         appellant could not come within the requirements of the immigration
         rules because her husband did not have leave at the time  she  made
         her application, or indeed at the hearing. He  considered  that  in
         order to succeed in her appeal, she would have  to  show  that  her
         circumstances were exceptional. He considered that it was difficult
         to see what harshness the appellant would be subjected  to  if  she
         had to return  to  India.  He  considered  that  if  her  husband's
         application eventually succeeded, then it would be open to  him  to
         sponsor her return as a spouse. If it were refused  then  she,  her
         husband and child could return to India as a family unit. He  noted
         that the appellant had not advanced any evidence to show  that  her
         circumstances were exceptional and he, accordingly,  dismissed  the
         appeal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      6. The matter would normally have been listed for a hearing  at  Field
         House but due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take precautions
         against its spread, this did not occur and directions were sent  to
         the parties on 26  June  2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.  I
         now consider the matter.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed.  The  respondent
         has raised no objection to  the  matter  being  considered  on  the
         papers. The appellant fails entirely to address the directions; her
         submissions essentially amount to a request for an  adjournment  on
         the same grounds as made twice before.

     10. A full account of the facts are set out in the papers on  file  and
         the issue to be decided is straightforward. There  are  no  matters
         arising from the papers which would require clarification and so an
         oral hearing would not be needed  for  that  purpose.  I  have  had
         regard to the fact that the appellant was given the opportunity  to
         present her case  at  an  oral  hearing  which  she  did  not  take
         advantage of and that she also had a further opportunity to  do  so
         by way of written submissions to the Upper Tribunal but  chose  not
         to do so. I am satisfied that I am able to fairly and  justly  deal
         with this matter on the papers before me and I now  proceed  to  do
         so.

         Submissions

     11. The  appellant's  submissions  are  dated  10  July  2020  and  the
         respondent's are dated 14 July 2020.

     12. As indicated above, the appellant's submissions unhelpfully  amount
         to  no  more  than  a  repeated  adjournment  application.   It  is
         maintained that determination of the appeal should be  delayed  for
         three months until the appellant's husband's appeal  is  determined
         (it would thus appear that his application for indefinite leave  to
         remain has been refused by the respondent). It is  maintained  that
         the appellant has been living in the UK  for  five  years  and  her
         daughter was born here and is now 23 months old. It is argued  that
         if the appellant's husband wins his appeal then their  child  would
         be able to apply for British nationality and the appellant would be
         able to apply for leave as the spouse of a settled  person.  It  is
         maintained that this appeal cannot be fairly determined  until  the
         outcome of the other appeal is known.

     13.  The  respondent's  submissions  are  made  without  sight  of  the
         appellant's submissions. The appellant's appeal is opposed.  It  is
         pointed out that the hearing had proceeded without any evidence  of
         submissions from the appellant whose representative  withdrew  from
         the proceedings. It is submitted that  the  appellant  nevertheless
         had the opportunity to make her case to the Tribunal but chose  not
         to do so. There being no evidence before the Tribunal with  respect
         to the article 8 claim relied on, the judge could not have  reached
         a different conclusion. The brevity of the findings  were  entirely
         due  to  the  conduct  of  the  appellant.  The  appeal  should  be
         dismissed.

         Discussion and conclusions

     14. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the submissions made by both parties.

     15. It is indeed unfortunate and regrettable that the  only  assistance
         the appellant's representatives have provided her with are repeated
         adjournment  applications.  The  last  one,  made  in  the  written
         submissions of 10 July 2020, do not even take account of  the  fact
         that the application for an adjournment had  already  been  refused
         twice before and that permission to appeal was not granted on  that
         point. There is no attempt to identify any  error  of  law  in  the
         determination and no attempt to put forward any submissions on  the
         nature of the article 8 claim relied upon.

     16. No bundle of documents  was  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  for  the
         purposes of the appeal. There is  no  evidence  of  the  child,  no
         evidence of the appellant's claimed asthma, no evidence of why that
         would be an issue now given that she has lived in  India  with  the
         condition for the vast majority of her life,  no  evidence  of  her
         domestic circumstances and no information whatsoever of the friends
         and relatives she claimed to have in the UK.

     17. Mr Avery is entirely correct to point out that the brevity  of  the
         judge's findings were due to the appellant's conduct and,  I  would
         add, that of her representatives. There was no  effort  at  all  to
         comply with earlier directions for  the  submission  of  supporting
         documents for the appeal hearing and there has been  no  engagement
         at all by the appellant and her representatives  with  the  appeals
         process.

     18. Whilst on the face of it, the judge erred by  not  considering  the
         appellant's child's best interests and other article 8 matters,  he
         had in fact no evidence before him on which to make any  meaningful
         findings. The burden is on the appellant to make out her case.  She
         has failed woefully to do so.

     19. The judge considered the issue  of  the  impact  of  any  potential
         future grant of leave to the appellant's husband and properly found
         that were he to be successful in his attempts to obtain  leave,  he
         would be able to sponsor an entry  clearance  application  for  the
         appellant and the child to return. No reasons have been put forward
         for why this could  not  be  done.  It  is  also  unclear  why  the
         appellant and the child were not  included  as  dependants  in  his
         application when this had been the case previously.

     20. On the evidence before him, the judge could not  have  reached  any
         other conclusion. Specific reference to the child and to article  8
         would not have led to a different outcome given the absence of  any
         evidence before him as to a  private/family  life  enjoyed  by  the
         appellant; far less, of any exceptional  circumstances  pertaining.
         As it stands, the challenge  is  without  any  merit,  particularly
         where permission was not granted for any argument on the  issue  of
         an adjournment.




         Decision

     21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.




         Anonymity

     22. No applicant for an anonymity order has been made at any stage  and
         I see no reason to make one.




    Signed


    R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 3 August 2020


