
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10464/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 7th September 2021            |On the 11th October 2021             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                              KERN REON GORDON
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NO MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Layoo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Antigua born on  27th  June  2000.  He
       arrived in the UK on 1st June 2011 as a visitor and then applied  to
       vary that leave to remain  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  an
       application which  was  refused  on  21st  December  2012.  He  then
       overstayed. He made four applications in 2013/14 which were refused.
       He then applied on 19th March 2019 to remain in the UK on the  basis
       of his family and private life  in  the  UK.  This  application  was
       refused in the decision of the respondent dated 3rd June  2019.  His
       appeal against this decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge SJ Clarke in a determination promulgated on the  23rd  October
       2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew
       on 28th July 2020 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred  in  law  in  conducting  the  Article  8  ECHR
       balancing exercise, and  in  particularly  by  arguably  not  making
       findings  about  the  appellant's  relationships  in  the  UK,   and
       especially that with his grandmother.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law, and if so to determine whether any  error
       was material and whether the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       needed to be set aside and remade.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal are drafted by the  appellant  in  person.  In
       short summary he sets out that he arrived in the UK when he was very
       nearly eleven years old, and is now only a young adult, and that  he
       had to leave Antigua because he had been cared for by  his  maternal
       grandmother, having been abandoned by his mother, but she had become
       ill and moved back to Dominica and so he was brought to the UK where
       he has lived, and formed all of his current family and private  life
       ties. He has a very strong, close  relationship  with  his  paternal
       grandmother, Aditha Gordon, especially as her daughter died in 2017.
       He argues that it would be devastating for both of them if he had to
       leave. In an additional statement dated the 7th September  2021  the
       appellant also suggests that he has spent more than half of his life
       in the UK.

    5. Ms Layoo made extensive submissions (such as how traumatic return to
       Antigua would be for the appellant who had grown up in  the  UK  and
       how traumatic his removal would be for his paternal grandmother  who
       had sadly lost her daughter in  this  country)  on  the  appellant's
       behalf in which she attempted to re-argue the case as if it  were  a
       hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  despite  my  efforts  to
       encourage her to explain instead how  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law in  its  decision-making.  Ms  Layoo  argued  that  the
       appellant had a half-brother (rather than a  step-brother)  but  was
       unable to identify any  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal regarding this person. She  suggested  that  his  existence
       might have been  raised  in  oral  evidence  but  Ms  Layoo  had  no
       transcript of the hearing so there was no evidential basis for  this
       submission, particularly as she had not represented before the First-
       tier Tribunal.

    6. The respondent, in the Rule 24 notice, argues that the  grounds  are
       simply a disagreement with the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
       and that the relationship with the appellant's paternal  grandmother
       is addressed at  paragraph  12  of  the  decision  and  a  balancing
       exercise conducted at paragraph 13 of the decision.  I did not  need
       to call on Mr Melvin to make further submissions.

    7. At the end of the hearing I explained  to  the  appellant  that  the
       grounds and submissions did not identify any legal mistakes  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal and so that his appeal could not succeed, but  I
       did not given an oral judgement and instead set out  my  reasons  in
       writing below.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The First-tier Tribunal does not accept,  at  paragraph  10  of  the
       decision, that the appellant was abandoned by his mother because  of
       the  differing  accounts  given  by  the  witnesses  about  how  the
       appellant was cared for in Antigua prior to coming  to  the  UK.  At
       paragraph 12 the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  accept  that  the
       appellant  has  a  family  life  relationship  with   his   paternal
       grandmother because his evidence was that he intends  to  study  and
       work rather than look after her, even if he is currently giving  her
       some temporary assistance. I find that both of  these  findings  are
       unarguably properly made: the finding that it had not been shown the
       appellant had been abandoned by his mother was made not only on  the
       evidence of the grandmother, which it was argued by Ms Layoo  before
       me could be unreliable because she had not expected to give evidence
       and was perhaps confused due to grief, although there was no medical
       evidence to support such a proposition, but also on the basis of the
       inconsistent evidence of the appellant and his  father  on  who  had
       provided care for the appellant in Antigua.  The  finding  that  the
       relationship between the appellant and his paternal grandmother  was
       a private life rather than family life relationship was plainly open
       to the First-tier Tribunal on the facts as they do not live together
       and there was no  evidence  of  greater  than  normal  emotional  or
       financial dependency between the two adults.

    9. There is no error in  law  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  the
       appellant's period of residence which is accurately recorded in  the
       decision. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration  Rules  provides
       that anyone who is over 18 years and under  25  years  old  and  has
       spent half of their life in the UK is  entitled  to  succeed  in  an
       application to remain on private life grounds.  However  in  October
       2019, at the time of decision on his application, the appellant  had
       spent 8 years and four months in the UK and he was 19  years  and  3
       months old. He had not therefore spent half of his life in  the  UK,
       as this would have  been  a  period  of  9  years  and  7.5  months.
       Currently the appellant is 21 years and 3 months old, and has  spent
       ten years and 3 months in this country, so he still has not lived in
       the UK for half of his life. He will not have spent half of his life
       in the UK until June 2022, when he will have been present  here  for
       eleven years and will be 22 years old.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal first properly and  lawfully  considers  the
       appeal by reference to  the  private  and  family  life  Immigration
       Rules. It finds that the appellant, a healthy, well-educated 19 year
       old adult at the time of hearing, would not  have  very  significant
       obstacles to integration if  he  were  to  return  to  Antigua,  his
       country of nationality and where he would have some familiarity with
       the country as he had lived there for the  first  11  years  of  his
       life. It was found that he would be able to make friends,  work  and
       study there with  the  support  of  his  father.  As  a  result  the
       appellant did not qualify to remain in accordance with  the  private
       life Immigration Rules. There was found to be no  applicable  family
       life Immigration Rules for the appellant.

   11. The First-tier  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
       appellant could succeed in his appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  when
       consider more broadly  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is
       accepted that removal from the UK would interfere  with  his  family
       life ties with his father and with his private life  ties  with  his
       grandmother, friends and studies formed in  the  UK,  where  he  was
       brought as a child, a  matter  which  was  not  his  choice.  It  is
       concluded  however  that  this  would  not  be  a   disproportionate
       interference with his Article 8 ECHR rights as he would be  able  to
       recreate an equivalent private life in Antigua, and his father,  who
       visits Jamaica regularly, could visit him in Antigua and he would be
       able to keep in contact with family in the  UK.  I  find  that  this
       decision-making gives consideration to all of  the  evidence  before
       the First-tier Tribunal and is unarguably rational, and thus  was  a
       decision lawfully open to the First-tier Tribunal.

   12. Ms Layoo and the appellant informed  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant has no step-brother and so the reference to this person in
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is a factual  error:  whilst
       is a regrettable mistake this is not a material error which affected
       the legality of the decision-making as it was  simply  said  in  the
       decision that the presence of this non-existent person in the UK did
       not make the appellant's removal in the UK unlawful.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
      on human rights grounds.




Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   7th  September
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

