
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10975/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2019                   |                                     |
|Written submissions made on 5        |                                     |
|December 2019 and 6 February 2020    |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                reda tahraoui
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe, Counsel, instructed by Elkettas &
                    Associates Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the appellant against the decision of a panel of
    the First-tier Tribunal  comprising  Judges  Wilding  and  Beach  ("the
    panel"), promulgated on 23 April 2019," by which it concluded that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal and, as a  consequence,  there
    was no jurisdiction to determine any appeal.

 2. This case was  heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  same  day  as  MY
    HU/19571/2018. The decision in that appeal has now been reported as  MY
    (refusal of human  rights  claim)  Pakistan  [2020]  UKUT  00089  (IAC)
    (published on 19 March 2020). MY and the present  appeal  both  concern
    the issue of whether a valid appeal could be made against a decision of
    the respondent to refuse an application. MY is of direct  relevance  to
    the appellant's case and we shall consider its conclusions later in our
    decision.

Relevant background

 3. On 26  March  2018  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Algeria,  made  an
    application for entry  clearance  as  a  visitor.  The  basis  of  this
    application was the appellant's wish to come to the United  Kingdom  to
    visit  his  sister,  a  British  citizen,  who  suffered  from   health
    conditions which,  it  was  said,  prevented  her  from  travelling  to
    Algeria. The appellant also expressed a desire to see his sister's  two
    minor children. The entry clearance application was  accompanied  by  a
    covering letter. Having set out  the  nature  of  the  application  and
    referred to supporting evidence, that letter went on to cite Appendix V
    to the Immigration Rules (which contains the requirements to be met  by
    the proposed visitor) and then  Article  8  ECHR.  In  respect  of  the
    latter, it was said that a refusal of entry clearance would breach  the
    protected rights of the appellant, his sister, and her two children.

 4. The application for entry clearance was refused on 13 April  2018.  The
    decision letter acknowledged the appellant's claim that his sister  was
    unwell. Having regard to the  evidence,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    concluded that it had not been shown that the appellant was employed as
    claimed and that his personal and/or financial  circumstances  had  not
    been satisfactorily explained. In light of this, it  was  not  accepted
    that the appellant was a genuine visitor, nor that  he  had  sufficient
    funds to cover the costs of the proposed visit to the  United  Kingdom.
    The application was refused with reference to paragraph  V4.2(a),  (c),
    and (e) of Appendix V to the Rules. No mention was made of  Article  8.
    The decision letter concluded by stating that:

         "In relation to this decision there is no right of appeal or  right
         to administrative review."

 5. Notwithstanding the apparent denial of a right of appeal, the appellant
    lodged a notice of appeal with the First-tier Tribunal. This prompted a
    review by an Entry Clearance Manager. That review,  dated  18  December
    2018, concluded that  the  original  refusal  of  the  entry  clearance
    application  was  to  be  maintained.  It  went  on  to  devote  a  not
    insubstantial amount of space to explaining why, in  the  view  of  the
    author, no "human rights claim" had been made by  the  appellant,  with
    the result that there had been no refusal of any such claim.  Reference
    was made to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1511 and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Baihinga r.22; human
    rights  appeal:  requirements)  [2018]   UKUT   00090   (IAC).   Having
    highlighted the difficulties faced by the applicant's seeking  to  rely
    on Article 8 in respect of relationships other  than  between  spouses,
    other partners or minor children, the review goes on to state:

         "I am satisfied that the ECO's decision to  deny  the  appellant  a
         right of appeal on human rights grounds is correct as a  matter  of
         law and it should be upheld. The appellant does not have a right of
         appeal against the ECO's decision dated 13 April 2018 to refuse him
         entry clearance as a family  visitor.  His  application  for  entry
         clearance to come to the UK and visit his disabled sister  and  her
         children does not constitute a 'human rights  claim'  and  as  such
         does not engage the provisions of Section 82(2)(b) of the 2002  Act
         [the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended].  He
         has not established a family life with his sister and her children.
         Further, the shortness of his visit (15 days) is another  indicator
         that Article 8(1) of the European Convention is not engaged at  all
         in this case. I do not see how this case can be distinguished  from
         Kopoi. The relationship between the appellant, his sister  and  her
         children is not  sufficient  to  constitute  family  life  for  the
         purposes of article 8 and he  does  not  have  a  right  of  appeal
         against the ECO's decision to refuse his visitor visa  application.
         It is rather unfortunate that the FtT Judge did not issue a Rule 22
         decision in this  case  to  strike  out  the  appeal  for  want  of
         jurisdiction."

 6. Finally, and at first blush perhaps somewhat incongruously, the  review
    considers paragraphs GEN.3.1 and 3.2 of Appendix FM to the Rules, which
    require decision-makers in certain scenarios to  consider  whether  any
    exceptional circumstances exist such that  leave  to  enter  or  remain
    should be granted in order to avoid "an justifiably harsh consequences"
    for an applicant or specified affected family members. It is said  that
    there was "no basis for such a claim" in the present case.

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  asserted
    that all requirements under Appendix V to the Rules had  in  fact  been
    satisfied. In addition,  Article  8  was  relied  on,  with  associated
    submissions based upon the best interests of the  appellant's  sister's
    children.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Given the wording of the respondent's decision, the panel raised  a  of
    its own volition  a  preliminary  issue  as  to  the  validity  of  the
    appellant's appeal. Adopting what in  the  circumstances  of  the  case
    appears to have  been  a  sensible  and  pragmatic  "belt  and  braces"
    approach, the panel heard evidence and submissions on the substance  of
    the purported  Article  8  claim,  together  with  submissions  on  the
    jurisdictional issue.

 9. At [8] the panel concluded as follows:

         "In his application for his visitor's visa, the appellant  included
         a  covering  letter  which  explicitly  raised  human  rights,  and
         specifically Article 8 of the European Convention  of  (sic)  Human
         Rights. However, in refusing the application  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer did not consider those  representations  at  all;  the  ECO
         simply considered the case under Appendix V the immigration  rules.
         It therefore is clearly the case that  the  appellant  had  made  a
         human rights claim, the  question  however  is  whether  the  ECO's
         decision amounted to a refusal of a human rights claim."

10. Having cited para 35 of Baihinga, the panel went on to conclude at [10]
    that:

         "In considering the decision of the entry clearance officer we  are
         not satisfied that it constituted a rejection  of  a  human  rights
         claim. Nowhere within the decision does the entry clearance officer
         consider the human rights representations  and  in  fact  the  only
         material consideration undertaken is  that  of  Appendix  V  and  a
         rejection that the appellant meets the requirements  of  the  visit
         visa rules. The entry clearance officer does not  engage  with  the
         question of Article 8 in the slightest, be it through the rules  or
         indeed outside of them. It is therefore clear that when taken as  a
         whole the entry clearance officer's decision is not a refusal of  a
         human rights claim."

11. The inevitable result of this conclusion by the panel  was  that  there
    was no valid appeal before it.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

12. Having referred to the nature of the entry  clearance  application  and
    the grounds of appeal lodged with the original notice  of  appeal,  the
    grounds of appeal in support of the permission application assert  that
    the appellant had in fact  made  a  human  rights  claim.  It  is  then
    erroneously stated that there had been no review by an Entry  Clearance
    Manager in this case. In light of the guidance set out in Baihinga,  it
    is contended that the respondent had engaged with Article 8,  and  that
    the panel were wrong to have concluded otherwise.

13. In granting permission on 11 July 2019, Resident Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Zucker confirmed that a  Duty  Judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had initially deemed  there  to  be  a  valid  appeal  by  the
    appellant on the basis that Article 8 was raised at  the  time  of  the
    entry clearance application. It was,  in  the  view  of  Judge  Zucker,
    clearly arguable that the appellant had made a human rights  claim  and
    that the respondent's apparent failure to have  engaged  with  it  when
    refusing the application  entitled  the  appellant  to  bring  a  valid
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

14. Like the panel, we deemed it appropriate to deal with this appeal in  a
    "belt and braces" manner. Thus, we  received  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's sister ("the sponsor") and heard submissions  both  on  the
    jurisdictional issue and the merits of the case.

15.  The  sponsor  adopted  her  witness  statement  and  provided  further
    information about her own circumstances and her relationship  with  the
    appellant. She explained that she had not seen her brother  since  2012
    and that she was unable to travel to Algeria due to her ill-health. She
    has no other relatives in the United Kingdom and that it was  important
    for her two teenage children to see their uncle. She told us  that  she
    communicates with the appellant on a daily basis. Other members of  her
    family residing in Algeria have visited the  United  Kingdom;  all  had
    complied with the conditions of their leave.

16. By way of submissions, Ms Anifowoshe relied first and foremost  on  her
    skeleton argument. She contended that the appellant had clearly made  a
    human rights claim when making the entry  clearance  application.  When
    refusing that application, the respondent had acknowledged the  feature
    of it which engaged Article 8, namely the appellant's relationship with
    his sister. That, submitted Ms Anifowoshe, was sufficient to constitute
    a refusal of the human rights claim.  On  the  alternative  basis  that
    there had been a total failure to consider the human rights  claim,  it
    was submitted that this too would constitute a refusal.  The  existence
    of judicial review as a  potential  remedy  was  acknowledged,  but  Ms
    Anifowoshe submitted that the costs  and  nature  of  relief  available
    rendered such an avenue unfair.

17. Reliance was placed the Entry Clearance Officer's  review.  Relying  on
    para 36 of Baihinga, Ms Anifowoshe submitted that  the  fact  that  the
    review had  considered  GEN.3.1  and  3.2  of  Appendix  FM  the  Rules
    indicated that the refusal of  the  entry  clearance  application  also
    constituted a refusal of the human rights claim. To  that  extent,  the
    review "tied in" with the decision.

18. As to the merits of the Article 8 claim, it was  submitted  that  there
    was family life as between the appellant and  the  sponsor.  There  was
    dependency in this case, particularly as the sponsor was unable  to  go
    and see the appellant in Algeria. The sponsor's two children were  also
    affected by the inability of the appellant to come to this country.  On
    the evidence, the appellant had  strong  ties  to  Algeria  and  was  a
    genuine visitor.

19. Mr Avery relied on the respondent's rule 24 response.  In  essence,  he
    submitted that even if a human rights claim had in fact  been  made  by
    the appellant, the decision did not constitute a refusal of that claim.
    The wording of the decision was clear enough.

20. At the conclusion of the hearing, we reserved our decision  on  whether
    or not the panel had erred in law.

Post-hearing submissions from the parties

21. In the case of MY, it was deemed appropriate to  issue  directions  the
    respondent, seeking more detailed submissions.  These  directions  were
    issued in respect of the appeal in MY only. The  respondent  filed  and
    served  further  submissions  on  5  December  2019,   addressing   the
    circumstances of both MY and the present appeal. These submissions were
    sent to the appellant's solicitors.

22. As regards the appellant's case, the respondent maintains her  position
    that the decision of 13 April 2018 did not constitute a  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim and that the panel was correct  so  to  have  found.
    However, it is accepted that the respondent had failed  to  follow  her
    own guidance when deciding whether or not a human rights claim had been
    made in the first place. Thus, the respondent accepts that  she  should
    now consider afresh the question of whether the appellant's application
    for entry clearance did in fact constitute a human rights  claim.  This
    does not, in her submission, have any material effect on the outcome of
    this appeal because there has clearly been no refusal of a human rights
    claim and thus no valid appeal.

23. By further directions issued on 24  January  2020,  the  appellant  was
    invited to make any further reply to the respondent's submissions if he
    so wished. In the event, brief written submissions,  dated  6  February
    2020, were filed and served. These submissions broadly reflect what was
    put  forward  at  the  hearing  on  22  October  2019:  the  respondent
    considered what is said to be the appellant's human  rights  claim  and
    then, by refusing the application for entry clearance, she went  on  to
    refuse that claim.

MY (refusal of human rights claim) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 00089 (IAC)

24. Having reviewed the appellate regime under Part 5 of the 2002  Act  and
    an array of relevant authorities, the  Upper  Tribunal  summarised  its
    conclusions at para 81:

         "81. In summary:

         (a)  a human rights claim is defined by section  113  of  the  2002
             Act;

         (b)  the respondent's assessment of whether a claim satisfies  that
             definition is not legally determinative;

         (c)  the respondent's Guidance is, however, broadly compatible with
             what the High Court has found to be the minimum elements of  a
             human rights claim;

         (d)  the fact a human rights claim has been made does not mean that
             any reaction  to  it  by  the  respondent,  which  is  not  an
             acceptance of the claim, acknowledged by the grant  of  leave,
             is to be treated as the  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim,
             generating a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal;

         (e)  the respondent is legally entitled to adopt the position  that
             she may require human rights claims to be made in a particular
             way, if they are to be  substantively  considered  by  her  so
             that, if refused, there will be a right of appeal;

         (f)  in view of (d) and (e) above, there is  no  justification  for
             construing section 82(1)(b) of the  2002  Act  otherwise  than
             according  to  its  ordinary  meaning,  which  is   that   the
             respondent decides to refuse a human rights claim if she:

             (i)  engages with the claim; and

             (ii) reaches a decision that  neither  the  claimant  (C)  nor
                  anyone else who may be affected has a human right which is
                  of such a kind as to entitle C to  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom (or to be given entry to it)  by  reason  of  that
                  right."

25. Paras 83-86 of MY go on to state:

         "83. For the reasons we have given, the mere  fact  that  leave  to
         remain is refused, in circumstances where a  person  has  submitted
         what satisfies the statutory definition of a human rights claim, is
         not sufficient to create a right of appeal.  As a  general  matter,
         the respondent is entitled to operate  a  system  whereby  she  can
         withhold substantive consideration of a human rights claim that has
         not been made in a particular manner.  There is nothing  inherently
         unlawful in such a system.  In particular, one can  understand  the
         respondent's need to maintain orderly decision making by  requiring
         separate applications in the case of certain human rights claims.

         84.  In any event, any challenge to this system (or to any specific
         refusal to engage with a human rights claim) has to be by  judicial
         review.  There is no justification for the present practice in  the
         First-tier Tribunal, which involves  an  impermissible  reading  of
         section 82(1)(b).  We respectfully endorse what First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Kelly said at paragraph 12 of his  decision  in  the  present
         case.  The practice should cease.

         85.  In most cases, it should not be difficult for a caseworker  or
         duty judge to see whether a human rights claim has been refused  by
         the respondent. The starting point will  be  whether  the  decision
         says it is the refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim  and  what,  if
         anything, the decision and reasons say about  a  right  of  appeal.
         The reasons for a refusal of a human rights claim will  necessarily
         involve a consideration of the human rights  of  the  applicant  or
         other relevant person.  Even if the decision is made  by  reference
         to a provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  of  its  nature
         involves human rights matters, there should be a  consideration  of
         the position outside the Rules, compatibly  with  Hesham  Ali  (see
         paragraph 75 above).

         86.  If the reasons for the decision reveal no  such  consideration
         by the respondent, the caseworker or duty judge will need  to  look
         to see what the explanation might be. If, as in the  present  case,
         the reasons state in terms that "any submissions you may have  made
         relating to your human rights  have  not  been  considered",  then,
         barring something  extremely  unusual,  that  statement  should  be
         accepted at face value.  No purpose will be served by asking to see
         the application and covering letter since, even if  these  disclose
         the making of a human rights claim, the respondent has not  decided
         to refuse it."

Error of law decision: discussion and conclusions

26. The first question is whether or not a human rights claim was  made  by
    the  appellant.  Although  this  had  been  controversial,  the   panel
    expressly  found  at  [8]  that  such  a  claim  had  been  made.   The
    respondent's submissions of 5 December 2019  do  not  acknowledge  that
    finding, focusing instead on her failure to  have  considered  relevant
    guidance  on  human  rights  claims  in  the  context  of  visit   visa
    applications.

27. We approach this appeal on the basis that a human rights claim  was  in
    fact made by the appellant.

28. As MY explains, the fact that a human rights claim has been  made  does
    not inexorably lead to a conclusion that there has been  a  refusal  of
    that claim such as to give rise to a  right  of  appeal,  whenever  the
    respondent reacts to the claim, otherwise than by responding to  it  by
    the grant of leave to remain or (as here) entry clearance.

29. The respondent's decision of 13 April 2018 could hardly be  clearer  as
    to its content and effect. There is no reference at all to Article 8, a
    human rights claim, or the refusal thereof.  There  is  no  substantive
    consideration  of  any  Article  8-related  matters  and  certainly  no
    conclusion that either the appellant or his sister  had  any  protected
    rights that were justifiably interfered with by the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance. Further, the last sentence of the refusal notice  states  in
    terms that there was "no right of appeal" against the  decision.  Given
    that there would have been a right of appeal if a  human  rights  claim
    had been refused, the statement that no such right existed was a  clear
    indicator that such a refusal had not taken place. None of  this  bodes
    well for the appellant's assertion  that  the  decision  was  indeed  a
    refusal of a human rights claim.

30. In our judgment, the passing reference in the decision to the  sister's
    ill-health  does  not  add  any  material  weight  to  the  appellant's
    assertion that the respondent had in fact engaged with the human rights
    claim such as to constitute a refusal of the same.  It  amounts  to  no
    more than an acknowledgement of the evidential picture.

31. The appellant  has  relied  on  the  content  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review. As we have seen, that review  purported  to  consider
    GEN.3.1 and 3.2 of Appendix FM to the Rules, provisions which deal with
    the existence of exceptional circumstances in an Article 8 context.  On
    the appellant's case, this aspect of  the  review  indicated  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance itself had also been a decision to refuse  a
    human rights claim We reject the submission  for  the  following  three
    reasons. First, the Upper Tribunal made it clear at para 35 of Baihinga
    that the question of whether a human rights claim has been refused must
    be judged by reference to the decision said to constitute that refusal.
    In the present case, this is the refusal of entry clearance. As we have
    alluded to in paragraph 28, above, the decision is clear on  its  face.
    Secondly, and with reference to the same passage in Baihinga, an  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review "cannot re-categorise a decision  which  was
    not, in its own terms, the refusal of a human rights claim." Thus,  the
    reference in the review to GEN.3.1 and  3.2  offers  the  appellant  no
    assistance. Thirdly, whilst para 36  of  Baihinga  indicates  that  the
    terms of a review may in certain circumstances cast light on  what  the
    original decision-maker had been doing when refusing an application for
    entry clearance, again this offers no  sustenance  to  the  appellant's
    case. There was no ambiguity in the decision to refuse the application;
    there were no aspects of that  decision  which  required  illumination.
    Further, the  review  itself  was  concerned  almost  entirely  with  a
    rejection of the appellant's assertion that there had been a refusal of
    a human rights claim giving rise to a right of appeal. The reference to
    GEN.3.1 and 3.2 of Appendix FM at the end of the document was at best a
    superfluous attempt to perhaps cover all bases,  as  it  were.  In  any
    event, it cannot possibly show that the decision  was,  notwithstanding
    all indications to the contrary, in fact a refusal of  a  human  rights
    claim.

32. In light of the foregoing, the only conclusion to be drawn is that  the
    respondent's decision of 13 April 2018  refusing  the  appellant  entry
    clearance as a visitor was not a refusal of a human rights claim.

33. It follows from this that the panel were correct in reaching  the  same
    conclusion and that there is no error  of  law  in  its  decision.  The
    appellant had no valid appeal.

34. In these circumstances it is of course unnecessary for us  to  consider
    the merits of the appellant's Article 8 case.

Notice of Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands. The appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

37. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and we  see
    no reason to do so.


Signed   [pic]         Date:  22 April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

