

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/10964/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On: 17th August 2017               |On: 21st August 2017                     |
|                                   |                                         |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, acting for Lincoln Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Pakistan born in 1986.  He  appeals
    with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  IF
    Taylor) to dismiss his human rights appeal.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal turns in part on the presence in the United Kingdom of  the
    Appellant's minor son. I am concerned that  identifying  the  Appellant
    could lead to the identity of the child being revealed  in  the  public
    domain.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background


 3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2010 with leave to enter as
    a student.  He duly renewed that  leave  on  more  than  one  occasion.
    Whilst here he met and married a Ms S,  a Pakistani who had settled  in
    the United Kingdom and had been granted indefinite leave to remain.  In
    February 2015 the couple had their first child,  a  little  boy  who  I
    shall refer to as G. By virtue of his mother's status at  the  date  of
    his birth, G is a British national.  On the 9th July 2015 the appellant
    made an application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 4. The application was refused on the 12th November 2015 for  one  central
    reason. The Respondent alleged that the Appellant had, in respect of an
    application  made  in  2013,   relied  on  an  English  language   test
    certificate to which he had not been entitled; specifically it was said
    that he had used a proxy to take his test and  that  he  was  therefore
    refused for involvement in what has become known as  the  'ETS  fraud'.
    This decision meant that the Appellant could not hope  to  qualify  for
    leave to remain under any of the routes in Appendix FM,  nor  276ADE(1)
    since he fell for automatic refusal on 'suitability grounds'. The 'five
    year route' was therefore closed to  him.   In  respect  of  Article  8
    'outside of the rules' (or as the Respondent continues to refer to  it:
    "decision on  exceptional  circumstances")  the  refusal  letter  again
    referred to the ETS fraud. Although it was noted that the Appellant had
    a British child, the Respondent considered it reasonable to expect  the
    child to remain in the UK without his father, since he could  be  cared
    for by his mother.

 5. The matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  in  essence
    accepted the arguments put in the refusal letter.

 6. Mr Moksud challenges the findings in respect of the 'ETS fraud' and  in
    respect of the  Appellant's  Article  8  family  life.   Before  me  Mr
    Harrison conceded that both limbs of the appeal were made out. In light
    of that agreement between the parties  I  need  not  deal  with  either
    ground, or their respective submissions in any great detail.


    Ground 1: ETS

 7. The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal appears in  the  determination
    at paragraph 8. Referring to the Respondent's evidence,  in  particular
    the witness statements of Rebecca Collins and Peter Millington  et  al,
    the Tribunal agreed that these were generic, and then said this:


         "... the documents are set out in very clear detail  the  procedure
         undertaken in respect of the voice recognition  software  which  is
         then tested by two suitably qualified individuals who  are  working
         independently and in the circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Respondent has established on the balance of probabilities that the
         tests  identified  in  respect  of   the   Appellant   were   taken
         fraudulently".


    The Tribunal then adds:


         "It is the Appellant's evidence that he took  these  exams  himself
         and that he did  not  engage  a  proxy  exam  taker  which  in  the
         circumstances I do not accept".

 8. The complaint that is made about that paragraph is that the  First-tier
    Tribunal appears to have strayed from the structured  approach  to  the
    question of fraud set out inter alia by the President in SM &  Qadir  v
    SSHD [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC). In that decision the  President  held  that
    the 'generic' evidence submitted by the Respondent can be  regarded  as
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of  proof  that  lies  on
    her, but that the Tribunal must then look with care at the  explanation
    offered by the individual who stands accused. In its final analysis the
    Tribunal must weigh the two in the balance before reaching a conclusion
    on the evidence. If the 'innocent explanation' offered by the appellant
    is rejected, then the Respondent will have succeeded in discharging the
    legal burden of  proof  and  will  have  demonstrated  fraud  has  been
    committed. On the contrary if the Tribunal accepts the evidence of  the
    appellant before it to be credible, that  burden  will  not  have  been
    discharged.


 9. The parties, and this Tribunal, are in agreement that paragraph 8  does
    not demonstrate that this methodical approach was adopted  here.   What
    appears to have happened is that the Tribunal found the legal burden to
    be discharged on the basis of the generic evidence,  without  balancing
    against that evidence the various points made  by  the  Appellant  (the
    fact that he had passed other, earlier, tests in  which  no  fraud  had
    been detected, his assertion  that  he  attended  the  test  centre  in
    person, his  denial  of  any  involvement,  the  fact  that  he  speaks
    excellent English etc). The sentence at the end of the  paragraph  does
    not amount to a reasoned evaluation of the Appellant's case.  This part
    of the decision must therefore be set aside.


    Ground 2: British Child

10. The reasoning on proportionality in the determination is  detailed  and
    canvasses a variety of issues. What it does not do, submits Mr  Moksud,
    is engage with the significance of the fact that the Appellant's  child
    is British.


11. The principle question to be addressed in  respect  of  proportionality
    was that set out in s117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002:


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship
           with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.


12. By virtue of s117D of the same Act, a British child is  a  "qualifying"
    child  in  the  context  of  s117B(6)(a).  It  is  accepted  that   the
    Appellant's child is British.


13. Did the Tribunal ask itself the correct question?  At paragraph 11  the
    determination says this:

         "... clearly, both the  appellant's  son  and  his  wife,  who  has
         indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, cannot be  forced
         or compelled to leave the  United  Kingdom.  If  the  appellant  is
         removed it will be for the appellant and his wife to decide whether
         to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  follow  the  appellant  to
         Pakistan".

14.  As set out at s117B(6)(b) the question was not whether the  child  was
    being compelled to leave, but whether it was reasonable to  expect  him
    to do so in order to preserve his family life  with  his  father.  This
    required the Tribunal to weigh the public interest against  the  rights
    of the child, taking into account all relevant matters.  In  this  case
    that included the fact that the child was British, itself an  important
    consideration:  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4.


15. It is not evident from the face of  this  determination  that  adequate
    weight was given  to  that  matter.   The  Tribunal  addresses  various
    factors such as the cultural origins of his parents, the fact that G is
    only young and that in its assessment at [14] he has "no real ties"  to
    this country.  I would observe that it cannot be said that this  was  a
    child who had no real ties to the UK. He has a British passport and  as
    such is entitled to the benefits  of  that  nationality.  That  is  not
    however Mr Moksud's principle complaint. He submits that in  addressing
    the question of 'reasonableness' the Tribunal erred in failing to  have
    regard to  the  Respondent's  now  well-known  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction entitled 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family
    Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes' (August
    2015).  At 11.2.3 under the heading "Would it be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the UK?"  the  following  answers  are
    given to caseworkers:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship".

    (emphasis added)


16. It should be noted that the terms  "parent"  and  "primary  carer"  are
    distinguished, and separated by an  "or".  The  clear  import  of  that
    policy statement is that where a parent of a  British  child  is  being
    required to leave the EU, the case must always be assessed on the basis
    that it would be unreasonable to expect the British  Citizen  child  to
    leave the EU with that parent.     That  is  because  in  circumstances
    such as these - absent criminality where different considerations apply
    - it can be assumed that  the  removal  of  a  parent  will  mean  some
    significant interference with Article 8 family life.


17. I am satisfied that in its assessment of Article 8 the Respondent erred
    in failing to have regard  to  the  Respondent's  published  policy,  a
    matter plainly relevant to the question of whether it was  'reasonable'
    to expect this child to leave,  or  whether  it  was  proportionate  to
    remove his father.


    Conclusions

18. This was not a case in which the presence  of  a  British  child  would
    inexorably lead to success  for  the  Appellant.   The  shadow  of  the
    accusation of fraud still remains over him and as such that would be  a
    matter that the Tribunal would legitimately be entitled to weigh in the
    balance. The proper determination of the appeal requires  the  Tribunal
    to decide the following questions of fact:


           a) Has the Respondent discharged the legal burden of  proof  and
              demonstrated that the Appellant used fraud in the context  of
              an immigration application?


           b) If so is that  a  matter  of  sufficient  weight  to  justify
              interference with his family life with his British family, or
              put  another  way  would   it   make,   in   the   particular
              circumstances of the case, it  'reasonable'  to  expect  this
              child to leave with his father?

           c)  If  the  ETS  fraud  is  not  proven  are  there  any  other
              countervailing factors such that the Respondent's concession,
              expressed in her policy, would not apply?

19. Before me the parties agreed  that  the  extent  of  the  fact  finding
    required necessitated the remittal of this  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


      Decisions


20. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved material errors in  approach.  It  is  set
    aside.


21. The appeal is to be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


22. There is an order for anonymity.

    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            18th August 2017


