
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10833/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2020                    |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            ABHISHEK BACHULAL LAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     A. Hussain, Paul John & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    A. Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Abdar ("the judge") promulgated on 9 January 2020
       dismissing his human rights claim. Neither the appellant nor a
       representative on his behalf attended the hearing.

    2. The single ground of appeal is that the notice of the hearing was not
       received. The appellant's application is supported by a witness
       statement from his solicitor confirming this.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on 20 April 2020. On 9 June 2020
       directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal expressing the
       preliminary view that the error of law issue in this appeal could be
       determined without a hearing.

    4. On 15 June 2020 the respondent submitted a rule 24 response stating
       that if it is established that the appellant and his representatives
       did not receive a notice of hearing there has been procedural
       unfairness and the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
       Tribunal.

    5. It appears, from the file, that the notice of hearing was sent to the
       correct address. However, the fact that the notice was correctly sent
       does not mean that it was in fact received. The appellant's solicitor
       has provided a witness statement stating that the notice was not
       received. I have no reason to believe the appellant's solicitor is
       being untruthful (which would constitute very serious professional
       misconduct) and therefore I accept the evidence of the appellant's
       solicitor that the notice was not received. I agree with the
       respondent that in these circumstances, although no fault lies with
       the judge, it would be procedurally unfair for the decision to stand
       given that the appellant has not been able to participate, so far as
       practicable, fully in the proceedings: see rule 2(c) of the Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    6. As the appeal will need to be considered afresh with no findings
       preserved, having regard to para. 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements
       of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and
       Upper Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal should be remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal.

       Notice of Decision

        a. The appeal is allowed.

        b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the
           appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
           by a different judge.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|D. Sheridan                          |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated:  17 August 2020               |






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

