
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/10030/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 February 2018                       | On 03 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                        REEM ADAM ABDALLA ABDALMAGID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, instructed by Katani & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision  of  Judge
    McGrade in the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing her appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent  on  12  October  2015  refusing  her  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a  person  granted  refugee  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The decision is  a  short  one  and  we  set  out  the
    relevant parts in full:-

           "6. The Appellant and her  sponsor  are  first  cousins.   Their
              mothers are sisters.  The sponsor lived in Sayah  Village  in
              Darfur until 2004.  Prior to his departure from Sudan between
              July and September 2004, he had contact with  the  Appellant.
              When the sponsor left Sudan, the  Appellant  was  only  seven
              years old.  Following his departure from Sudan,  he  spent  a
              number of years in Libya.  He  left  Libya  around  2009  and
              travelled to Turkey.  He spent around five  years  in  Turkey
              and thereafter travelled to the  United  Kingdom.   Following
              his arrival in the United Kingdom on 12th August 2014, he was
              granted asylum.

           7.  While the sponsor was in Turkey,  the  parties  underwent  a
              marriage by proxy in Sudan.  The sponsor's father represented
              the sponsor in those proceedings.  As at  the  date  of  that
              marriage, the Appellant was 13 years old.

           8.   The parties did not meet between 2004 and October 2016.  In
              October 2016, they  both  travelled  to  Ethiopia  and  spent
              approximately five days together.

           DECISION

           9.  The Appellant in this case has sought entry clearance as the
              spouse of a refugee.  She submitted  this  application  under
              paragraph 352A of the Immigration  Rules.   However,  it  was
              clear the Appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration
              Rules as, on the Appellant's version of events, the  marriage
              did not take place until after the Sponsor  left  Sudan.   It
              was clearly open to the Appellant to seek entry clearance  as
              a souse under Appendix FM.  However, she did not do so.

           10. The Appellant's solicitor has submitted  that  it  would  be
              disproportionate to refuse  the  appeal  in  accordance  with
              Article 8.

           11.  In  order  to  deal  within  the  application  outside  the
              Immigration Rules, I require to be satisfied there is a  good
              arguable case to do so.  The Appellant  chose  to  submit  an
              application under a category with which she could not comply.
               I have been provided with no information by her solicitor as
              to which of the requirements for entry clearance as a  spouse
              under Appendix FM the  Appellant  can  meet.   There  is  for
              example no information before me as  to  the  income  of  the
              sponsor  and  whether   this   meets   the   minimum   income
              requirements.  I also have no  information  to  indicate  the
              Appellant meets the English language requirements.

           12. I note at the date of the  decision,  the  sponsor  and  the
              Appellant had not met for a period of almost 11 years.   When
              they last met, the Appellant was only  7  years  old.    They
              claim to have been married by  proxy  in  Sudan.   When  they
              married by proxy, the Appellant was only  13  years  old.   I
              have no information before me to establish that marriages  by
              proxy in which one of the parties is 13 years old are  lawful
              under Sudanese law.

           13. Given the circumstances I have described  above,  I  am  not
              satisfied there is a good arguable case to enable me to  deal
              with this appeal outside the Immigration Rules, in accordance
              with Article 8.  Even if I was satisfied  there  was  a  good
              arguable  case,  it  is  clear  the  Appellant   has   either
              deliberately  or  inadvertently  attempted  to   bypass   the
              appropriate requirements  under  the  Immigration  Rules  for
              leave to enter as a spouse by submitting an application under
              a category with which she could not comply.   It  is  clearly
              open to her to submit an application under Appendix  FM.   In
              these circumstances, I would have held that any  interference
              was proportionate."

 2. Permission to appeal has been granted on  the  ground  that  the  judge
    erred in law in the first sentence of paragraph 11: it is  asserted  on
    the appellant's behalf that she did not need to show a  "good  arguable
    case" and that the judge should, in any event, have considered her case
    outside the Immigration Rules.  We heard submissions from Mr Winter but
    did not need to call on Mr Matthews.

 3. Although the phrase used by the judge, might, if taken out of  context,
    be regarded as unfortunate, it does not disclose any error  of  law  in
    the present case, for there is, in truth, no shadow of substance in the
    claim that the appellant was entitled to entry clearance on  the  basis
    of the material before the  judge  and  despite  failing  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  relationship  between  her
    and her sponsor cannot in truth be regarded as that  of  marriage,  not
    only because there was and is no evidence that the marriage  was  valid
    in the place where it was  celebrated,  but  because  in  any  event  a
    marriage where one of the parties is aged 13 would not be recognised in
    any part of the United Kingdom because it would be contrary  to  public
    policy to do so.  So far as the relationship between the appellant  and
    the sponsor is concerned, it is barely vestigial.   They  did  not  see
    each other between 2004 (when the appellant was 7 years old) and  2016,
    when they spent five days together.  The only other  contact  of  which
    the judge had evidence consists of telephone calls and texts which,  as
    Mr Winter conceded in the course of his submissions, do  not  show  any
    particularly close relationship between them.  In  these  circumstances
    we doubt whether article 8 could even be regarded as  engaged  by  this
    relationship.

 4. If article 8 were to be regarded as  engaged,  the  question  would  be
    whether  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance   is   a   disproportionate
    interference with the article 8 rights of either of  the  appellant  or
    her sponsor.  The material before the judge, and before us,  is  wholly
    inadequate to show that it would be disproportionate.   First,  as  the
    Judge pointed out, there is no evidence of the sponsor's circumstances,
    and therefore no material which would enable a judgment to be  made  on
    what the appellant's circumstances would be if she came to  the  United
    Kingdom: only with such evidence would  it  be  possible  to  ascertain
    whether refusing her admission would be disproportionate.  Secondly, we
    wholly agree with the judge's conclusion that in any event there is  no
    basis for saying that it will be disproportionate to  require  her,  if
    she seeks, admission, to make the appropriate application, rather  than
    an inappropriate one.

 5.  For these reason we see no basis for interfering with Judge  McGrade's
    decision and we dismiss the appellant's appeal.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 24 April 2018.
