
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10091/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     TO
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Najwa, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as TO.

Introduction

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to family proceedings relating to his child ('D').   D,  a  British
         citizen, was  born  in  August  2014.  His  mother  ('L')  and  the
         appellant are no longer in a relationship.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He has appealed  against  a
         decision dated 10 April 2019, in which First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT')
         Judge Moran dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

      3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom ('UK') in October 2008  as
         a visitor and overstayed.  In 2013 he made an asylum  claim,  which
         was then withdrawn.  Following this, he made a human rights  claim,
         which was refused.  His appeal against that decision was refused by
         FTT Judge James following a hearing on 13 May 2013.   As  noted  by
         Judge Moran at [17], Judge James made extensive adverse credibility
         findings regarding the evidence from  the  appellant  and  L.   The
         appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 24 May 2013.

      4. The appellant then made various unsuccessful applications to remain
         in the UK.  This appeal relates to an application to remain made on
         15 January 2015, on the basis of his relationships with  D  and  L.
         It must be noted that D was not yet  born  at  the  time  of  Judge
         James' decision.  This application was refused in a decision  dated
         10 April 2018.  The decision-maker noted  that  at  the  time,  the
         appellant was seeking a child arrangements order  ('CAO')  but  did
         not have direct access to D.

      5. The appellant has relied upon an undated CAO.  The date is  missing
         from this document.  Ms Najwa told me it was dated 14  August  2018
         but Judge Moran referred to the CAO as having been made following a
         hearing on 18 February  2019.   The  summary  of  a  CAO  dated  18
         February 2019 at [4(e)] and  [13]  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  is
         consistent with the copy of the only undated order before me.    In
         an order  dated  8  July  2019  DJ  O'Neil  granted  the  appellant
         permission to disclose the CAO to the tribunal  determining  issues
         relating to his immigration status.  This refers the final order in
         case MA17P01296.  Permission has not been granted to  disclose  any
         other order to this Tribunal and I have therefore  only  considered
         the undated order behind the 8 July 2019 order in  the  appellant's
         bundle.  In any event this was the only order that Ms Najwa  relied
         upon.  This seems to relate to a hearing on 18 February 2019.    On
         this occasion, the court ordered, inter alia: L to make D available
         for supervised contact with the appellant at a contact centre every
         other  Saturday;  video  /  telephone  contact  on  the   alternate
         Saturdays, and; additional  contact  during  holidays  and  special
         occasions.

      6. By the time of the hearing before Judge Moran: the appellant and  L
         were divorced in 2017; prior to this L made allegations of domestic
         violence and findings of fact  were  made  against  him  in  family
         proceedings in November 2016; although the appellant saw D when  he
         was younger, contact broke  down  in  2016  when  it  became  "very
         occasional" - see [24] of Judge Moran's decision; the appellant re-
         commenced regular (supervised) contact in March  2019  pursuant  to
         the CAO; this contact was successful and it was  envisaged  at  the
         time that contact would be unsupervised, with  the  support  of  L,
         after  another  three  sessions;  the  appellant  lived  with   his
         girlfriend in Leeds, whereas L and D lived in Wigan.

      7. Judge Moran considered the appellant to be  an  unreliable  witness
         who exaggerated the contact he had with D and  his  claim  to  have
         financially supported him.  The appellant's domestic violence to  L
         was noted.  Judge Moran found that a powerful motivating factor for
         the appellant pursuing contact was in order to remain  in  the  UK.
         Judge Moran concluded that the appellant was not taking  an  active
         role in D's upbringing and as such the Immigration Rules could  not
         be met.   Judge Moran also concluded that as the appellant was  not
         providing D with "direct parental care" he did not have  a  genuine
         relationship for the purposes of s.  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').

Error of law

      8. In a decision dated 25 June 2019, Upper Tribunal ('UT') Judge Coker
         granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  observing  that  in
         requiring direct parental care in order to establish a genuine  and
         subsisting relationship, Judge Moran arguably  erred  in  law.   Ms
         Najwa made it clear that this was the only ground of appeal  relied
         upon.  Mr Diwncyz conceded that Judge Moran erred in  law  in  this
         respect - he clearly predicated his conclusion that  the  appellant
         did not have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with D,
         on the absence of him exercising direct parental care to  D  -  see
         pages 9 and 10 of the decision.

      9. Mr Diwnycz was correct to make  this  concession.   In  SSHD  v  AB
         (Jamaica) [2019] 1 WLR 4541, [2019] EWCA Civ 661,  Singh  LJ  (with
         whom King LJ and Underhill LJ  agreed)  made  it  clear  that  when
         determining whether there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship for the purposes of s. 117B(6) of the 2002 Act,  there
         is no requirement for that relationship to involve  at  least  some
         element of direct parental care to the child.  Rather,  no  further
         gloss should be put upon the wording of s. 117B(6). The application
         of the relevant wording will depend on an assessment of  the  facts
         of the particular case before it. The exercise is  a  highly  fact-
         sensitive one.

     10. In concluding that the absence of a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship between the appellant and D follows from  the  absence
         of evidence of direct parental care, the FTT erred in law  and  the
         decision needed to be remade.

Re-making the decision

     11. Both representatives agreed that the re-making of the  decision  on
         Article 8 requires limited fact-finding and can be done in the  UT.
          I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to be remade in the UT.

     12. Ms Najwa indicated that the appellant wished to proceed without any
         further adjournment.  I noted that the appellant had  not  provided
         an  updated  witness   statement   and   neither   had   L.    Both
         representatives however agreed that it was in  D's  best  interests
         for there to be no further delay and that the appellant and L could
         provide  oral  evidence  regarding  the  arrangements  since  Judge
         Moran's decision.

Evidence

     13. I therefore heard oral evidence from the appellant and L, who  were
         both cross-examined  by  Mr  Diwnycz.   Although  there  were  some
         inconsistencies that emerged regarding the  nature  and  extent  of
         contact between the appellant and D since the last FTT hearing, the
         evidence was broadly consistent and can be summarised as follows:

          i) L has been  and  remains  happy  for  the  appellant  to  have
             unsupervised contact with D, as she believes they have a  good
             relationship.

         ii) There has been very limited unsupervised contact since the FTT
             hearing.  The appellant was only able to provide two  examples
             of this: when he took D on an outing  to  Southport  in  April
             with a friend and his son in April 2019 and when  he  attended
             D's sports day in June / July 2019.  L gave a further  example
             of the appellant taking D to Church  about  three  weeks  ago.
             The appellant did not refer to this at all.

        iii) No firm or clear  arrangements  have  been  made  between  the
             appellant and L regarding regular contact between  father  and
             son.  Indeed Ms Najwa pressed the appellant on  this  at  some
             length and asked, "what has been agreed?" on three  occasions.
             The appellant said he would love to have D  on  a  Sunday  but
             "nothing" has been agreed.

         iv) The reason provided for the sporadic contact and the  lack  of
             any agreement for regular contact related to the  geographical
             distance between the appellant and D/L.

     14. The documentary evidence available since  the  FTT's  decision  was
         very limited indeed.  Apart  from  the  two  court  orders  I  have
         referred to, there were  also  photographs  of  D,  some  of  which
         include the appellant and a letter dated 15 July 2019 in support of
         contact, from L.

Submissions

     15. After hearing evidence from the appellant  and  L,  I  heard  brief
         submissions from the representatives.  Ms Najwa accepted  that  the
         appeal entirely turns upon one issue: does  the  appellant  have  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with D?   Mr  Diwnycz  accepted
         that if the answer to that is yes the appeal  must  be  allowed  on
         Article 8 grounds because the requirements of s. 117B(6)  would  be
         met.  Ms Najwa accepted that if the  answer  to  that  question  is
         negative, the appeal must be dismissed and there is no need  to  go
         on to do any additional Article 8 assessment.

     16. Ms Najwa was entirely correct to narrow the ambit of the appeal  in
         the manner  she  did.   It  is  plain  from  the  appellant's  poor
         immigration history that although he has been in the UK for over 10
         years, little weight can be  attached  to  his  private  life.   No
         particularly strong features of private  life  were  identified  or
         even alluded to.  As to the remainder of s.117B, there  is  a  very
         strong public interest in the removal of the  appellant  given  his
         immigration history and the un-appealed  adverse  factual  findings
         made by Judge James and Judge Moran.  I therefore need only address
         s. 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Legal framework

     17. S. 117B(6) of the 2002 Act states:

             "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

     18. AB (Jamaica) (supra) provides guidance on the proper application of
         both (a) and (b) of s. 117B(6).  I entirely accept that if  (a)  is
         met, it would not be reasonable to expect D to leave the UK for the
         purposes of (b).  D is a  qualifying  child  as  he  is  a  British
         citizen.  The sole  issue  in  dispute  is  therefore  whether  the
         appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
         D.

     19. As explained by  Singh  LJ  in  AB  (Jamaica),  this  turns  on  an
         assessment of all the relevant facts and circumstances.  This  must
         include an assessment of the child's best interests which must be a
         primary considerations. This will also include a  consideration  of
         (but is not limited to or determined by) what  role  the  appellant
         actually plays in caring for and making decisions in relation D and
         the nature and extent of  contact.   In  this  regard  I  note  the
         observations of King LJ at  [109]  of  AB  (Jamaica)  (my  emphasis
         underlined):

             "In order to demonstrate a genuine  and  substantial  parental
             relationship, it is common ground that it is not necessary for
             the absent parent to have parental responsibility and,  in  my
             judgement, it is hard to see how it can be said otherwise than
             that a parent  has  the  necessary  "genuine  and  substantial
             parental relationship" where that parent is seeing his or  her
             child in an unsupervised setting on a regular  basis,  whether
             or not he has parental responsibility and whether  or  not  by
             virtue of a court order. Equally, the  existence  of  a  court
             order permitting direct contact in favour of the absent parent
             is  not  conclusive  evidence  of   the   necessary   parental
             relationship. It may be that a court would conclude that there
             is no "genuine and substantial parental  relationship"  where,
             for example, a parent has the benefit of  a  court  order  but
             does not, or only unreliably and infrequently, takes up his or
             her contact."

     20. The application of the  relevant  wording  in  s.  117B(6)(a)  will
         depend on an assessment of the facts of the particular case  before
         it. The exercise is a highly fact-sensitive one.

Findings

     21. I entirely accept that it is  in  D's  best  interests  to  have  a
         relationship with his  father  and  for  that  relationship  to  be
         encouraged to develop.  I make that finding bearing  in  mind  that
         notwithstanding the appellant's past, the family courts  considered
         the development of contact to be in D's best interests - hence  the
         terms of the CAO.  I note (as contended at [13] of the  grounds  of
         appeal) that the appellant may have had a closer relationship to  D
         for the first two years of his life  to  2016.   Contact  was  then
         stopped by L and did not properly re-start  (other  than  the  very
         occasional) until t the family court ordered supervised contact and
         other less direct contact in March 2019. Contact has therefore only
         relatively recently re-started.  I accept that the  appellant  gets
         on with D and D gets  on  with  him  when  he  sees  him,  but  the
         relationship is clearly a very limited one, in which the  appellant
         merely plays and chats with D.

     22. Although the appellant has seen D outside of a contact centre on  a
         few occasions since the last FTT hearing, these have been  sporadic
         and irregular.   The  appellant  struggled  to  identify  a  single
         occasion when he had unsupervised contact with his son.  The  three
         occasions cited (Southport, sports day, Church) have  all  been  in
         the presence of many others at all times.  D has  apparently  never
         been to the appellant's home or spent any meaningful period of time
         alone with D since the resumption of contact earlier in the year.

     23. The appellant explained he has mostly seen D in the presence of  L.
         When I asked him about this he explained that in the past he simply
         did not know what to do.  He gave an example  of  being  given  the
         child and not being told how to change  his  nappy.   That  example
         must relate to the past.  The appellant  was  unable  to  give  any
         concrete example of the way in which he  took  on  the  role  of  a
         parent when he saw D on the limited occasions he did.  He was  only
         able to say he held his water bottle and wiped his nose  at  sports
         day.  It is clear that the appellant relies upon L to parent  D  in
         every material way, and has  demonstrated  no  real  commitment  to
         developing the contact he  has  with  D  beyond  the  fleeting  and
         irregular.  It is noteworthy  that  the  appellant  found  it  very
         difficult to recall when contact took place.  He even forgot  about
         taking D to Church three weeks ago.

     24. Both the appellant and L said that contact could increase  if  they
         lived nearer to each other but neither gave any reason  to  believe
         that this was a realistic prospect given financial  restraints  and
         other commitments.  L has other children in Wigan.   The  appellant
         offered no evidence as to how or when he would relocate from Leeds,
         closer to Wigan.

     25. In any event, I was struck by  the  lack  of  any  real  intent  or
         motivation on the part of the appellant to make arrangements to see
         his son.  I asked L if she would be  happy  for  the  appellant  to
         collect D from school and to see him  more  often.   She  indicated
         that she would have been happy for that to have  taken  place.   It
         has not, save for the very limited occasions referred to above. The
         appellant seemed able to make and finance  arrangements  to  attend
         the contact centre on alternate Saturdays but has not been able  or
         willing to make regular arrangements after this.  I note  that  the
         appellant and D have contact  over  the  telephone  /  video.   The
         appellant is not entirely uninterested in D but he is  clearly  not
         interested or motivated enough to even devise a plan as to how  and
         when the current level  of  sporadic  contact  will  develop.   The
         relationship  between  D  and  the  appellant  remains   uncertain.
         Indeed, contact between them seems to have reduced in the last  few
         months.  The appellant has demonstrated an absence of motivation to
         develop the relationship.  I do  not  accept  this  can  simply  be
         blamed on distance.  The appellant has not been pro-active.  He has
         not explained why friends have been unable to assist him with coach
         fares to Wigan.  The appellant is  not  a  motivated  father.   The
         current relationship between him and D is very limited  indeed  and
         on the evidence before me there is no realistic  prospect  that  it
         will develop beyond fleeting and  sporadic  contact  from  time  to
         time.

Conclusion

     26. Having considered all the  relevant  facts  holistically,  together
         with D's best interests, I have decided that notwithstanding the re-
         commencement of contact, it  has  become  increasingly  limited  in
         recent months and when this is considered together with the absence
         of any realistic plan regarding contact in the foreseeable  future,
         the appellant cannot be said  to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with D.

Decision

     27. The FTT's decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

     28. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR
         grounds.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 September 2019

