
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10090/2017
                                                               HU/11499/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 28 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                      soniasingh [r] - first appellant
                       bedanand [r] - second appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of First-tier  Tribunal
    Sweet (the  Immigration  Judge)  to  dismiss  the  appellants'  appeals
    against the refusal by the respondent to grant them leave to remain.

2.   The appellants are citizens of Mauritius who are husband and wife.   On
    30 August 2016 they applied for leave to remain on the basis that their
    family or private life would be unlawfully interfered with,  but  those
    applications were refused by the respondent on 4th and  20th  September
    2017 respectively. Both appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.



3.   The Immigration Judge heard the  appellants'  appeals  on  14  February
    2019.  He noted that the first appellant (Mrs [R])  had  applied  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules for indefinite leave to  remain
    on grounds of 10 years' continuous lawful residence in  the  UK  on  30
    August 2016.  The second appellant's application had been on the  basis
    that he was a dependent relative and therefore fell to be  given  leave
    to remain in the UK under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The Immigration Judge allowed  the  appeals  but  made  no  fee  award,
    noting that the appeals had succeeded solely on  human  rights  grounds
    based on evidence presented at the hearing  rather  than  the  evidence
    presented to the Secretary of State.

5.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan gave the respondent  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal because he considered it arguable  that
    the Immigration Judge  had  miscalculated  the  appellants'  period  of
    residence for the purposes of paragraphs 276B and "paragraph  309E"  of
    the Immigration Rules. At the hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  it
    became apparent that the provision Judge Chohan had intended  to  refer
    to was paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules rather paragraph 309E.

Background

6.   Their appellants applied for leave to remain was on 24 April  2014  but
    that resulted in a refusal of leave to remain on 23 June 2014. However,
    they subsequently appealed that  decision  on  20  October  2014.  That
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and the  appeal  rights
    therefore became exhausted.

7.   The respondent said that the  first  appellant's  application  on  30th
    August 2016, on which the second appellant's application  depended  (as
    her spouse) was out of time (because it was more  than  14  days  after
    service of the refusal notice). Therefore, the first appellant did  not
    have the statutory form of leave which would otherwise  be  created  by
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 and lacked the necessary  period
    of "10 years continuous lawful residence" as required by paragraph 276B
    (i) of the Immigration Rules.

The grounds of appeal

8.   The grounds of appeal raise a  distinct  point  of  law,  statutory  or
    regulatory construction.  The grounds of appeal  set  out  that,  as  a
    matter of construction, the appellants' rights to remain in the UK came
    to an end  in  2014.  Therefore,  their  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
    thereafter under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 came to an end.
    At that point, if this argument is correct, their presence  in  the  UK
    became unlawful.  Therefore,  they  could  not  qualify  for  ten-years
    continuous lawful residence and  the  first  appellant  was  unable  to
    qualify under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. It followed that
    the second appellant  would  not  qualify  on  the  basis  of  being  a
    dependent relative under those Rules.

The hearing

9.   Mr Lindsay stated that the relevant part of the Immigration  Rules  was
    paragraph 39E and specifically sub-paragraph  (2)(iii)  thereof,  which
    provides an exception for over stayers who apply within  fourteen  days
    of the applicant leave expiring. Paragraph  30  9E  therefore  contains
    provisions for calculating when the  application  was  made.  Where  an
    application was made under those Rules after the expiry of the time for
    making an in-time application the application must be made  "within  14
    days" of the "expiry of  any  leave  extended  by  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971; or (iii) the expiry of the time-limit for  making
    an in-time application  for  administrative  review  or  appeal  (where
    applicable)...". The effect of this provision, Mr Lindsay  argued,  was
    to bring to an end the leave which is  continued  pending  a  variation
    decision. The decision in this case I was informed  that  the  hearing,
    was a "variation" decision. I was also provided with a copy of  Section
    3C of the 1971 Act (as amended) which provides that the section applies
    in various situations, including under sub-paragraph (2) where leave is
    extended by virtue of any  period  when  "(a)  the  application  for  a
    variation is neither decided nor withdrawn" or  "(b)  an  appeal  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 could
    be brought against  the  decision  on  the  application  for  variation
    (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time with permission).  I
    have emphasised those last words as it seems that there are crucial  to
    Mr Lindsay's argument.

10.  Mr Lindsay's submits that, because leave had expired in June 2014,  any
    appeal that was made  out  of  time,  albeit  following  the  grant  of
    permission retrospectively, cannot have had the effect of extending the
    period beyond the fourteen days allowed by paragraph  39E.  Section  3C
    envisaged a situation where once an application for variation was  made
    fourteen days  were  available  following  that  decision  to  make  an
    application which would be treated as being  in-time.  Once  that  time
    expired, based on Mr Lindsay's submissions, the person concerned became
    an overstayer.

11.  Mr Aslam disagreed with that construction and he  took  the  view  that
    you could  read  the  legislation  as  allowing  an  appellant  who  is
    subsequently granted retrospective permission to appeal, i.e. after the
    time for appealing has expired,  as  having  leave  and  therefore  not
    coming within the words of Section 3C (2) (b) of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971-i.e. those words would not be aimed at such a person.

12.  There was a difference of opinion between  the  representatives  as  to
    what should happen if I did find the material error  of  law  that  had
    been identified by Mr Lindsay. Mr Aslam submitted that in circumstances
    where I found a material error of law, I should send the matter back to
    be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Lindsay submitted that this
    was a distinct  matter  which  could  be  re-considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal if necessary.



Discussion

13.   I  have  considered  carefully  the  correct   construction   of   the
    Immigration Rules in the context of  the  extension  of  leave  pending
    decisions provided for by section 3C of the 1971 Act.

14.  I am not persuaded by Mr Aslam that it is capable of being read in  any
    way other than the plain  wording.   The  plain  wording  requires  the
    tribunal to ignore the possibility  of  an  appeal  out  of  time  with
    permission.  Therefore,  following  expiry  of  leave   in   2014   any
    application for variation after that, i.e.  in  2016,  would  not  have
    afforded them any lawful permission to remain. The appellants became at
    that point overstayers and therefore, as  a  matter  of  law,  they  do
    appear to have been overstayers. This should have informed the way that
    the Immigration Judge assessed the  Article  8  application.  Here  the
    Immigration Judge allowed the  appeal  under  article  8  of  the  ECHR
    because he thought  the  appellants  qualified  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15.  It was submitted that there had been a change  in  circumstances  since
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in that an  application  for
    naturalisation on behalf of the appellants' daughter, Roopeshka, born 8
    March  1996,  had  recently  succeeded  (on  a  date  in  April  2019).
    Therefore, with effect from April 2019 Roopeshka is a British  citizen.
    The question is: what should now happen?

Conclusion

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law in that it misconstrued the Immigration Rules which may have led it
    to reach an onerous conclusion on the application of article 8  to  the
    facts of the case. Therefore, that part of the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.  The findings of fact in relation to  family  life  and  private
    life in the UK are not disputed by the  respondent  -  there  being  no
    argument with those findings.

17.  It follows from my decision that the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law, that it is necessary to set aside  the  decision
    that the Immigration Rules were met  and  to  go  on  and  re-make  the
    decision.  I have considered whether it is necessary  to  hear  further
    evidence on this, there having been no application  to  adduce  further
    evidence.

18.  I have decided, having found that there was a material  error  of  law,
    that the appeal by the respondent should be  allowed  to  that  extent.
    The decision in relation to the Immigration Rules is set aside  insofar
    as that has an impact on the human rights appeal.

19.  I reserved my decision as to the ultimate disposal of the case  at  the
    hearing. However, I indicated to the parties at the hearing that, in so
    far as it became necessary to do so, I would re-make  the  decision  in
    the Upper Tribunal based on the submissions made at the hearing by both
    parties. There was no application to adduce fresh evidence  not  before
    the FTT under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008. It was agreed that the naturalisation of the youngest child
    was a matter not before the FTT and there had been  no  application  to
    adduce fresh evidence, although I cannot ignore the fact that  she  has
    UK Nationality-there being no objection to me seeing the  copy  of  her
    passport. Her change in status may form the subject matter of  a  fresh
    application in due course.

20.  I heard brief submissions by both representatives on  the  question  of
    ultimate disposal. The facts were  that  the  eldest  daughter  of  the
    family (Roopeshka) had discretionary leave to remain in her own  right.
    Mr Aslam submitted that the Immigration  Judge  had  been  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion he reached in relation to article 8.

21.  Mr Lindsay said it had always been accepted that there was family  life
    between the adult daughter and her parents in the  UK.  Roopeshka  was,
    however, 23 having been born on 8 March 1996 and there was no  evidence
    amounting to support of the parents. There were  the  normal  emotional
    ties between parents and their daughter. In relation to the appellants,
    little weight should attach to their private life as their  immigration
    status had been precarious since 2014. I was referred to the case of KO
    Nigeria. The  issue  was  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  return  the
    appellants to Mauritius or require the respondent to allow them to stay
    in the UK. Mr Lindsay referred me to the IDI guidance (at paragraph 10)
    and to Lord Carnwath's judgment in KO. It  was  pointed  out  that  the
    younger child would be returning to  Mauritius  with  his/her  parents.
    Neither parent had  any  right  to  be  in  UK.  The  facts  should  be
    considered and when those facts were considered it would be  reasonable
    in all the circumstances to return the appellants to Mauritius.  I  was
    specifically referred to paragraphs 17-18 of KO. As the  press  summary
    states:

         "...It is inevitably relevant to consider where the parents,  apart
         from the relevant  provision,  are  expected  to  be,  as  it  will
         normally be reasonable for the child  to  be  with  them.  To  that
         extent the record of the parents may become indirectly material  if
         it leads to them having to leave the UK. It is only if it would not
         be reasonable for the child to leave with them that  the  provision
         may give the parents a right to remain".


22.  The case of NS was put forward as similar on its facts  to  this  case.
    Again, I quote for the press summary:

         "...NS concerned section 117B of the  2002  Act.  The  parents  had
         falsely claimed to have completed a postgraduate course in order to
         obtain leave to remain [46]. The Upper Tribunal judge's conclusion,
         read in its full context, did not involve any error of approach. He
         was entitled to regard the parents'  conduct  as  relevant  to  the
         extent that it meant they had to leave the country, and to consider
         the position of the child on that basis [51]."


23.  It was therefore submitted that there was no reason  in  principle  why
    the appellants should not return to Mauritius with their  young  child.
    There would be disruption to family life,  but  it  was  necessary  and
    proportionate for them to return.

24.  Mr Aslam also addressed submissions to the tribunal on the  basis  that
    I was to proceed to remake the decision. He referred me to the case  of
    J G [2019] UKUT 72 and in particular  to  paragraph  27  thereof  where
    Judge Gill referred to the limits on the case of KO and  how  the  case
    could be misinterpreted. In particular, having  pointed  out  that  the
    requirement in section 117B (6) is derived from the section 55 duty  to
    secure the welfare of children  within  the  jurisdiction,  Judge  Gill
    stated that paragraph 18 and 19 of KO did not mandate or  lend  support
    to the suggestion that in  determining  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect a child to leave the UK one must ignore the fact that  they  one
    or both of the parents will no longer be in the UK.  It  would  not  be
    reasonable to remove  this  British  citizen  child  to  Mauritius  and
    therefore it would not be reasonable to expect parents  to  be  removed
    either. Family life still exists with the adult child (Roopeshka) also.
    I refer to her witness statement at paragraph 2, 6 8  and  9,  for  the
    degree of support given and the extent of dependency  on  her  parents.
    She is currently looking for work.

25.  Mr Lindsay was allowed  the  last  word  as  it  was  the  respondent's
    appeal. He said that although the Immigration Judge had disagreed  with
    the respondent's position it was not in any way "overruled". There  was
    no realistic possibility that Roopeshka would be required to leave  the
    UK and insofar as the family were divided by the respondent's decision,
    this was necessary in  all  circumstances.  The  FTT  was  required  to
    recognise  the  respondent's  position  that   the   appellants   would
    reasonably be able to return to Mauritius as a family unit and continue
    their family life there.

26.  Following the submissions summarised above, I have decided  to  re-make
    the  decision  for  the  purposes  of  section  12(2)(b)(ii)   of   the
    Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (2007  Act)  based  on  the
    evidence before the FTT as supplemented by the  submissions  summarised
    above. I have regard to the following in deciding the ultimate disposal
    of these appeals:

      1) The first appellant (Mrs Soniasingh [R]) was born on 26  June  1972
         and has been in the UK since 2005 having originally come here  with
         a  visit  visa  but  having  extended  her  leave   several   times
         subsequently. She originally came to the UK as a  Tier-4  (general)
         migrant (see her application at A7). Her occupation at the time  of
         her immigration application  (it  appears  in  December  2015)  was
         described as a "legal secretary". It is likely to that she would be
         able to resume employment on return to Mauritius, possibly with  an
         improved skill set.


      2) Her husband (Bedanand) was born on 8 November 1968 and is therefore
         the eldest of the adult appellants. He first entered the UK in 2006
         (see his solicitor's letter dated 30 August 2016). He claims to  be
         dependent on his wife. This seems to have been  the  basis  of  his
         being allowed to remain here for the time he has  been  in  the  UK
         (see the summary on the refusal letter). He does  not  advance  any
         independent basis for remaining in  the  UK  beyond  his  dependent
         status.


      3) They have two children together: the eldest (Roopeshka) was born on
         8 March 1996 and the youngest ([B]) was born on 27  December  2008,
         but I have been provided with very little  detail  of  the  latter,
         other than that she has now become a British  citizen.  She  is  of
         course young, although she will now be in  the  educational  system
         here. English is widely spoken in Mauritius.


      4) Mauritius has a functioning school and health care system  and  the
         appellants have a supportive  family  there.  It  is  by  no  means
         entirely negative for [B] to be  exposed  to  the  culture  of  her
         parents. No evidence of insurmountable obstacles existing to family
         life continuing in Mauritius  has  been  placed  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal nor was such evidence placed before the FTT.


      5) The appellants have been living here, at best,  precariously  since
         2014, I have found.  They therefore fall within the  little  weight
         provision of section 117B(5)  as  far  as  their  private  life  is
         concerned.


      6) I have taken full account of section  117B(6)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules and the guidance in both KO and JG  but  consider  that  this
         family would be returning as one unit to Mauturius and there is  no
         likelihood they will be divided as a family. Given [B]'s young  age
         any  impact  on  that   child's   schooling   would-be   short-term
         disruption. The respondent has had full regard to  his  obligations
         under section 55 of the 2009 Act but, in so far as he has not  done
         so, the parties indicated that the recent change in status  of  [B]
         by being given British citizenship could  form  the  subject  of  a
         separate application.  I say "could", but I am not encouraging them
         to  make  a  future  application  as  it  is  undesirable  for  all
         considered to be involved in endless litigation about their status.




      7) The normal expectation where a family come here for a limited  stay
         but fail to return to their  own  country,  or  quickly  regularise
         their status in the UK, is that after their limited stay, they will
         eventually have to do return to the country of  their  nationality.
         There appear to be  no  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the
         finding that the removal of the appellants would be unlawful  under
         article 8. The respondent took account of the anticipated impact on
         the family unit including [B]. However, insofar as  the  appellants
         and [B] will be separated from their  adult  daughter  (Roopeshka),
         modern means of communication will ensure the family remain close.


Decision

27.  I have found a material error of law and set aside the decision of  the
    FTT.

28.  I have decided, given my interpretation of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    the appellants' immigration history, that the appeals on  human  rights
    grounds should be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 25 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   W.E.Hanbury   Date 25  May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

