
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10730/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 CARLON [C]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Radford, instructed by Braitch solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 30 November  1993  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Jamaica. He appealed against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State dated 1  March  2019  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim,  the
    Secretary of State having made an order to deport him to  Jamaica.  The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated  on  8  October  2019,
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds. The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had arrived in United Kingdom at the age  of  five  years
    with his mother in 1999. He was first granted leave  to  remain  on  27
    January 2016, the leave valid until 27 July 2018. Prior to  that  date,
    an application made by his mother for indefinite leave  to  remain  had
    been refused. On 25  January  2019,  the  appellant  was  convicted  at
    Warwick Crown Court of possession  of  Class  A  (cocaine/heroin)  with
    intent to supply. He was sentenced to 30 months in prison.

 3. The judge found that the appellant has a partner with whom he  has  two
    children who are British citizens. The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    relationship  with  the  partner  and  children  is  both  genuine  and
    subsisting. However, the respondent argued that it would not be  unduly
    harsh for the partner and children to leave the United Kingdom with the
    appellant and live in Jamaica or to remain here in this country  whilst
    the appellant is deported. The judge concluded [51  and  54]  that  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 399 of HC  395  (as
    amended) or section 117C of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002. She found that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant  to
    be deported Jamaica whilst his partner and children  remain  living  in
    the United Kingdom; the argument that the entire family could  relocate
    to Jamaica does not appear to have been maintained  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal nor was it advanced before the Upper Tribunal.  At  [53],
    the judge observed that, although the appellant had been in the  United
    Kingdom since he was five years old,  his  residence  had  only  become
    lawful from January 2016. However, the judge  accepted  the  submission
    that, whilst  the  appellant  could  not  as  a  consequence  meet  the
    statutory exception, the length of the appellant's  residence  in  this
    country and the reasons why his residence had only become lawful in the
    last few  years  (whilst  a  minor,  he  had  no  power  to  alter  his
    immigration status) may be of relevance in  determining  whether  there
    existed very compelling circumstances beyond  the  application  of  the
    statutory provisions and exceptions.

 4. In determining whether very compelling circumstances existed, the judge
    found that the appellant, an able-bodied  young  man  in  good  health,
    would be unable to obtain assistance from  various  state  agencies  in
    Jamaica offering support to  vulnerable  adults.  Moreover,  the  judge
    found that the appellant, notwithstanding his  criminal  defending,  is
    culturally  and  socially  integrated  in  the  United   Kingdom.   She
    identified very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration
    into life in Jamaica, a country with which he has no links say for  his
    nationality and where no family members are living who would be able to
    assist him. Consequently, the judge found that in the  light  of  these
    very compelling circumstances, the appeal should be allowed on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds.

 5. At the initial hearing, Ms Radford, who  appeared  for  the  appellant,
    submitted that six points arose from the grounds  of  appeal.  I  shall
    address those points in the order in  which  she  raised  them  in  her
    submissions.

 6. First, the Secretary of State has made a global reasons challenge  that
    to the decision. That challenge, submitted Ms Radford, was not tenable.
    I agree. The decision as a whole is very carefully reasoned. Whether or
    not one agrees with the conclusion, any reader of the decision would be
    left in no doubt as to the reasons why the judge  allowed  the  appeal.
    Secondly, Ms Radford submitted that challenge in  the  grounds  to  the
    judge's findings as to the appellant's cultural and social  integration
    were essentially made on the basis of rationality. Mrs  Pettersen,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, agreed that  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal was not  irrational  or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  per  se.  She
    acknowledged that it would be possible for the appellant to succeed  on
    the basis of the facts (which remain  unchallenged)  as  found  by  the
    judge. However, Mrs Pettersen submitted that an error  of  approach  on
    the  application  of  relevant  law  had  led  the  judge  into   error
    particularly   as   regards   the   treatment   of   the    appellant's
    rehabilitation/integration.  The  courses  which  the   appellant   had
    undertaken in prison had been given too much weight  in  the  analysis;
    the appellant had every motive to behave well whilst imprisoned  so  as
    to prevent any delay in his release.

 7. I agree with Ms Radford that the jurisprudence  does  not  exclude  all
    those who have dealt in drugs ever being able to prove  that  they  are
    culturally and socially integrated in British society  (see  CI  [2019]
    (Nigeria) EWCA Civ 2027).  Consequently,  the  judge  did  not  err  by
    considering  whether,  on  the  particular  facts,  the  appellant  had
    achieved integration. I find the judge's reasoning  at  [65-66]  to  be
    clear and cogent. There is no suggestion that the judge has  considered
    factors  which  were  not  relevant.  The  judge  fully  accepted   the
    respondent's view that the appellant's integration had been  diminished
    by his offending but she was also entitled to be 'satisfied that it was
    not so diminished that I can attach no weight to it  in  the  balancing
    act required. [66].' I can  identify  no  legal  flaw  in  the  judge's
    approach or her application of the law.

 8. I agree also with Ms Radford's submission that it was for the judge  to
    determine  what  weight  to  give  to  her  findings  as  regards   the
    appellant's  rehabilitation.   The   judge   was   fully   aware   that
    rehabilitation hitherto has taken place in prison and has not,  as  the
    grounds that state, 'been effectively tested.' However, it was open  to
    the judge to observe that the appellant did not have a  'long  list  of
    convictions with a variety of previous interventions' [64] Her  finding
    that 'some weight should be attached to the fact that  [the  appellant]
    has had the opportunity to  address  his  offending  and  confront  the
    impact this has had on him his family and  society  at  large'  is  not
    irrational. I note the use of  the  qualifying  'some';  I  reject  the
    respondent's submission that the judge has attached excessive weight to
    the appellant's efforts at rehabilitation.

 9. I also agree with Miss Radford that the judge's finding as regards  the
    very  significant   obstacles   facing   the   appellant   as   regards
    reintegrating in  Jamaican  society  is  not  irrational  but,  rather,
    cogently reasoned. Mrs Pettersen criticised the reference made  by  the
    judge to various agencies of the state and NGOs in Jamaica which  offer
    assistance to vulnerable adults and the fact that the  appellant  would
    be unable to access such assistance because he is  not  vulnerable.  On
    first inspection, it is not clear why the judge  should  consider  such
    assistance at all until one recognises that the issue was first  raised
    by the Secretary of State  in  the  decision  letter.  It  is  not  now
    reasonable for the respondent to criticise the  judge  for  considering
    matters which respondent himself had introduced. Having  said  that,  I
    agree that  the  appellant  cannot  access  such  assistance  with  the
    consequence that, although he is an able-bodied young  male  with  work
    experience in the United Kingdom, he has not been to Jamaica  since  he
    was five years old and would have no family or other assistance on  the
    ground there to assist any attempt he might make to integrate into that
    society. The point made by the judge that  the  appellant  might  place
    himself at risk by attempting to befriend strangers in Jamaica is  also
    well made and supported by the background material.

10. The respondent criticises the judge for failing to refer  to  any  help
    which the appellant's mother and sister might be able  to  provide.  Ms
    Radford acknowledged that the judge does not refer in any detail to the
    mother and sister but she submits that it was  not  necessary  for  the
    judge to deal with each and every aspect of the appeal. In  any  event,
    she submitted that the mother has little money available to assist  the
    appellant whilst the sister is only 15 years old.  I  agree  with  Miss
    Radford. Even if the judge  may  be  criticised  for  failing  to  make
    specific findings regarding the mother and sister, I  cannot  see  that
    the outcome of the appeal would have been altered in any  way  had  she
    included those family members in her otherwise very detailed analysis.

11. Both  parties  are  in  agreement  that  the  country  guidance  of  AB
    (Protection-criminal gangs-internal relocation)  Jamaica  [2007]  UKAIT
    00018 is not relevant despite what is stated in  the  grounds  at  [8].
    There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  will  be  at  threat  from
    criminal gangs seeking to target him in Jamaica.

12. The judge has,  as  she  was  required  to  do,  considered  first  the
    statutory provisions, including the exceptions, of  section  117C.  She
    did not fall into legal error by finding that, although  the  appellant
    could not establish that he met the requirements of the exceptions, his
    lengthy residence in the United Kingdom, the reasons  why  he  had  not
    regularised his status before 2016 and his complete lack of links to or
    possible  assistance  within  Jamaica,  there  exist  very   compelling
    circumstances in this appeal. Her  decision  is  detailed,  cogent  and
    fully reasoned. The Secretary of State accepts that, on the same facts,
    it is not inevitable that the appeal should fail. I  acknowledge  that,
    on the same facts, a different  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion. However, that is not the point.  For  the  reasons  I  have
    given, I find that the judge's decision is not flawed by legal error as
    pleaded or at all.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed


         Signed                              Date 21 January 2020

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
