
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/10000/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 November 2018                   |On 27 November 2018                |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    M A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  appeals  against  a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Kempton,
    promulgated  on  3  April  2018.   His  grounds  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 12 April 2018, paragraphs 1 - 18.

 2. The points made in the grounds, following  their  paragraph  numbering,
    are these:

    (7)  and  (10).   The  appellant's  circumstances  should   have   been
    considered "in isolation to that of his parents", and "what his parents
    did or did not do should not have influenced the FtT's decision".

    (8).  As the judge acknowledged at [13]  the  appellant's  private  and
    family life and deep roots in the UK,  it  was  an  error  at  [26]  to
    conclude he "did not engage any article of ECHR".

    (9).  The judge said that the appellant's friends  did  not  attend  to
    give evidence, but they are minor  children,  under  age  10,  and  the
    hearing was on a school day.

    (11) discourses on the cost of education in Bangladesh,  but  makes  no
    discernible point about error by the FtT.

    (12) - (18) discourse on the appellant's ties in the UK,  his  lack  of
    ties with Bangladesh, the strong reasons needed for refusing leave, and
    excerpts from case law, insisting that his interests demanded that  the
    appeal be allowed.

 3. Under cover  of  a  letter  dated  12  November  2018  the  appellant's
    representatives  (who  took  over  acting  only  recently)  submit   an
    inventory of productions which they say are relevant in light of  KO  &
    others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  The inventory includes  a  copy  of  the
    application dated 20 September 2018 by  the  appellants'  parents  (who
    were his co-appellants in recent failed appeal proceedings)  for  leave
    to remain based on 10 years' lawful residence in the UK.

 4. Mr Ndubuisi submitted that the judge made  3  errors:  (1)  incorrectly
    assuming that the appellants' parents would  be  leaving  the  UK;  (2)
    giving no weight to the fact that  by  the  date  of  the  hearing  the
    appellant had reached the 7-year point to become  a  qualifying  child;
    and (3) becoming preoccupied with the shortcomings of  the  immigration
    history of the appellant's parents, and overlooking that the child  was
    not to be blamed for those.

 5. Based on submission (1), if the appellant's parents were (legitimately)
    not to be leaving the UK, it would of course be unreasonable to  expect
    the appellant to do so.  Mr Ndubuisi said that the procedural  history,
    up to and including the application dated  20  September  2018,  showed
    that the appellant's parents would be granted leave to remain,  and  it
    should not have been taken that they would be departing.

 6. The position before the FtT was that the appellants' parents had failed
    through various proceedings, including a recent appeal, to establish  a
    right to remain in the UK.

 7. I rejected submission (1)  at  the  hearing,  without  calling  on  the
    respondent to reply, because:

      i) no such case was put to the FtT;

     ii) no such line of argument is among the grounds on  which  permission
         to appeal to the UT was granted;

    iii) the line is not one which  should  have  been  considered,  without
         prompting, by the FtT;

     iv) the assumption that the appellants' parents are entitled  to  leave
         is not one the judge should have made, when the submissions of both
         sides were to the contrary.

 8. On submissions (2) and (3), having heard also  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Govan, I reserved my decision.

 9. Two incidental errors are disclosed by the original  grounds,  although
    Mr Ndubuisi, sensibly, did not press them at the hearing.

10. Firstly, the case did "engage" the ECHR, but the conclusion shows  only
    an error of expression.  The FtT  meant  that  the  outcome  is  not  a
    disproportionate breach of rights under the ECHR.

11. Secondly, nothing adverse could be drawn  from  the  non-attendance  of
    children, friendly with the appellant, on a school day, whose  evidence
    was apparently uncontentious  and  unlikely  to  be  tested  in  cross-
    examination.   (Mr  Ndubuisi  was  unable  to   confirm   whether   the
    appellant's friends are all  under  the  age  of  10,  which  would  be
    surprising, but that is even more incidental.)

12. The judge did not fail to notice or to give  weight  to  the  appellant
    having become a qualifying child.  She said  at  [20]  that  the  "only
    issue" was whether, as such, it would be unreasonable to expect him  to
    leave the UK and return to Bangladesh.   She  then  set  out  paragraph
    276ADE of the immigration rules, the "section  55  duty",  and  section
    117B of the 2002 Act; [20] - [22].

13. The closest the appellant has come to identifying error is at  (7)  and
    (10) of the grounds and in submission (3).  The decision at points does
    read as weighing in the balance the shortcomings of  the  parents.   No
    doubt that reflects the  case  put  by  representatives  on  how  those
    matters should bear on the outcome, and reflects  the  law  as  it  was
    understood prior to KO and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

14. KO bears in both directions.  Misconduct of parents does not come  into
    the balance - [16] - but it is  equally  clear  that  their  record  is
    "indirectly material", because they are assumed to be  leaving;  it  is
    normally reasonable for children to be  with  their  parents;  and  the
    assessment is to be made "in the real world in which the children  find
    themselves" - [18] and [19].

15. The decision of the FtT grapples closely with the evidence,  expressing
    sympathy where that was justified - [15] - but giving good reasons  for
    scepticism of the extent of alleged difficulties faced by the appellant
    in Bangladesh - [14], [17] - [20],  [25].   The  decision  might,  with
    hindsight and in light of KO, have been expressed somewhat differently,
    but its essence is a realistic assessment of what it is  reasonable  to
    expect in the world of the appellant.  In the context  of  his  parents
    leaving the  UK,  there  was  nothing  unreasonable  in  expecting  the
    appellant to go with them.

16. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

17. The anonymity direction made by the FtT is maintained herein.



            [pic]


            19 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


