

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2016                           |On 22 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                  INOKA [A]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain. Solictitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  however  for
         convenience I shall refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.


      2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 16 November  1977.
         She entered the UK in June 2008 as the  dependant  of  her  student
         husband but a subsequent application for indefinite leave to remain
         was refused on 13 April 2015. A further application was refused, on
         25 July 2015. On 7 September 2015 the applicant sought to remain as
         a spouse. This was refused on 29 October 2015 because the appellant
         did not meet the requirements of D-LTRP.1.3., E-LTRP.2.2(b) and 3.2
         (b), R-LTRP.1.1.(a), (c)(i) and (d)(i), (ii) and (iii), EX.1.(a) of
         Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the
         Immigration Rules.

      3. The appeal against the refusal of the application was determined on
         the papers at Glasgow by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clough and in  a
         determination promulgated on 26 May 2016, the appeal was allowed on
         article 8 grounds.

      4. The judge found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules (at paragraph 9). She found, however, that
         the appellant had family life with her husband and child (both  now
         settled in the UK), that removal of the child would interfere  with
         family life, that failure of the life in the UK test was the  "only
         reason" she had failed in her original claim and, that as she had a
         bad back, she had an excuse for that. She noted that the  appellant
         spoke English and that her husband supported  her  financially  and
         that these amounted to reasons why "I can consider article  8  over
         and above the Immigration Rules".

      5. The respondent obtained permission to appeal on the  basis  of  the
         inadequately reasoned findings and conclusions.

      6. At the hearing before me on 17 November 2016, a  preliminary  issue
         on timeliness  was  raised  by  Mr  Hussain.  He  argued  that  the
         respondent had made her application for permission to appeal a  day
         late and he argued that the application should be rejected on  that
         basis. I considered  that  this  objection  had  been  raised  this
         morning for the first time and given that late  objection  and  the
         minimal period of delay, I considered  it  was  fair  and  just  to
         extend time.

      7. I then heard submissions from the parties. Mr Melvin submitted that
         the judge had  failed  entirely  to  consider  whether  there  were
         obstacles to the continuation  of  family  life  in  Sri  Lanka  or
         whether there were any compelling circumstances which  warranted  a
         grant of leave.  There  was  no  consideration  of  the  rules  and
         inadequate consideration of  the  matter  outside  the  rules.  The
         appellant's ability to speak  English  and  maintain  herself  were
         neutral matters.

      8. Mr Hussain submitted there was adequate consideration  despite  the
         brevity of the determination. The judge considered factors such  as
         the child's schooling and she also considered the  Razgar  guidance
         and s.117B. She found that family life existed. Whilst the decision
         could have been more detailed and  reasoned,  the  judge  had  done
         enough.

      9. In response, Mr Melvin pointed out that the judge did not have  any
         evidence before her of the child's schooling and so that was not  a
         finding.

     10. At the conclusion of the hearing I  notified  the  parties  that  I
         would be finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in
         law and that her detention would  be  set  aside.  I  now  give  my
         reasons for that decision.

                   Findings and conclusions

     11. The determination is brief and the findings are limited. There  has
         been no application of the rules or any  consideration  of  whether
         family life could continue in Sri Lanka. These  are  matters  which
         should have been considered. The judge appears to have given weight
         to the appellant's ability to speak English and  of  her  husband's
         ability to maintain her but at best these are neutral factors under
         s.117B and cannot advance her claim. There was no  evidence  before
         her of the child's schooling and nothing to suggest that the  child
         could not be educated in Sri Lanka. In all, the judge  gave  weight
         to irrelevant matters and failed to have regard  to  matters  which
         should have been considered. It follows that  she  made  errors  of
         law. Her determination is unsustainable and I set it aside.

     12. The parties agreed that the matter should be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh decision. Although the  appeal  had  been
         determined on the papers, the appellant now seeks an oral hearing.


     13. Decision

     14. The determination contains errors of law such that the decision  is
         set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
         hearing at which the decision shall be re-made.

     15. There has been no request for an anonymity order and I therefore do
         not make one.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 17 November 2016


