

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10559/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by skype for business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 November 2020                        |On 30 November 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                             Mr MD SAMSUL AREFIN
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lemer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal ((Judge Peer) (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ".) By
    its decision, the Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision, dated, 7 June 2019 to refuse  his  human
    rights claim.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and Counsel did
    not seek to advance any grounds as  to  why  such  an  order  would  be
    necessary.

 1. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face  to
    face hearing and that this could take place  via  Skype.  Both  parties
    have indicated that they were content for the  hearing  to  proceed  by
    this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral
    submissions to be given by each of the parties.

 2. The hearing took place on 18 November  2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court  at
    Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely  via  video  as  did  the
    appellant and his solicitors. There were no issues regarding sound, and
    no substantial technical problems were encountered during  the  hearing
    and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their  respective
    cases by the chosen means.

 3. I am grateful  to  Mr  Lemer  and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.

The background:

 4. The immigration history of the appellant is set  out  in  the  decision
    letter dated 7 June 2019 and the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs  2-
    6.

 5. The appellant entered the UK with entry clearance as a Tier  4  student
    on 13 October 2009. His leave was valid until 20 August 2012.

 6. On 20 August 2012, the appellant applied further leave to remain  which
    was granted on 16 October 2012 until 31 July 2014.

 7. On 2 April 2013, the appellant applied further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 student was granted on 31 May 2013 until 22 April 2104

 8. On 18 April 2014, the appellant applied further leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 student was granted on 19 May 2014 until 24 August 2015.

 9. On 29 January 2015, the appellant's leave was  curtailed,  and  he  was
    served with forms IS151A and Part 2 informing him  of  his  immigration
    status and liability to detention and removal.

10. The appellant sent a PAP letter to the respondent on 9 February 2015.

11. On 13 February 2105, the respondent maintained the decision.

12. On 20 March 2015, the appellant commenced judicial  review  proceedings
    which concluded when the application was struck out on  the  3  January
    2017.

13. On 12 February 2019, the appellant requested the decision  to  withdraw
    leave to be revoked and further to the issue of a section  10  response
    form on 28 March 2019, the appellant submitted  additional  grounds  in
    support of a human rights claim by letter dated 9 April 2019.

14. The decision letter is dated 7 June 2019. It refers  to  the  appellant
    having made a human rights application on the 9 April 2019 and that  it
    had been "refused." The  decision  letter  began  by  setting  out  the
    appellant's  immigration  history  which  I  have  summarised  in   the
    preceding paragraphs. The decision letter made reference to there being
    no reference made about a partner, parent, or dependent children in the
    United Kingdom under the  family  life  rules  under  Appendix  FM  and
    therefore his claim was only considered under the private life route.

15. When considering a private life rules under paragraph  276ADE  (1)  the
    respondent stated that his application fell for refusal on  grounds  of
    suitability set out in section S-LTR of Appendix FM. In particular  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of S-LTR 4.2 and therefore  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1).

16. The reasons given in the decision letter stated that the appellant,  in
    support of his Tier 4 (General)  student  application  submitted  on  2
    April 2013 he submitted a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational  Testing
    Service ("ETS"). He stated  that  he  had  attended  London  School  of
    Technology on the 27 June 2012 and undertook the speaking component  of
    the ETS TOEIC English language test.

17. The decision letter went on to state:

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test. Using voice verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests. ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to
         the SSHD that there was significant evidence to conclude that your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test
         taker. Your scores from the test taken on 27 June 2012 at London
         School of Technology have now been cancelled by ETS.


         On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the
         Secretary of State is satisfied that your certificate was
         fraudulently obtained and that you use deception in your
         application of 2 April 2013.


18. The decision letter also noted that as he had been found unsuitable  he
    could therefore not meet the rules  on  eligibility  grounds.  However,
    notwithstanding the above, consideration was given to  his  eligibility
    under Paragraph 276 ADE (1) on the basis of his private life.

19. It was noted that he was a national of Bangladesh  having  entered  the
    United Kingdom on a Tier 4 student Visa on 1 October 2009.  He had  not
    lived in the UK continuously  for at least 20  years,  and  that  there
    would be no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
    Bangladesh having spent 20 years living in his home  country  prior  to
    entry to the UK and that he would not  encounter problems communicating
    upon return as records showed that he spoke Bengali and English. He had
    spent nine years in the UK compared to 20 years in  Bangladesh  and  it
    was considered that he had significant experience of, and  exposure  to
    Bangladeshi culture,  and  would  have  no  problems  re-adapting  into
    society there. He was currently aged 29 years old  and  had  spent  the
    majority of his life in  Bangladesh,  including  his  formative  years.
    There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  had  any   adult   caring
    responsibilities in the UK, Bangladesh had a  healthcare  system  which
    was accessible  and  capable  of  assisting  him  when  necessary.  Any
    relationships formed by in the  UK  could  continue  from  overseas  by
    modern communication methods. There was no evidence that  he  would  be
    unable to maintain himself back in Bangladesh. It was  clear  from  the
    length of time he spent in the UK that  he  had  adequately  maintained
    himself whilst residing in the UK. He was of working age and  would  be
    able to seek opportunities abroad therefore he could adequately support
    himself upon return. Having to seek employment and  find  accommodation
    in another country may be an inconvenience but it does not amount to  a
    "very significant obstacle".

20. The respondent went on consider whether  there  were  any  "exceptional
    circumstances" which would give rise to a grant of leave outside of the
    rules but for the reasons given in the decision concluded that  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to return to Bangladesh.

21. The decision letter then went on to make reference to a number of legal
    authorities including SM  and Qadir  (ETS - evidence - burden of proof)
    [2016] UKUT 0029 and cited part  of  the  judgement  dealing  with  the
    evidence of Dr Harrison and that  subsequent  to  that  decision  those
    queries were considered an address by Prof French in a report dated  20
    April 2016. It  was  therefore  stated  that  in  light  of  that,  the
    Secretary of State maintained her view that the ETS verification system
    is "adequately robust and rigorous."

22. For those reasons, the Secretary of State therefore was satisfied  that
    his presence was not conducive to the public good because  his  conduct
    made it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK, and  his  removal
    from the UK would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining
    effective immigration control.

23. It was noted that he would have been exposed to the cultural  norms  of
    that society in a significant manner and that  it  would  not  dissolve
    over a period of nine years in the  UK.  It  was  considered  that  his
    linguistic  ties  would  not  have  been  lost  and  whilst  return  to
    Bangladesh may initially be difficult, he would not suffer any  greater
    hardship than other people of that nation. In addition,  he  had  never
    possessed leave to remain which would have led  to  settlement  in  the
    United Kingdom. Consequently,  he  had  no  legitimate  expectation  to
    remain here indefinitely.

24. Consequently, his application was refused.

25. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT (Judge
    Peer) on 18 October 2019. In a  decision  promulgated  on  18  November
    2019, the FtTJ dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on
    Article 8  grounds.  In  summary,  the  FtTJ  considered  the  evidence
    advanced on behalf the respondent to demonstrate that the appellant had
    use deception, but for the reasons set  out  at  paragraph  [24]  -[37]
    reached  the  conclusion  that  the  respondent  had   discharged   the
    evidential burden on her by reference to the generic evidence and  also
    the specific individual evidence that related  to  this  appellant  but
    having considered the  "  innocent  explanation"  and  weighed  up  the
    evidence, the FtTJ found that " it was more likely than  not  that  the
    appellant did not use a proxy test taker" ( at [37]).

26. However, in relation to the immigration rules, the FtTJ found  that  he
    could not meet paragraph 276 ADE either by reference to his  length  of
    residence or on the basis that there were "very  significant  obstacles
    to his reintegration into Bangladesh (see paragraph 39).

27. As to whether or not he should be granted leave to remain  outside  the
    immigration rules, the FtTJ addressed this at paragraphs [40 - 44].

28. At [40] the FtTJ took into account that there was no evidence as to any
    family life in the UK and that it was not argued  on  his  behalf  that
    there was family life with friends that the appellant  currently  lived
    with.

29. As to his private life the judge observed at [40] that  whilst  he  had
    not provided any specific or concrete details of his  private  life  or
    ties in the UK other than by reference to living with Mr Islam and  his
    wife and child, the judge took into account that he had  established  a
    private life given the period of time he spent in the UK for  the  most
    part studying and that there would be an interference that private life
    if he had to leave the UK.

30. As to the issue of proportionality, the judge took into account that he
    lived in the UK for almost 10 years but that he had lived his  majority
    of his life in Bangladesh and was an adult when he came to  the  UK  to
    study in 2009. The judge took into account that the appellant was aware
    that he would be expected to return to Bangladesh at  the  end  of  his
    studies and there was no evidence to show that he would not be able  to
    find employment in Bangladesh. The judge observed  that  the  appellant
    had not said that he had no ties in Bangladesh but  that  it  would  be
    difficult as he had  not  told  his  family  the  full  extent  of  the
    situation in the UK and as they had invested in him and  supported  his
    studies, they would not be able to support him  on  return.  The  judge
    found that the appellant had education and there was no  evidence  that
    he could not find work  on  return.  The  judge  also  found  that  the
    appellant had not given any particular  or  specific  evidence  of  his
    private life ties in the UK, but he could  retain  those  ties  in  any
    event through telephone and other forms of contact. The judge also took
    into account that his leave to remain at always been "precarious"  only
    private life established during this time carry little weight the judge
    found that the "public interest lies expecting those who have no  basis
    to remain in the UK to leave the UK. The  appellant  currently  has  no
    basis to remain in the UK."

31. At [43] the FtTJ addressed the submission based on the weight  afforded
    to the public interest in the circumstances where the previous leave to
    remain was curtailed on the basis of an allegation  of  deception.  The
    judge observed that his attention had been drawn  to  the  respondent's
    concession as recorded in the decision of Khan at paragraph 37.

32. The judge concluded at [44] as follows:

         "the concession was made  in  the  context  of  Khan  and  no  such
         concession was put before me in this appeal by the  respondent  nor
         was it put me by  the  respondent  that  if  I  were  to  find  the
         reception allegation was not made out that a decision overall would
         be withdrawn. It is not open to me to set aside the decision by way
         of remedy as he is open  to  the  court  on  judicial  review.  The
         paragraph was not cited in full in Mr Lemer's skeleton nor  whether
         any detailed submissions or evidence as to  whether  the  appellant
         circumstances fell within the scope of the concession and,  if  so,
         on what basis and I find that it would not be appropriate for me to
         make any specific findings in relation to the interpretation, scope
         or application of the concession in any event. Although, I have not
         upheld the allegation of deception. I further do not find  that  it
         is open to me to  determine  the  public  interest  in  immigration
         control carries less weight in the balancing exercise I am required
         to carry out. There is no evidence or indication before me that  it
         would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to  return  to
         Bangladesh or of any exceptional circumstances. Taking  account  of
         all circumstances and evidence, I  find  that  the  respondent  has
         shown that the decision is a necessary, justified and proportionate
         decision."


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

33. Permission to appeal was sought and was granted on  17  April  2020  by
    FtTJ Boyes who stated as follows:

         Permission is granted.

         "the grounds assert that the  judge  erred  in  the  assessment  of
         proportionality under Article 8 outside the Rules and  in  relation
         to the Article 8 decision  generally.  I  have  had  sight  of  the
         grounds and the judgment.

         The grounds are clearly arguable  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
         application. I need say no more than that. "

34. Mr Lemer relied upon the written grounds of  appeal.  There  were  also
    further  written  submissions  submitted  by  direction  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal dated 22 July 2020.

35. There were also written submission filed on behalf  of  the  respondent
    dated 6 July 2020. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent  relied  upon
    those written submissions.

36.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
    their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend to  address
    the submissions made by the when addressing the grounds.

37. There is a preliminary  point  to  determine.  At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing, Mr Diwnycz  stated  that  he  applied  for  a  stay  of  these
    proceedings. This was on the basis that the Upper Tribunal were to hear
    an appeal dealing with TOEIC issues. He was not  able  to  provide  any
    more information nor was he able to  address  why  the  issues  in  the
    forthcoming appeal impacted on this particular appeal.

38. Mr Lemer on behalf of the appellant resisted any  such  application  on
    the basis that it had not been demonstrated why a stay  was  sought  by
    reference  to  this  particular  appeal.  He  also  stated   that   his
    instructing solicitors had been in recent contact with  the  respondent
    via another senior Presenting Officer and no reference was made to  any
    application for a stay.

39. Having set out the basis of the stay application, I  am  not  satisfied
    that it has been properly explained why a stay of these proceedings  is
    appropriate. Notwithstanding the lateness of the application, there  is
    no indication of  how  the  forthcoming  appeal  affects  this  present
    appeal. I therefore refuse the application to stay these proceedings.

The grounds of challenge:

40. Whilst this is an appeal brought  by  the  appellant,  in  the  written
    submissions provided by the respondent, they raised grounds challenging
    the decision reached on the deception issue.

41. There is no dispute between the parties that the respondent is entitled
    to raise this issue in the light of the decision of  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Devani [2020] EWCA Civ 612 and  as  set
    out in the respondent's written submissions at paragraphs 15-16.

The ETS issue:

42. The written submissions submit that the decision of the FtTJ was flawed
    for three reasons. Firstly, in reaching a conclusion at [37] the  judge
    failed to have regard to the respondent's  evidence  recorded  at  [31]
    that results of the tests  at  the  test  centre  where  the  appellant
    undertook the test appeared to show widespread cheating. There  was  no
    evidence of any valid tests taken on that day. This was consistent with
    the decision in MA (ETS- TOEIC testing)  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  450  at
    paragraph 44. As this was powerful evidence that showed prima facie the
    evidence of fraud on a significant level it should have been  addressed
    by the judge.

43. The second error is the  FtTJ's  reliance  on  the  appellant  in  this
    language ability at the appeal hearing. It is submitted that this was a
    highly material issue to the  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility (at [37]),  where  the  judge  stated  "the  appellant  has
    provided  oral  evidence  and  objective  evidence  pertaining  to  his
    competence in English at the time  of  the  impugned  test  potentially
    raising an innocent explanation."  It  is  submitted  that  the  FtTJ's
    approach was flawed  because  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing which was over seven years after he took  the  test  could  not
    possibly pertain to his ability back then. As the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    cautioned against placing  much  reliance  on  appellant's  ability  in
    English before the FTT, the FtTJ here has not been cautious  and  there
    has been a substantial period of over seven years between the time when
    the appellant took the test and his evidence  before  the  tribunal  in
    which time one would have expected that having lived and worked in  the
    UK spoken English would have improved significantly.

44. The last point relied upon by the respondent is that the judge erred in
    law in the approach at [37]. The FtTJ simply found  the  appellant  did
    not cheat because he provided  an  innocent  explanation  but  has  not
    applied the "evidential boomerang" that was required which  would  have
    included the specific evidence about the cheating.

45. Mr Lemer addressed these points in his written submissions and his oral
    submissions. He submitted that the FtTJ heard extensive  oral  evidence
    from the appellant was cross examined. He reminds the tribunal that  an
    appeal court should be reluctant to interfere  with  findings  of  fact
    made at first instance and on the present case, there is no such  basis
    for interfering with the decision of the FtTJ.

46. In his grounds he  cites  the  well-known  cases  of  Datec  electronic
    Holdings Ltd v UPS Ltd [2007] 1WLR 1325 [46] and the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in McGraddie v McGraddie [2013] 1 WLR 2477 at  paragraphs
    2 - 3.

47. He further submits that the respondent is incorrect to suggest that the
    judge took into account the appellant's English language ability at the
    hearing. He submits that the judge  in  fact  placed  reliance  on  the
    evidence as to the appellant's English-language levels at the  time  of
    the impugned TOEIC test as set out at paragraph 37 of the decision. Any
    reference to the appellant's English-language at the hearing related to
    a description of the manner in which the appellant gave his account  of
    taking the  impugned  English  language  test  which  was  set  out  at
    paragraph 35.

48. As to the submission that the judge  applied  the  wrong  approach  the
    burden of proof, Mr Lemer submits that the FtTJ correctly  applied  the
    evidential "boomerang" as set out at paragraphs [34] and [37].

49. No further oral submissions were made in reply by  the  respondent;  Mr
    Diwnycz relied upon the written grounds.

50. I have therefore carefully considered the written and oral  submissions
    of the parties. Having done so I am not satisfied that the decision  of
    the FtTJ discloses the making of an error on a point of law in the  way
    advanced on behalf of the respondent.

51. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that decision.

52. The respondent submits that the FtTJ failed to apply the correct  legal
    approach when reaching a decision on the issue of whether the appellant
    engaged in deception. In the decision of SM &  Qadir  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1167  the  three-stage   approach   was   summarised.   That   involves
    considering, first, whether the Secretary of State has met  the  burden
    on her of identifying evidence that the TOEIC certificate was  obtained
    by deception; second whether  the  claimant  satisfies  the  evidential
    burden on her of raising an  innocent  explanation  for  the  suggested
    deception; and third, if so, whether the Secretary of  State  can  meet
    the legal burden of showing, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that
    deception in fact took place. Contrary to the written submissions,  and
    when reading the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the FtTJ  did
    apply the correct approach. I do not find that there is  any  error  in
    the judge's assessment of the correct legal test or  the  evidence.  At
    [34] the FtTJ set out the jurisprudence and expressly made reference to
    the "boomerang" approach and the shifting burden.

53. It is plain from reading the decision that the judge  properly  reached
    the conclusion at paragraph [34] that the respondent had discharged the
    initial evidential burden. Whilst the FtTJ was critical of the evidence
    advanced on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  was  either
    illegible or missing, it was open to the  FtTJ  to  consider  that  the
    information in Annex A and Annex B when taken together  indicated  that
    the results  for tests taken on 27 June  2012  by  a  person  with  the
    appellant's name and date of birth at the London School  of  Technology
    were considered invalid.

54. It is also plain from reading the evidence referred to in the  decision
    that the appellant had offered an innocent explanation thus  the  judge
    was required to consider the evidence as a whole  to  consider  whether
    the respondent  discharged  the  burden  on  him  to  demonstrate  that
    deception had taken place on the balance of probabilities. At [37]  the
    FtTJ carried out that exercise as  can  be  seen  from  his  conclusion
    "...the Respondent has not proved to the required legal  standard  that
    the appellant has used deception in the past to obtain leave to  remain
    in the UK".

55. The respondent also asserts that the FtTJ erred in the reliance  placed
    on the appellant's English Language  ability  at  the  appeal  hearing.
    However, the submissions made on behalf  of  the  respondent  fails  to
    properly consider the FtTJ's decision and in particular paragraph [37].
    The FtTJ was not referring to his level or proficiency  in  English  at
    the date of the hearing but was in  fact  referring  to  the  level  of
    English at the time of the impugned test and placing reliance on  other
    material relevant to the issues.  At  [35]  the  FtTJ  identified  that
    evidence-  that in August 2012 he was awarded a level 5 HND in business
    and in 2013-2104 he as studying for a degree  with  the  University  of
    Sunderland.

56. At paragraph [36], the FtTJ directed himself to   the  decision  of  MA
    Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 and  expressly  paragraph  [57]  which  states;
    "second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the Appellant had no reason
    to engage in deception which we have found proven.  However,  this  has
    not deflected any way from reaching our main findings and  conclusions.
    In the abstract, of course, there is a range  of  reasons  why  persons
    proficient in English may engage in  TOEIC  fraud.  These  include,  in
    exhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of failure,  lack  of  time  and
    commitment and contempt for the immigration system. These reasons could
    conceivably overlap in individual cases and there is  scope  for  other
    explanations the deceitful conduct in the sphere. We are  not  required
    to make a further finding of why the Appellant engaged in deception and
    to this we add that this issue was not explored during the hearing.  We
    resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter."

57. The decision in MA was a statutory appeal and the evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal was more extensive than it had heard before  in  SM  and
    Qadir. In particular, the ETS voice files of  the  appellant  had  been
    obtained and it was agreed that the voice  was  not  his.  However,  he
    challenged whether the file was indeed a recording of the test  he  had
    taken and there was evidence from three experts exploring the issues of
    how the wrong file may have been supplied. At [47] the  Upper  Tribunal
    acknowledged  that  there  were  "enduring  unanswered  questions   and
    uncertainties relating in  particular  to  the  systems  processes  and
    procedures concerning TOEIC testing and in the subsequent allocation of
    scores in the later conduct and activities of ETS."  Accordingly,  much
    still turned on the Upper Tribunal's assessment of the appellant's oral
    evidence. They found his evidence to be  a  fabrication.  Both  parties
    have therefore emphasised that "the question of  whether  a  person  is
    engaged in fraud in procuring a  TOEIC  in  this  language  proficiency
    qualification will invariably be intrinsically fact sensitive."

58. As Mr Lemer submits, the FtTJ reaching an overall conclusion, the judge
    was entitled to take  into  account  the  appellants  English  language
    ability at the time of the impugned test.  It was open to the  FtTJ  to
    reach the conclusion that it was not credible that he would use a proxy
    in an area of skill in which he was proficient (at [37]). When applying
    the dicta in MA (Nigeria) are set out above, it was open to  the  judge
    to conclude that in the light of his experience and ability  there  was
    no reason why he needed to cheat.

59. The last point raised submits that the FtTJ erred  in  not  considering
    that there were no valid tests at the centre. As  Mr  Lemer  submitted,
    the evidence was set out in the FtTJ's decision at [31] where the  FtTJ
    expressly made reference to that evidence and recorded  that  the  test
    centre look up tool showed that 190 tests had  been  undertaken  on  27
    June 2012 and 89 were invalid  and  101  were  questionable.   In  this
    context I have also considered the decision of the Court of  Appeal  to
    the decision in The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615  and in particular paragraph 30  where  the
    court contrasted "invalid" results with those of  "questionable".  What
    is set out at  paragraphs  [25  -  30]  of  that  decision  is  that  a
    questionable designation  means  there  may  not  have  been  deception
    because unlike where there has been an invalid designation,  there  was
    not a matched voice with the person who took a test using  a  different
    name. The Court of Appeal concluded that the Secretary of  State  would
    face difficulties in respect of the evidential burden if  there  is  no
    individual evidence which shows that test results were invalid.

60. Therefore, even if there  were  "questionable"  results  that  was  not
    sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  those  tests  were  the  results  of
    deception.

61. The FtTJ had the advantage of hearing the appellant give oral  evidence
    and for that to be the subject of cross-examination. As  Mr  Lemer  set
    out both in his written and oral submissions, the Upper Tribunal should
    not interfere with a decision of the FtT unless satisfied that there is
    an error of law. In my judgment, it is plain from reading the  decision
    that the  FtTJ  did  identify  some  matters  that  troubled  him  when
    considering the appellant's account ( set out at [35] and  returned  to
    at [37]) but I am satisfied that the FtTJ  carefully   weighed  up  the
    evidence as a whole  before reaching his final conclusions at [37].

62. In this context I remind myself of the words of Lord Justice  Underhill
    in Ahsan (as cited) at paragraph 33 and that although  it  seems  clear
    that deception took place on a wide scale it does not follow that every
    person who took the TOEIC test was engaging in deception.

63. Given the evidence that I have set out above, that was a decision  that
    was open to the judge to reach. Having considered the evidence that was
    before the Tribunal and in the light of the grounds, I am not satisfied
    that the judge erred in law in reaching that decision.

64. I now turn to the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

The appellant's grounds:

65. In the original grounds, it is submitted that it had been argued before
    the FtTJ that in the event of a finding that the appellant had not used
    deception, the appellant would have accrued 10 years  lawful  residence
    and  that  this  was  of  material  relevance  to   the   question   of
    proportionality and that the weight attached  to  the  public  interest
    would be reduced.

66. It is further argued that the FtTJ erred in his conclusions set out  at
    paragraphs [42-44] of his decision  when  addressing  the  decision  of
    Khan.

67.  Thus, Mr Lemer challenges the FtTJ's consideration of the decision  in
    Khan.  He  submits  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  properly  address  the
    concession and that he erred in law in his assessment that  the  public
    interest should not be reduced in the light of the  favourable  outcome
    on the issues of deception.

68. The third point made on behalf of the appellant is that the FtTJ failed
    to make  any  findings  as  to  the  relevance  of  having  potentially
    satisfied the ten  years  lawful  residence  requirement  but  for  the
    unlawful curtailment of his leave.

69. In the written submissions relied upon by the respondent, there was  no
    engagement with the points made in the  original  grounds  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant. This was set out in the response by  Mr  Lemer
    at paragraph 4. The only submission made is that at paragraph 17  which
    states that in the event that the Upper Tribunal declined to find  that
    the FtTJ erred in law (in relation to the ETS issue)  and  also  agrees
    with the respondent that the  Judge  did  not  err  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's article 8 claim, the respondent accept the appellant  still
    falls be granted a period of 60 days leave to  enable  him  to  make  a
    fresh application pursuant to the respondent's own policy guidance, and
    thus invites the tribunal to dismiss the appeal but to  issue  a  short
    form of wording to give effect to the policy.

70. I shall deal with the third point raised by Mr Lemer first.  Whilst  it
    is  submitted  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the  ten  years  lawful
    residence requirement ( see appellant's written   submissions),  as  Mr
    Lemer effectively conceded in his later  written  submissions  and  his
    oral submissions, the respondent is correct to state  that at the  date
    of the application , the appellant had not accrued ten years residence.
    Nor would he be able to argue before the FtTJ  that  in  the  event  of
    having been  found  not  have  used  deception,  that  he  should  have
    succeeded on the basis of having ten years  lawful  residence  as  this
    would constitute a " new matter" and would have required the consent of
    the respondent. Furthermore, as the  respondent's  written  submissions
    point out, the appellant had not provided  evidence  that  he  met  the
    other requirements necessary, for example,  that  he  had  demonstrated
    sufficient knowledge of life in the  UK  in  accordance  with  Appendix
    KoLL.

71. That said, I am satisfied that the FtTJ erred in his assessment  as  to
    how his finding that the  appellant  had  not  used  deception  in  his
    previous application should be taken account of in the  proportionality
    assessment. I am also  satisfied  that  in  this  context  he  did  not
    properly apply the decisions in Khan and Ahsan.

72. Paragraph 37(ii)  of  Khan  stated  that  for  those  whose  leave  was
    curtailed "a further opportunity for the individuals to  obtain  leave"
    would be provided "with  the  safeguards  in  paragraph  (iii)  below".
    Paragraph (iii) confirmed  that  in  making  any  future  decision  the
    Respondent would "not hold any previous  gap  in  leave  caused  by  an
    erroneous decision in relation to ETS against  the  relevant  applicant
    and will have to take into account all the circumstances of each case".
    Further, whilst paragraph 37 records the respondent's undertakings, the
    clear ratio of both Khan and Ahsan  is  that  a  person  who  has  been
    subject to an erroneous decision in relation to an  ETS  decision  must
    not be put in a worse position than if the adverse decision -  in  this
    case a curtailment decision - had not been made.

73. Paragraph 120 of Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009  reads as follows;

         "The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on a human
         rights appeal an appellant were found not to  have  cheated,  which
         inevitably means that the section 10 decision had been  wrong,  the
         Secretary of State would  be  obliged  to  deal  with  him  or  her
         thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not  been  made,
         i.e. as if their leave to remain had not  been  invalidated.  In  a
         straightforward case, for example, she  could  and  should  make  a
         fresh grant of leave to remain equivalent to that  which  had  been
         invalidated. She could also, and other things being  equal  should,
         exercise any relevant future discretion, if necessary "outside  the
         Rules", on the basis that the appellant had in fact  had  leave  to
         remain in the relevant period notwithstanding  that  formally  that
         leave remained invalidated. (I accept that how to exercise  such  a
         discretion would not  always  be  easy,  since  it  is  not  always
         possible to reconstruct the world as it would have been;  but  that
         problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on  judicial
         review.) If it  were  clear  that  in  those  ways  the  successful
         appellant could be put in substantially the same position as if the
         section 10 decision had been  quashed,  I  can  see  no  reason  in
         principle why that should not be taken  into  account  in  deciding
         whether a human  rights  appeal  would  constitute  an  appropriate
         alternative remedy. To pick up a particular point relied on  by  Mr
         Biggs, I do not regard the fact that a person  commits  a  criminal
         offence by remaining in the UK  from  (apparently)  the  moment  of
         service of a  section  10  notice  as  constituting  a  substantial
         detriment such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to  have  the
         notice quashed, at least in circumstances where there has  been  no
         prosecution. (It is also irrelevant that  the  appellant  may  have
         suffered collateral consequences from the section  10  decision  on
         the basis that his or her  leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
         losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot  alas  cannot  be
         remedied by either kind of proceeding.)"


74. Both the decisions in Ahsan and Khan are primarily concerned  with  the
    availability and nature of a right of appeal in which the  respondent's
    allegation of proxy test taking  could  be  fairly  considered  on  the
    merits.  The decision in Ahsan involved direct challenges to  decisions
    to remove taken under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  as
    it was prior to the amendments wrought by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    The decision in Khan, was concerned with the appeals regime  introduced
    by the Immigration Act 2014, involved direct challenges to  curtailment
    decisions in respect of  which  there  were  no  rights  of  appeal.  A
    compromise was reached by the parties in Khan in which  the  appellants
    would make human rights claims  and,  if  they  were  successful  in  a
    subsequent human rights appeal on the basis that they  did  not  cheat,
    save in the absence of a new factor, the respondent would  rescind  her
    curtailment decisions and  afford  them  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    secure further leave to remain [23].

75. The Court of Appeal set out the Secretary of State's  written  position
    at [36] and [37]. Paragraph [37] reads,

         "Further, at para. 8 of the note, it was stated:


             "Nonetheless, for the avoidance of doubt,  the  SSHD  confirms
             that:


                  (i)  For those individuals whose leave was curtailed,  and
                      where that leave would still have time to run  as  at
                      the date of an FTT determination that  there  was  no
                      deception, subject to any further appeal to  the  UT,
                      the curtailment decision would be withdrawn  and  the
                      effect ... would be that leave would continue and the
                      individuals would not be disadvantaged in any  future
                      application they chose to make;


                  (ii) For those whose leave has been curtailed,  and  where
                      the leave would in any event have expired without any
                      further application being made, the  Respondent  will
                      provide a further opportunity for the individuals  to
                      obtain leave with the safeguards in  paragraph  (iii)
                      below.


             For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an in time
             application for further leave to remain which was  refused  on
             ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination that there was
             no deception would be that the refusal would be withdrawn. The
             applicant  in  question  would  still  have   an   outstanding
             application for  leave  to  remain  and  the  Respondent  will
             provide them with a reasonable opportunity to make any further
             changes to their application which would be considered on  the
             basis of  them  not  having  employed  any  deception  in  the
             obtaining of their TOEIC certificate, and they would in no way
             be disadvantaged in any future application they chose to make.


                  (iii)    In all cases, the  Respondent  confirms  that  in
                      making any future  decision  he  will  not  hold  any
                      previous  gap  in  leave  caused  by  any   erroneous
                      decision in relation  to  ETS  against  the  relevant
                      applicant, and will have to take into account all the
                      circumstances of each case.


             However, the Respondent does  not  accept  that  it  would  be
             appropriate for the Court now to bind him as to  the  approach
             that he would take towards still further applications  in  the
             future, for example by stating that each applicant has already
             accrued a  certain  period  of  lawful  leave.  The  potential
             factual  permutations  of  the  cases  that  may  need  to  be
             considered are many and various. In some cases,  for  example,
             it will be apparent that, whilst on the facts as presented  at
             the appeal an appellant's human rights claim is successful, he
             would not have been able to obtain leave  at  previous  dates.
             Again, this issue will have to be dealt with on a case by case
             basis." (Bold in original)"


76. The decisions do not set out how a human rights application  should  be
    decided in the event of a finding, such as in  this  appeal,  that  the
    respondent has not discharged the burden and  thus  deception  has  not
    been proven. However, when reading paragraph 120 of  Ahsan,  it  states
    that in the light of any judicial finding made,  the  respondent  would
    provide that person with a further opportunity to make any  application
    or to be put in the position they would have been.

77. This is consistent with the respondent's own policy which is set out at
     Educational Testing Service (ETS): casework instructions, Version  3.0
    (published 28 August 2020), page 9:

         "If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but  a  finding
         is made by the Tribunal that the appellant did not obtain the TOEIC
         certificate by deception, you will need  to  give  effect  to  that
         finding by granting sixty days leave outside the rules. This is  to
         enable the appellant to make any application they want to  make  or
         to leave the UK."


78. Whilst this is not the policy in force at the date of the decision, the
    relevant paragraph set out above was similarly set out in  the  earlier
    policy and reference is made in the respondent's written submissions.

79. Whilst the respondent submits that it was open to the FtTJ  to  dismiss
    his article 8 claim on the basis of the wording of the policy in  which
    the respondent would accept  that  the  appellant  still  falls  to  be
    granted a period of 60 days leave, I do not think that that  submission
    properly takes account of the binding authorities. Nor  do  I  consider
    that that is a proper assessment of the Article 8 claim.

80. If the binding authority were followed by the FtTJ in  the  appellant's
    case the FtTJ should have properly  taken  account  of  the  favourable
    finding on the issue of deception. The FtTJ was in error by stating  at
    [44] that he did not have evidence of  the  appellant's  position.  The
    FtTJ had earlier set out the appellant's immigration  history  and  was
    thus aware that his leave  had  been  curtailed  as  a  result  of  the
    allegation of deception being made.

81. In the light of the FtTJ's finding that the respondent  had  failed  to
    prove TOEIC fraud the FtTJ should have taken that into account  in  his
    assessment of proportionality and if he had done so would  have  likely
    to have found that it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant
    pursuant to the decision appealed against, because there  would  be  no
    public interest capable of justifying  removal  in  the  light  of  the
    respondent's duty set out in Khan,  and Ahsan at para. [120].

82. The judge's error was plainly material because it led him to attach  no
    significance when conducting the Article 8  proportionality  assessment
    to the legal significance (following Ahsan and Khan) of  the  erroneous
    decision to curtail the appellant's leave.  I  am  therefore  satisfied
    that the FtTJ fell into error in the way submitted by Mr Lemer and  set
    out in the original grounds. Accordingly, I set aside the  decision  of
    the judge.

83. Consequently, as I have found that the FtTJ's findings on the ETS issue
    were open to the FtTJ to make and there is no error of law as  asserted
    on behalf of the respondent, I have considered the appropriate  outcome
    on the facts and in the light  of  the  jurisprudence  set  out  above.
    Having done so and applying the five-step approach set out in Razgar  I
    am  satisfied  that  Article  8  is   engaged  and  that  there  is  an
    interference with the appellant's private life and that it is not in in
    accordance with the law, in the light  of  the  decision  in  Khan  and
    Ahsan. Even if I were wrong  about  that,  I  am  satisfied  that  when
    considering the issue of proportionality, that it  constituted  a  very
    compelling circumstance going directly  to  the  issue  of  the  public
    interest consideration and thus his removal would be  disproportionate.
    It therefore follows that the outcome should be to allow the appeal. It
    is clear from the reasoning set out above that, pursuant to  section  8
    of the Human Rights  Act  1998,  the  appropriate  remedy  is  for  the
    respondent to grant a short period of further leave to remain, not less
    than 60 days, together with confirmation that previous gaps will not be
    held against him. Such a  remedy  would  be  consonant  with  what  was
    envisaged as appropriate in the decisions of Ahsan and Khan  and  would
    enable the appellant to make any necessary further application.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law.

The decision is set -aside and I re-make the decision. I  allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
     Dated 19 November 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

