
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10981/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Friday 17 May 2019                |On 14 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MISS CARROL [J]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Thomas Andrew
                    & Daodu solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

            Background

    1. By a decision promulgated on 28 February 2019 ("the  Decision"),  I,
       sitting with Mr  Justice  Waksman  (sitting  as  an  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge), found an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Colvin, allowing the Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary
       of State's decision dated 21 September 2017 refusing the Appellant's
       human rights claim.  The Decision is  annexed  hereto  for  ease  of
       reference.

    2. The Secretary of State's decision was  made  in  the  context  of  a
       decision to deport the Appellant to Jamaica based on an offence  she
       committed which led to a conviction and twelve months'  sentence  in
       2002.  It is common ground that the Appellant has not committed  any
       criminal offence since.

    3. The background facts are set out at [2] and [3] of the Decision  and
       I do not need to repeat those.  As is evident  from  what  is  there
       said, the salient factors in this case are the  Appellant's  private
       life in the UK, her family life with Mr [S] and the delay since  the
       commission of the index offence.

    4. In relation to the Appellant's private life, she has been in the  UK
       since May 2000.  She  came  here  as  a  visitor  but  has  remained
       unlawfully since the expiry of that leave.  She was  aged  forty-two
       years when she arrived and is now aged sixty-one. In  addition,  she
       has some health problems.  Her family members are in  the  UK.   She
       has no family in Jamaica.

    5. The Appellant has been in a relationship with Mr [S] since 2012  and
       they live together.  Mr [S] is originally from Jamaica but came here
       in the 1960s as a young man.  He is British.   He  has  a  daughter,
       aged thirty years.  He also has a sister in the UK.  I was told that
       his other family members are in the US. He has no family in Jamaica.
        Mr [S] has a number of health problems. The Appellant is  both  his
       partner and his carer.

    6. The index offence is one of wounding.  The  Appellant's  account  is
       that it was committed in self-defence against  the  partner  of  her
       former partner.  I have no sentencing remarks in  relation  to  that
       offence given the passage of time.  However, even if  there  was  an
       element of self-defence, the jury clearly did not accept  that  this
       was a complete defence as the Appellant  was  found  guilty  of  the
       offence. It is common ground that the Respondent did  not  make  any
       decision to deport the Appellant until March 2015.   It appears that
       the Appellant had previously  applied  to  remain  on  human  rights
       grounds in 2008  which  application  was  refused,  and  the  appeal
       dismissed.  I do not have a copy of that decision, but I  understand
       it to be accepted that there was no  deportation  decision  at  that
       stage.

    LEGAL FRAMEWORK

    7. As Mr Jarvis reminded me, since the offence was  committed  as  long
       ago as 2002, this is not an automatic deportation decision under the
       UK Borders Act 2007.  It is a decision to deport made under  section
       3 Immigration Act 1971.  As Mr Jarvis submitted,  and  Mr  Plowright
       accepted, Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
       ("Section 117C") applies.  Mr Jarvis also very fairly submitted that
       I should be guided in my consideration of the human rights claim  by
       Section 117C because he said there was a slight  disconnect  between
       the terms of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in relation to  the
       Appellant's  offence  and  sentence  and  those  of  Section   117C.
       Section 117C is more generous to the Appellant and  Mr  Jarvis  said
       therefore that I should apply that  section  in  preference  to  the
       Rules.  Mr Plowright did not object.

    8. Section 117C reads as follows:

           "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals

           (1)   The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
           interest.

           (2)   The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
           the criminal.

           (3)   In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies.

           (4)   Exception 1 applies where-

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                deported.

           (5)   Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
           unduly harsh.

           (6)   In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
           interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2.

           (7)   The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
           taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
           decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
           the reason for the decision was the offence or offences for
           which the criminal has been convicted."

    9. The Appellant's sentence was one of twelve months.  As such, she can
       succeed if she meets either of the two exceptions  in  Section  117C
       (4) and (5).  Although, as  Mr  Plowright  conceded,  the  Appellant
       cannot meet the first of those exceptions because she has been  here
       unlawfully, save  for  the  first  six  months,  it  is  nonetheless
       necessary to consider whether she would meet that  exception  except
       for the lawful residence provision if I need to go  on  to  consider
       the Appellant's case on a wider assessment of  proportionality.   In
       that  regard,  although  Section  117C(6)  provides  only   for   an
       application of "very compelling circumstances" outside the Rules for
       those sentenced to over four  years,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA
       (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       [2016] EWCA Civ 662 ("NA (Pakistan)") recognised that the same  test
       must be capable of applying also to those with a sentence  of  under
       four years who cannot meet the exceptions in  order  to  render  the
       scheme compliant with Article 8 ECHR.  This is dealt with at [25] to
       [27] of the judgment as follows:

           "25.  Something has obviously gone amiss with the drafting of
           section 117C(3). In Inco Europe Ltd v First Choice
           Distribution [2000] 1 WLR 586, HL, at 592-593, Lord Nicholls
           (with whom the other members of the Appellate Committee agreed)
           explained the circumstances in which the courts in interpreting
           statutes can correct obvious drafting errors. In our view the
           lacuna in section 117C (3) is an obvious drafting error.
           Parliament must have intended medium offenders to have the same
           fall back protection as serious offenders. Mr Tam invited us so
           to rule.


           26.   In reaching this conclusion it is important to bear in
           mind that the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act is framed in such a
           way as to provide a structured basis for application of and
           compliance with Article 8, rather than to disapply it: see the
           title of Part 5A, the general scheme of the provisions in that
           Part and, in particular, section 117A(1). If section 117C barred
           medium offenders from asserting any Article 8 claim other than
           provided for in subsections (4) and (5), that would plainly be
           incompatible with Article 8 rights (either their own or
           Convention rights of individuals in their family) in some cases.
           Equally plainly, it was not Parliament's intention in enacting
           Part 5A to disapply or require violation of Article 8 in any
           case. We also place reliance on section 3(1) of the Human Rights
           Act 1998. That provision requires courts to construe legislation
           in a way which is compatible with Convention rights, if it is
           possible to do so. It is possible to do so here. In accordance
           with the guidance given by Lord Nicholls, the words which need
           to be read into section 117C (3) so as properly to reflect
           Parliament's true meaning are clear, namely the same words as
           appear in sub-section (6) and in para. 398 of the 2014 rules,
           which came into effect at the same time as part of an integrated
           and coherent code in primary legislation and the Immigration
           Rules for dealing with deportation cases.


           27.   For all these reasons we shall proceed on the basis that
           fall back protection of the kind stated in section 117C(6)
           avails both (a) serious offenders and (b) medium offenders who
           fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2. On a proper construction of
           section 117C(3), it provides that for medium offenders "the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies or unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2."


   10. The Supreme Court has recently provided guidance in relation to  the
       way in which the test of "unduly harsh" is to apply in order to meet
       the second exception in KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State
       for the Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)").   The
       Supreme Court concluded that the question  whether  the  effect  was
       unduly harsh was an assessment which had to be made based solely  on
       the impact on either the partner or child, taking no account of  the
       public interest in deportation which was already  built  in  to  the
       exception.  However, the Supreme Court drew attention  to  the  high
       level of impact required to satisfy the test as follows:

           "23.  On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems
           clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of
           "reasonableness" under section 117B (6), taking account of the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. Further
           the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It assumes
           that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level
           which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context.
           "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level. The relevant
           context is that set by section 117C (1), that is the public
           interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
           for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent.
           What it does not require in my view (and subject to the
           discussion of the cases in the next section) is a balancing of
           relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other than
           is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section itself by
           reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of
           the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the
           Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55,
           64) can it be equated with a requirement to show "very
           compelling reasons". That would be in effect to replicate the
           additional test applied by section 117C (6) with respect to
           sentences of four years or more.


           ...


           27.   Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"
           in this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J
           President and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015]
           INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15 April 2015. They
           referred to the "evaluative assessment" required of the
           tribunal:


                "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly
                harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
                undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it poses a
                considerably more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this
                context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It is the
                antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore, the
                addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                standard still higher."


           On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal held
           that the test was satisfied:


                "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation in concluding
                that it would be unduly harsh for either of the two seven
                year old British citizen children concerned to be abruptly
                uprooted from their United Kingdom life setting and
                lifestyle and exiled to this struggling, impoverished and
                plague stricken west African state. No reasonable or right
                thinking person would consider this anything less that
                cruel."


           This view was based simply on the wording of the subsection, and
           did not apparently depend on any view of the relative severity
           of the particular offence. I do not understand the conclusion on
           the facts of that case to be controversial."


   11. Notwithstanding the need to ignore the facts relating to the offence
       and relative severity of it when looking at the exception in Section
       117C (5), that passage says nothing about the way in which the  test
       outside the exceptions is to operate.  In NA (Pakistan),  the  Court
       of Appeal said this:

           "29.  In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
           (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
           117C (6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held
           is to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
           criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from
           seeking to rely on matters falling within the scope of the
           circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to
           contend that "there are very compelling circumstances, over and
           above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have
           indicated above, a foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon
           such matters, but he would need to be able to point to features
           of his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in
           paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules), or features falling
           outside the circumstances described in those Exceptions and
           those paragraphs, which made his claim based on Article 8
           especially strong.


           30.   In the case of a serious offender who could point to
           circumstances in his own case which could be said to correspond
           to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, but where
           he could only just succeed in such an argument, it would not be
           possible to describe his situation as involving very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2. One might describe that as a bare case of the kind
           described in Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could
           point to factors identified in the descriptions of Exceptions 1
           and 2 of an especially compelling kind in support of an Article
           8 claim, going well beyond what would be necessary to make out a
           bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 and 2, they
           could in principle constitute "very compelling circumstances,
           over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2", whether
           taken by themselves or in conjunction with other factors
           relevant to application of Article 8."


       This Tribunal has recently considered whether that passage continues
       to apply following the Supreme Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria)  and
       has confirmed that it does (see in particular  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly
       harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC)).

   12. The issue therefore is whether the Appellant can meet the exceptions
       in Sections 117C (4) and (5) and, if not,  whether  there  are  very
       compelling circumstances outside those exceptions which  permit  her
       to succeed.  In  considering  that  issue,  I  have  regard  to  the
       approach set out in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2016] UKSC 60 ("Hesham Ali"). Although the  judgment  in
       Hesham Ali pre-dates the introduction of Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act
       which includes, inter alia, Section 117C,  that  judgment  is  still
       helpful for what  it  has  to  say  about  the  public  interest  in
       deportation and the way in which the proportionality  assessment  in
       deportation cases should be approached, in particular  at  [50]  and
       [82] to [83] where Lords Reed and  Thomas  advocated  the  following
       approach:

           "50.  In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its task
           on the basis of the facts as it finds them to be on the evidence
           before it, and the law as established by statute and case law.
           Ultimately, it has to decide whether deportation is
           proportionate in the particular case before it, balancing the
           strength of the public interest in the deportation of the
           offender against the impact on private and family life. In doing
           so, it should give appropriate weight to Parliament's and the
           Secretary of State's assessments of the strength of the general
           public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders, as
           explained in paras 14, 37-38 and 46 above, and also consider all
           factors relevant to the specific case in question. The critical
           issue for the tribunal will generally be whether, giving due
           weight to the strength of the public interest in the deportation
           of the offender in the case before it, the article 8 claim is
           sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In general, only a claim
           which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as it was put
           in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."


           ...


           82.   I agree with the judgment of Lord Reed and in particular
           the matters he sets out at paras 37-38, 46 and 50. I add three
           paragraphs of my own simply to emphasise the importance of the
           structure of judgments of the First-tier Tribunal in decisions
           where article 8 is engaged. Judges should, after making their
           factual determinations, set out in clear and succinct terms
           their reasoning for the conclusion arrived at through balancing
           the necessary considerations in the light of the matters set out
           by Lord Reed at paras 37-38, 46 and 50. It should generally not
           be necessary to refer to any further authority in cases
           involving the deportation of foreign offenders.


           83.   One way of structuring such a judgment would be to follow
           what has become known as the "balance sheet" approach. After the
           judge has found the facts, the judge would set out each of the
           "pros" and "cons" in what has been described as a "balance
           sheet" and then set out reasoned conclusions as to whether the
           countervailing factors outweigh the importance attached to the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders."


       In other words, the issue then becomes one whether  removal,  or  in
       this case deportation, has unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
       Appellant and others affected by the decision when  the  Appellant's
       private and family life is balanced against the public interest (see
       also Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       [2017] UKSC 11 - "Agyarko").

   13. I canvassed with the representatives at the outset  of  the  hearing
       whether, when looking at the consequences and proportionality of the
       decision, I needed to take account of the slightly different context
       here which involves a deportation based on an offence committed many
       years  ago.   The  issue  for  me  though  is  whether  removal   in
       consequence of the decision breaches the  Appellant's  human  rights
       and not whether the decision is unlawful. Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that
       the lawfulness of the decision is something which may weigh  in  the
       balance when considering the public interest.   Ultimately,  though,
       as he pointed out, and I accept, although  it  might  be  said  that
       deportation has more serious consequences than  removal  because  of
       the bar to re-entry whilst there is an extant deportation order, the
       same or a very similar bar exists in  removal  cases  also  applying
       paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules.

   14. An additional point arises, though, in light of the  facts  of  this
       case as to how proportionality is to be assessed more  widely  given
       the unlawfulness of the Appellant's residence  in  the  UK.   As  Mr
       Jarvis submitted, and I accept, if  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
       exceptions in Section 117C are met, when looking at  proportionality
       more generally, I have to take into account  the  other  factors  in
       Sections 117A-D, in particular those in Section 117B which reads  as
       follows:

           "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases


           (1)   The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
           the public interest.


           (2)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (3)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-


                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (4)   Little weight should be given to-


                (a)    a private life, or


                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


           that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)   Little weight should be given to a private life
           established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
           status is precarious.


           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


                (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and


                (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                leave the United Kingdom."


   15. Finally, I do not repeat what was said in  the  Decision  about  the
       effect of the delay in taking deportation action.  That is  set  out
       at [10] to [17] of the Decision.   That  is  the  approach  which  I
       intend to take in this case in the event that it becomes relevant to
       consider this factor.







    EVIDENCE

   16. I have before me the Appellant's bundle as was before the First-tier
       Tribunal.  The pagination does not  follow  sequentially  throughout
       and therefore I refer to documents in that bundle where necessary by
       reference to the document itself.  In addition,  I  have  a  further
       witness statement from  the  Appellant  dated  21  March  2019  with
       enclosures.  I also heard oral evidence from the Appellant and  from
       Mr [S].

    The Appellant's Evidence

   17.  The Appellant has provided two witness statements, a recent one  as
       above and one dated 1 October 2018.

   18. The Appellant's statements deal with her  immigration  history,  the
       circumstances  of  her  offending,  her  and  her  partner's  family
       circumstances and medical problems.

   19. I do not need to deal with the Appellant's  immigration  history  as
       that is uncontroversial and already set out in the Decision. Dealing
       first with  the  offence,  therefore,  I  have  mentioned  that  the
       Appellant  says  that  she  committed  it  in   self-defence.    The
       circumstances are expanded upon at [6] of  her  first  statement  as
       follows:

           "6.   ... There were  however  extenuating  circumstances.   The
           alleged victim of the offence of wounding was a lover of my  ex-
           partner Eddie Edwards.  Prior to the commission of the offence I
           was previously living  with  Eddie  Edwards  whom  I  was  in  a
           relationship with. I had returned to collect my belongings  from
           my previous partner home and met the victim there.  She was very
           obstructive and locked me in the wardrobe as  I  was  trying  to
           remove my belongings.  I forced my way out of the  wardrobe  but
           she lurched at me with a table knife she was  eating  with.   In
           the process of defending myself she alleged that I  wounded  her
           when in fact, I was merely defending myself.  That by  no  means
           makes me a danger  to  other  members  of  the  community.   The
           incident and conviction are historic having taken place over  16
           years ago.  The Respondent should not now seek to  rely  on  the
           historic offence and conviction to deport  me.   Furthermore,  I
           have served my sentence.  I was not recommended for  deportation
           by  the  Crown  Court  Judge  on  conclusion  of  the   criminal
           proceedings in 2002 and I have not been involved in any  further
           offences since then."

   20. In terms of her rehabilitation, the Appellant says this:

           "11.  The offence being relied upon by the  Respondent  resulted
           in my first and only custodial sentence.  I  deeply  regret  the
           incident which took place over 16 years ago.  Since I served the
           sentence I have tried to put the incident behind me  and  by  my
           efforts and hard work I have put myself in the best position and
           have re-established myself as a good member of society.  I  have
           never since completing my sentence engaged in a fight even  when
           provoked.  Whilst in prison in 2002, I took the  opportunity  to
           improve myself by undertaking courses in  English,  Mathematics,
           IT and  Pottery.   I  have  not  reoffended.   I  am  completely
           rehabilitated.  I do not pose a risk or danger to members of the
           community.  Prior to my arrival in the  United  Kingdom  I  have
           never been involved in the  commission  of  or  convicted  of  a
           criminal offence.  I am not a  hardened  criminal.   I  disagree
           that my deportation is conducive  to  public  good  and  in  the
           public interest.  The offence was committed over  16  years  ago
           and since I  served  my  sentence,  I  have  not  exhibited  and
           continue not to exhibit any tendency to show that I am  or  will
           be a risk or danger to the community.  I  have  not  engaged  in
           fights or any activity that would lead  to  any  allegations  of
           commission of a crime against me.  I made  a  grave  mistake  by
           engaging in what I would describe as a domestic  fight  and  for
           which I had been punished by society  for  by  serving  a  short
           custodial sentence.  My presence in the United Kingdom will  not
           be detrimental to public good.  I had used  my  time  in  prison
           constructively and contributed positively to the community  when
           I  was  released  into   the   community.    I   am   completely
           rehabilitated.  I have rehabilitated myself so that I may live a
           law abiding life in society."

   21. In terms of her own family circumstances, the Appellant has a number
       of relatives in the UK, including her mother and siblings  (see  [9]
       of her first statement).  They are all British citizens.  That  they
       live in the UK and are now British citizens is confirmed by  letters
       from them in the bundle.  They confirm that the Appellant  is  close
       to them and their own families.

   22. The main relationship on which the Appellant relies however is  that
       with her partner, Mr [S].  She confirms that they have been together
       since 2012.  She says this about the relationship:

           "7.   ... My partner [O] has always supported my application  to
           remain in the United Kingdom as we both emotionally rely on each
           other and he has been a source of moral  support  and  strength.
           He exerts influence over me.  I will never get  myself  involved
           in a fight again.  I now live as part of a stable  family  unit.
           I  am  very  close  to  my  partner.   My  partner  has  medical
           conditions including advanced prostate cancer.  He  also  has  a
           condition which causes extreme pain in his legs, knees, back and
           other parts of his body.  I care for him and he also  cares  for
           me."

   23. The care which the Appellant provides to Mr [S] was the  main  focus
       of the evidence before me.  The Appellant gave  oral  evidence  that
       she assists Mr [S] to use  the  toilet  and  shower.    Due  to  his
       prostate cancer, he has to use the toilet frequently.  I do not need
       to  go  into  detail  about  the  evidence  of  the  extent  of  her
       assistance; that would be unnecessarily intrusive.   Suffice  it  to
       say that the assistance she gives is of a  highly  personal  nature.
       She also cooks for him and does the shopping.  She said  that  there
       was no other family member who could care for Mr [S] if she were not
       there.  His sister is herself in her seventies and housebound.   The
       Appellant also helps her by preparing  some  meals  and  paying  her
       bills for her.  She also takes her  to  appointments.   However,  Mr
       [S]'s sister does have a carer who comes in the mornings to help her
       wash.  Mr [S] also has an adult  daughter  with  whom  he  maintains
       contact.  However, the Appellant said that she would  be  unable  to
       assist as she works and travels internationally for her job.  Mr [S]
       has no friends as they have died.  As Mr Jarvis noted, there was  no
       witness statement from either Mr [S]'s sister or  his  daughter  and
       neither attended to give evidence.  However, the Appellant said that
       this was because she had not been asked to provide  statements  from
       them.  Mr [S]'s daughter was at work  and  could  not  attend.   His
       sister, as already noted, is housebound.

   24. When asked why Mr [S] could not return  to  Jamaica  with  her,  the
       Appellant said that this would not be possible as she did  not  have
       anywhere to live there and no family there who could help them.

   25. The Appellant also has health problems.  In her first statement, she
       says that she has "type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis and  chest  pains".
       She suffers from high cholesterol and blindness in the left  eye  as
       well as back pain.  Her second statement updates on the position  in
       this regard as follows:

           "3.   My health  has  been  deteriorating  considerably  and  my
           medical  condition  has  now  worsened.   I  recently  undertook
           surgery in relation to my heart and now  strongly  believe  that
           should I be removed from the United Kingdom my  life  expectancy
           will  be  shortened  as  I  now  have  extreme   difficulty   in
           breathing...."

   26. Annexed to her statement are a short letter from Dr  S  Kaddoura  of
       the Department of Cardiology, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital dated
       11 December 2018.  He records that the Appellant has  "a  background
       of ischaemic heart disease, myocardial infarction  and  primary  PCI
       with stenting  in  2009  and  has  cardiovascular  risk  factors  of
       hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and diabetes  mellitus".    The  other
       documents record appointments leading to  admission  in  March  2019
       which the Appellant indicated in oral evidence  was  to  replace  an
       existing stent which had worn out.

    Mr [S]'s Evidence

   27. Mr [S] has provided a witness statement dated 1  October  2018.   He
       provides the following relevant evidence in that statement:

           "5.   We have now been together for over 6  years.   Since  that
           time our relationship has developed into a very serious one.  We
           have plans to marry.  We live together as a couple and a  family
           unit. ... My family and friends all know here and love  her  and
           consider her part of our family.  I consider her to be my  other
           half and we are inseparable.

           6.    We are  emotionally  and  financially  dependent  on  each
           other.   This  dependence  however  goes  beyond  emotional   or
           financial ties as we both care for each  other.   I  financially
           support Carrol.  She is not having recourse to public funds  and
           will not do so in the future.

           7.    Should my partner the appellant be removed to Jamaica this
           would  not  be  conducive  to  her  wellbeing.   A  very  strong
           relationship of love,  bond,  affection  and  dependency  exists
           between Carrol and myself and her removal will cause  unbearable
           consequences to both of us.

           8.    The uncertainty around  Carrol's  immigration  status  has
           contributed significantly to the vulnerability of her  wellbeing
           as she feels frustrated and helpless.  We as a result  have  not
           been able to plan properly for the future.  I  am  not  able  to
           leave the United Kingdom and move to Jamaica to  live  with  her
           and continue our  relationship  there  because  I  have  medical
           conditions including prostate cancer which I will not be able to
           manage in Jamaica should I be  compelled  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom with her for Jamaica...

           9.    Carrol is an honest, gentle, caring woman and she deserves
           to stay in the United Kingdom to be with her family.  She should
           not be denied this right.  She cares for me and I also care  for
           her as she also suffers for serious medical conditions including
           type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, chest  pains,  high  Cholesterol,
           and blindness in the left eye.

           10.   My partner's deportation will  have  a  major  devastating
           effect on myself.  It will be an unthinkable battle  to  protect
           myself mentally, physically, and maintain  a  degree  of  social
           functioning."

   28.  Mr  [S]  also  gave  oral  evidence.   That  evidence  was  largely
       consistent  with  that  of  the  Appellant.   He   confirmed   their
       relationship.   He  also  confirmed  his  health  problems  as   the
       Appellant has recorded them.  His cancer had  spread  to  his  bones
       some three months previously.  He had been to the  hospital  on  the
       previous day and they were due to review him again in three  months.
       He was given medication but no other treatment.

   29. Mr [S] confirmed the care which the Appellant provides for  him  and
       that there is no-one else within the family who can  care  for  him.
       Other than his sister and daughter, his other family members live in
       the US.  He confirmed that his sister is too unwell herself to  help
       him and that his daughter works and travels the world so  could  not
       help.  He is unable to go to the toilet unaided and has to be helped
       to shower or bath. This is due to his arthritis.  Although  he  said
       that he would be able to  cook,  he  could  not  cook  anything  hot
       because he has arthritis in his hands  which  prevents  him  holding
       things.  For the same reason, he cannot shop for  himself.   He  has
       never had assistance  from  social  services.   Before  he  met  the
       Appellant, his health complaints were not as bad as they are now and
       so he did not need the assistance which he now needs.

   30. Mr [S] is now aged eighty-four years.  He was able to work part-time
       until some months ago but has had to give up due to his health.   He
       said that he did not think he could get the treatment he has here if
       he were to return to Jamaica.   He  would  not  be  able  to  afford
       treatment there.  He has been back to Jamaica since  he  left.   The
       last time he was there was in 2013 when someone he knew had died.




    Other Evidence

   31. Although there are documents in the bundle confirming the  multitude
       of health complaints from which the Appellant  and  Mr  [S]  suffer,
       there is no formal medical report in relation to  either.   A  large
       number of the documents relate only to appointments or  a  diagnosis
       at a particular point in time.  For  example,  there  are  documents
       annexed to Mr [S]'s statement which indicate that  there  were  some
       concerns about his blood pressure but, by a  letter  dated  27  June
       2018, from the Department of Cardiology at King's College  Hospital,
       it is confirmed that whilst he has some ongoing symptoms,  the  only
       treatment recommended was a referral to a diabetologist and a review
       after six months.

   32. I have already referred to the latest medical letter in relation  to
       the Appellant.  The one which I found the most useful in terms of  a
       summary of Mr [S]'s condition is from his GP dated 8 July 2015 which
       reads as follows:

           "[O] has prostate cancer which was diagnosed  in  2013.   Recent
           Bone scans (April 2015) suggest there are bony metastases and he
           has been commenced on  3  monthly  hormone  therapy  injections;
           prostap.  This medication was started in clinic dated 26th  June
           2015.  As far as I am aware he will remain on hormone  treatment
           indefinitely or until instructed otherwise  by  the  oncologist.
           If he does not  have  the  treatment  potentially  his  prostate
           cancer will metastasise further.  He is also on tamsulosin which
           helps with his urinary symptoms.

           [O] also has a chronic right sided otitis externa for  which  we
           have referred him  to  ENT.   He  has  chronic  right  arm  pain
           (radiculopathy)  which  is  related  to  the  degenerative  disc
           disease in his cervical spine.  You will  note  that  he  is  on
           naproxen for symptoms relief."

   33. Although I accept that the evidence shows that the Appellant and  Mr
       [S] are both  prescribed  a  number  of  medications,  there  is  no
       evidence before me that those cannot be obtained in Jamaica nor that
       either they would have to pay for them or that they would be  unable
       to afford them.  There are no medical reports as to the prognosis if
       they were to return to Jamaica.  There is no medical evidence as  to
       the support which Mr [S] receives from  the  Appellant  nor  whether
       that support could be obtained from other sources, particularly from
       social services.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    Section 117C

   34. For reasons which I will come to in due course, this appeal succeeds
       or fails depending whether the Appellant can meet the  exception  in
       Section 117C (5) based on her family life or otherwise  whether  the
       impact on that family life is so severe that it outweighs the public
       interest.  I will  therefore  begin  with  a  consideration  of  the
       evidence in that regard.

   35. Mr Jarvis did not contend that I  should  not  accept  the  evidence
       about the severity of Mr [S]'s condition nor  about  the  assistance
       which he requires based on any absence of supporting  evidence.   He
       accepted  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr  [S]  was
       consistent in this regard.  I also observe that, although Mr [S] was
       able to come and go from the hearing room unaided, he did  not  seek
       to exaggerate his evidence about what he could and could not do  for
       himself.  I accept that evidence in  particular  as  reflecting  the
       extent of his medical conditions and the effect on  his  ability  to
       look after himself.

   36. What that evidence shows is that Mr [S] suffers  from  a  number  of
       chronic medical  conditions  including  prostate  cancer  which  has
       spread to his bones and arthritis  which  inhibits  his  ability  to
       carry out some functions for himself.  Of particular  importance  is
       the evidence that he requires help with very personal functions such
       as going to the toilet and washing himself.  Although  I  accept  Mr
       Jarvis' evidence that Mr [S]  could  in  principle  look  to  social
       services to assist in that regard (in the  way  that  they  do,  for
       example, in relation to his sister), at his advanced age,  I  accept
       that being helped in that way by a complete stranger would impact on
       his personal dignity.

   37. I accept as did Mr Jarvis that it would be unduly harsh for  Mr  [S]
       to return to Jamaica with  the  Appellant.   The  evidence  is  that
       neither of them have family members there who could help them adjust
       to life there.  That was not challenged.   As  such,  the  Appellant
       would have to find work and find a place to live.   Given  his  need
       for regular treatment for  his  conditions,  Mr  [S]  could  not  be
       expected to return to Jamaica at that stage.  It might in due course
       be possible for him to do so once the Appellant was  settled  but  I
       accept Mr Jarvis' concession that to do so in the short  term  would
       be unduly harsh.

   38. That leaves the prospect of Mr [S] remaining in the UK  without  the
       Appellant.  I recognise that the test of what is unduly harsh  is  a
       high and exacting one.  I also accept that, following KO  (Nigeria),
       it is not open to me to take  into  account  when  considering  that
       standard to take account of the relative severity (or otherwise)  of
       the Appellant's offence, the reasons behind that  offence  nor  that
       there was a delay of some thirteen years before the Respondent  took
       deportation action.  However, although Mr [S] has family in the  UK,
       I accept the evidence which was unchallenged that his family members
       are unable to provide the sort of regular care which  he  needs.   I
       have already set out the  difficulties  of  having  social  services
       provide that care.  Although, as Mr Plowright  fairly  conceded,  in
       principle, social services could step in to provide the sort of care
       which the Appellant provides, that would, as he said, be to  replace
       a partner with a carer.  I have not set out in detail  the  evidence
       which I received about the very personal level  of  care  which  the
       Appellant has to provide  for  Mr  [S].   As  Mr  Jarvis,  accepted,
       however, to require Mr [S] to have  a  stranger  provide  that  care
       would impact on his personal dignity.  It is that coupled  with  the
       deterioration in Mr [S]'s medical condition  which  has  led  me  to
       conclude that it would be   unduly harsh for Mr [S] to remain in the
       UK without the Appellant.

   39. For that reason, the Appellant meets the exception in  Section  117C
       (5).  Her appeal succeeds on that basis.

   40. In case that conclusion is challenged, however, I go on to  consider
       the other aspects of this case.   In relation to the exception under
       Section 117C (4), Mr Plowright accepts  that  the  Appellant  cannot
       meet this in full as she has not been lawfully resident  in  the  UK
       for most of her life.  I accept that the Appellant is  socially  and
       culturally integrated in the UK.  Although she  has  not  apparently
       worked here (she is not entitled to  do  so)  and  came  here  at  a
       relatively advanced age, and although her family members and Mr  [S]
       were originally from Jamaica, they are  all  now  British  citizens.
       She regularly attends church in the UK and those who know  her  have
       provided supporting letters as to her community involvement in  that
       regard.

   41. I do not however accept that there are very significant obstacles to
       the Appellant's integration in Jamaica.  She did not  leave  Jamaica
       until she was in her forties.  I do not have any  information  about
       what she did before then, but she would be well used to the  customs
       there and I assume probably worked there.  The main obstacle to  her
       readjustment is the lack of family there and her health  conditions.
       However, she is an adult and the evidence does not show that she  is
       dependent on her family members here for her care.  Her evidence  is
       that Mr [S] is dependent on her for care (see above).  There  is  no
       evidence that the medication which she  receives  for  her  ailments
       would not be available to her in Jamaica.       Some of  her  health
       problems pre-date her arrival in the UK.

   42. For those reasons, even if the Appellant had been lawfully  resident
       in the UK for most of her life, I would not have accepted  that  she
       could meet all the criteria in Section 117C  (4).   As  it  is,  she
       cannot meet two of the three criteria.

    Very Compelling Circumstances Outside Section 117C/ the Rules

    Factors for the Appellant

   43. If the Appellant did not meet either of the  exceptions  in  Section
       117C, the effect of deportation on  Mr  [S],  in  particular,  would
       still be relevant to consideration of the impact on the  Appellant's
       family life. I accept that the Appellant has a  strong  family  life
       with Mr [S].  They are in a genuine and committed relationship.  The
       evidence about that was not challenged.  Even if I  had  found  that
       the impact of depriving Mr [S] of the  care  of  the  Appellant  was
       insufficient to meet the very high threshold in  Section  117C  (5),
       that would nonetheless be a very weighty factor in  the  Appellant's
       favour when assessing proportionality.

   44. Although I have rejected any suggestion that the obstacles which the
       Appellant would face on return to Jamaica when integrating there are
       not "very significant" it is evident that she would face problems re-
       adjusting to life there.  She has not been there since  2000.   Even
       if as I think likely, she would have worked there before  coming  to
       the UK, and would have been educated there, she has been  away  from
       the country for  a  significant  period  and  there  would  be  some
       adjustment needed. She has no family members or  friends  there  and
       whilst no doubt her family here could provide some financial support
       on return (as Mr [S] does now) I accept that, particularly given her
       age, the Appellant would find adjustment very difficult. That  is  a
       factor to which I attribute some weight.

   45. The Appellant's own medical condition also  has  to  be  taken  into
       consideration.  However,  as  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out,  it  is  not
       suggested that those health problems  are  sufficient  to  meet  the
       Article 3 ECHR threshold.  There is no evidence that  the  Appellant
       could not get treatment in Jamaica. I give that factor little weight

   46. Although I accept the evidence about the other  aspects  of  private
       life which the Appellant enjoys in the UK, such as her  relationship
       with family here and her church activities, and  I  take  that  into
       account, the evidence is limited and I was not  asked  to  hear  any
       evidence from those persons to provide more detail  (even  though  a
       number of  the  Appellant's  family  members  were  present  at  the
       hearing). I also give that factor little weight.

    Public Interest

   47. I accept that Section 117C  provides  that  deportation  of  foreign
       criminals is in  the  public  interest.   Although  the  Appellant's
       offence is historical, and I accept that she has not  committed  any
       criminal offence since 2002,  she  remains  liable  to  deportation.
       Even though she no longer  poses  a  risk,  is  remorseful  for  her
       offence and, given  the  passage  of  time  can  be  assumed  to  be
       rehabilitated, there remains a public interest in deportation.    It
       is though relevant to the public interest that  the  Appellant  does
       not pose any risk of reoffending.

   48. I remind myself of what we said in the Decision in relation  to  the
       delay in making a decision to deport.  I accept, as set out at  [17]
       of the Decision, that the delay in taking  deportation  action  can,
       when proportionality is assessed outside the Rules,  be  a  relevant
       consideration and may operate to the benefit  of  the  Appellant  by
       reducing the public interest in deportation. However, the  Appellant
       was here unlawfully and should have returned to Jamaica during  that
       period.  As Mr Jarvis put it, although  there  is  a  delay  by  the
       Respondent in taking deportation action for thirteen years, there is
       a longer delay counting against the Appellant for failing to  return
       home when she had no right  to  be  here.   I  accept  though  that,
       although the Appellant entered into the relationship with Mr [S]  at
       a time when she knew full well that she had  no  right  to  be  here
       (having lost an appeal against removal), there is no indication that
       the Respondent took any steps to remove her after  her  unsuccessful
       appeal and she may have formed  the  view  that  she  would  not  be
       removed in spite of her unlawful presence.

   49. However, it remains the case that, due to the  unlawfulness  of  the
       Appellant's presence in the UK, there is also a public  interest  in
       deportation  based  on  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
       control.  Further,  as  Mr  Jarvis  submitted,  and  I  accept,  the
       application of Section 117B means that I can give little  weight  to
       the Appellant's private and family life both of  which  were  formed
       and enjoyed here whilst she was present unlawfully.

   50. Mr Plowright submitted that it was relevant that the  Appellant  has
       been here for nineteen  years,  one  year  short  of  the  residence
       requirements in paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules.   He  accepted  that
       there is no "near miss" principle.   There  is,  though,  a  further
       reason why this cannot avail the Appellant and that is  because,  as
       Mr Jarvis  submitted,  and  I  accept,  the  fact  of  the  criminal
       conviction would prevent the Appellant benefitting from  either  the
       family life or private life provisions of the Rules.

   51. I accept that, when the combination of factors  in  the  Appellant's
       favour is balanced against the public interest, with  the  exception
       of the impact on Mr [S], none of those factors would  be  sufficient
       taken individually or cumulatively to outweigh the public  interest.
       I accept that, applying Section 117B, I can only give little  weight
       to the Appellant's family life with Mr [S].  However, that does  not
       mean that I give this no weight at all.  Although the Supreme  Court
       in Hesham Ali was not considering the effect of  Sections  117B  and
       117C, as is made clear in its judgment, whether a decision to deport
       is proportionate depends ultimately on whether, weighing the factors
       for and against an appellant, the factors in favour of an  appellant
       outweigh the public interest.  Put another way, as the Supreme Court
       said in Agyarko, the ultimate question  is  whether  the  impact  of
       removal (or in this case deportation) is unjustifiably harsh.

   52. Taking into account what I say about the severity of the  impact  of
       deportation of the Appellant on Mr [S] and weighing in  the  balance
       also the length of time since  the  offending  in  this  case  which
       reduces the public interest to some (limited) extent in deportation,
       I am satisfied that the impact of  the  Appellant's  deportation  is
       unjustifiably harsh.    The Appellant would therefore  also  succeed
       if her claim needed to be considered more  widely.   As  it  is,  my
       primary conclusion is that she succeeds on the basis that one of the
       exceptions in Section 117C is met.



      DECISION
            The Appellant's appeal is allowed  on  the  basis  that  Section
117C (5) is met.
       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 22 May 2019
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith





                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10981/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 19 February 2019                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
            MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MISS CARROL [J]
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Youssefian, Counsel instructed by Thomas Andrew
                    & Daodu solicitors


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

            Background

     1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department.  For ease of reference, we refer below to  the  parties
        as they were in the First-tier Tribunal albeit that  the  Secretary
        of State for the Home Department is technically  the  Appellant  in
        this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a  decision
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 19 November 2018
        ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
        Respondent's  decision  dated  21  September  2017   refusing   the
        Appellant's human rights claim in the  context  of  a  decision  to
        deport the Appellant to Jamaica.

     2. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor in May 2000, aged  forty-
        two years, and was granted leave as a visitor until November  2000.
        She did not depart when her leave expired.  She applied  to  remain
        as a student nurse in June 2004 which application  was  refused  in
        June 2008.  On 2 July 2008, the Appellant was served with notice of
        liability to removal as  an  overstayer.   She  submitted  a  human
        rights application which was refused in July 2008  and  her  appeal
        was dismissed in October 2008.  On 3 September 2002, the  Appellant
        was convicted of an offence of wounding and  was  sentenced  to  12
        months imprisonment.  The Respondent served her with a  deportation
        decision in March 2015 and her human rights claim  was  refused  in
        May 2015.

     3. The Appellant has been in a relationship with a British citizen, Mr
        [OS], since 2012 and they live together.  Both the Appellant and Mr
        [S] have various medical conditions.  Mr  [S]  is  originally  from
        Jamaica and may be part of the "Windrush" generation,  having  come
        to the UK in 1959/60 in his twenties.  He has returned  to  Jamaica
        in 2004 for a funeral and in 2014 to stay with a friend.  He has  a
        brother in Jamaica.  He has a daughter aged thirty years who  lives
        in the UK and with whom he has frequent  contact.  The  Appellant's
        immediate family are also in the UK.   She does not apparently have
        family members in Jamaica.  In spite of Mr [S]'s  age  and  medical
        conditions, he continues to work part-time in the UK.

     4.  The  Decision  allowing  the  appeal  is  based  in  part  on  the
        Appellant's family and private life circumstances but in large part
        on the Respondent's delay in taking any action to deport or  remove
        her and the impact of that delay on the public interest.   We  will
        come to how the Judge reasoned her assessment below.

     5. The Respondent challenges the Decision on three grounds.  First, he
        says that the Judge should not have given any or as much weight  as
        she did to the delay factor given the Appellant's unlawful presence
        in the UK.  He points to the case of Xu, R (on the application  of)
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department (IJR) [2014] UKUT  375
        (IAC), itself referring to the Supreme Court judgment  in  Patel  v
        Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72:  the
        Respondent is entitled to expect those  in  the  UK  unlawfully  to
        leave and is not obliged to remove an individual.  In  relation  to
        the relative weight to be given to delay, he  also  points  to  the
        Tribunal's decision of RLP (BAH revisited  -  expeditious  justice)
        Jamaica [2017] UKUT 00330 (IAC) which he says post-dates the  Court
        of Appeal judgment in MN-T (Colombia) v Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 893 on which the  Judge  relies  at
        [36] of the Decision.

     6. Second, the Respondent says that the Judge was not entitled to give
        weight or not  as  much  weight  as  she  did  to  the  Appellant's
        rehabilitation.  He refers to the case of Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 557 which  reviewed
        the  authorities  in  relation  to  the  weight  to  be  given   to
        rehabilitation and pointed to the fact that this is only one  facet
        of the public interest in deportation.

     7. Third,  he  says  that,  although,  given  Mr  [S]'s  age,  medical
        conditions and family ties it could be accepted that  it  would  be
        unduly harsh for him to relocate to Jamaica, the  Judge  failed  to
        make clear findings whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  him  to
        remain without the Appellant.

     8. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Lambert on 12 December 2018  in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
        relevant:

           "... [3]    Paragraphs 2-3 of the grounds merely repeat argument
           put forward at the hearing as to the significance  in  terms  of
           delay of service of an IS151A on the Appellant and the fact that
           she became ARE in 2008.


           [4]   The arguable ground in relation to the issue of  delay  is
           as to the judge's reliance on MN-T (Colombia)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
           893, in which a 5 year delay in  commencing  deportation  action
           was held to make a 'critical difference' and  to  constitute  an
           exceptional circumstance weighing in favour  of  the  Appellant.
           The Respondent points to a subsequent decision of the UT in  RLP
           (BAH revisited - expeditious justice) Jamaica [2017] UKUT  00330
           which stated that 'even egregious and unjustified delay  on  the
           part of the Secretary of State is unlikely to tip the balance in
           the Appellant's favour'.  While it is by  no  means  clear  that
           this decision of the UT is capable of directly over riding  that
           of the Court of Appeal, it is arguable that the Judge's  failure
           to consider RLP at all constitutes a possibly material error  of
           law.


           [5]   It is also arguable in the light  of  case  law  cited  at
           paragraph 6 of the grounds that  the  judge  wrongly  attributed
           weight to the period of rehabilitation.


           [6]    The  ground  contending  failure  to  consider   and   to
           articulate what the unduly harsh consequences on the Appellant's
           partner would be were he to remain in the United Kingdom without
           her is less arguable.  The judge at paragraph 38 refers to  this
           84 year old man's treatment for advanced  prostate  cancer,  the
           fact that the Appellant is his main support and  carer  and  his
           belief that her deportation  would  have  a  'major  devastating
           effect' on him.


           [7]   There is therefore an arguable error of law  disclosed  by
           the application."

     9. The matter comes  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  Decision
        contains a material error of law and if we so find, to re-make  the
        decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  do  so.



      Decision and Reasons


    10. We begin with the Respondent's second ground as we  can  take  this
        very shortly.  The Appellant was convicted of an offence  in  2002.
        She has committed no further offences in the  sixteen  years  since
        then.  That was undoubtedly a factor which the Judge  was  entitled
        to take into  account.   It  is  clearly  relevant  to  the  public
        interest in relation to the protection of the  public  against  the
        risk from criminals.  The absence of offending will tend to  reduce
        the public interest in the balance.  We do not  read  Olarewaju  as
        saying anything to the contrary.  The  reference  at  [26]  of  the
        judgment to a factor which cannot without more ever be regarded  as
        amounting to very compelling circumstances is to the age  at  which
        Mr Olarewaju committed his offences which  would  have  been  taken
        into account in the length of sentence.  True it is that the  Court
        of Appeal refers to rehabilitation as only one facet of the  public
        interest and we do not doubt that  taken  alone  it  could  not  be
        sufficient to amount to a  very  compelling  circumstance  but  the
        passage of time since the offending is a relevant  factor  and  the
        Judge was entitled so to conclude at [34] of the Decision.

    11. However, we consider the Respondent's first ground to be  stronger.
        The Judge refers at [32] to the Court of Appeal's judgment in  MN-T
        (Colombia) and what that has to say  about  delay.   We  accept  Mr
        Youssefian's point about whether what is said in  the  guidance  in
        RLP can be taken into account given that this part of the  headnote
        may not be included in the decision as a whole.  In any event,  the
        judgment in MN-T  (Colombia)  clearly  takes  precedence  over  the
        Tribunal's decision which post-dates it.   The  Court  of  Appeal's
        judgment was not apparently  cited  to  the  Tribunal  and  is  not
        therefore considered.

    12. However, there is a further reason why the Judge may have erred  in
        taking into account the judgment in MN-T (Colombia) and that is its
        factual context.  The appellant in that case had arrived in the  UK
        in 1977 aged nine years.  She was, by the  time  of  the  Court  of
        Appeal's  judgment  aged  forty-eight  years.   Moreover,  she  was
        granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  September  1980  and  had
        therefore been in the UK lawfully until a deportation decision  was
        made against her in July 2008, nine years after the index  offence.
        Thereafter, the Respondent  took  no  action  to  deport  her.  The
        appellant applied for further leave  to  remain  over  three  years
        after her appeal was dismissed.  Reliance was placed on the lack of
        offending since the index offence (by then  about  thirteen  years)
        and the Respondent's delay in deporting her since her  unsuccessful
        appeal some three years earlier. It was  her  appeal  against  that
        refusal which formed the basis of the appeal before  the  Court  of
        Appeal.  We accept that the focus of the delay was  a  period  when
        the appellant had no leave to remain in the UK,  having  been  made
        subject to a deportation order.  However,  the  Court  of  Appeal's
        conclusion that the delay in that case made a "critical difference"
        has to be  read  in  the  context  of  the  overall  facts  and  in
        particular what is said at [29] of the judgment that the  appellant
        had lived in the UK for most of her  life  and  had  satisfied  the
        requirements  of  exception  1   of   Section   117C   Nationality,
        Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("section  117C")  many  years
        earlier.  The appellant had also come to  the  UK  as  a  child,  a
        matter which the Court of Appeal also considered  relevant  by  its
        citation of Maslov  v  Austria  [2009]  INLR  47  at  [31]  of  the
        judgment.  Her age when she came to the UK is said at [33]  of  the
        judgment to be "significant".

    13. Mr Youssefian relies on what is said at [35]  of  the  judgment  as
        follows:

           "I agree that rehabilitation alone would not suffice to  justify
           the Upper Tribunal's decision in this case.  If it had not  been
           for the long delay by the Secretary of State in taking action to
           deport, in my view there would be no  question  of  saying  that
           "very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           Exceptions 1 and 2"  outweighed  the  high  public  interest  in
           deportation.   But  that  lengthy   delay   makes   a   critical
           difference.  That lengthy delay is an exceptional  circumstance.
           It has led  to  the  claimant  substantially  strengthening  her
           family  and  private  life  here.  Also,  it  has  led  to   her
           rehabilitation  and  to  her  demonstrating  the  fact  of   her
           rehabilitation by her industrious life over the last  13  years.
           This is one of those cases which  is  on  the  borderline.   The
           Upper Tribunal might have decided  either  way.   The  Court  of
           Appeal would not have reversed the Upper Tribunal's decision  if
           the Upper Tribunal had decided that because of the  high  public
           importance the claimant must be deported."


                                                              [our emphasis]


    14. We accept that delay  may  remain  relevant  to  where  the  public
        interest balance is struck even in a case where the  person  to  be
        deported has been  here  unlawfully  throughout.   However,  it  is
        unhelpful to pick out words from  an  assessment  in  one  case  as
        justifying an assessment in a  different  factual  context  without
        taking into account the relevant factors which are  different.   We
        recognise that the different factors between this case and that  in
        MN-T (Colombia) in some respects favour the Appellant  rather  than
        undermining  her  case.   For  example,  the  offending   in   MN-T
        (Colombia) was far greater.  The period between the offence and the
        deportation decision was also shorter and in MN-T  (Colombia)  what
        was relied upon was  the  period  after  the  deportation  decision
        rather than before it.  However, the period that the  appellant  in
        MN-T (Colombia) had spent in the UK, her age when she  arrived  and
        that she had lawful residence  for  a  long  period  prior  to  the
        offending are all factors which favoured the appellant in that case
        which do not apply here.

    15. That brings us  on  to  the  effect  of  the  Appellant's  unlawful
        residence and whether  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
        Respondent's delay also in removing her to justify  the  conclusion
        that there are very compelling circumstances.  This  brings  in  to
        the equation a point made by Mr Lindsay which he accepted  was  not
        one of the grounds pleaded but which he said was obvious  and  that
        is the failure to have regard to Section 117B.   That  is  relevant
        not only to the weight which can be given  to  family  and  private
        life developed whilst a person is  here  unlawfully  but  also  the
        separate public interest in removal of those here  unlawfully.   It
        is that latter factor in particular  which  we  consider  that  the
        Judge has failed to take into account which is relevant  to  ground
        one concerning the weight given  to  the  delay  in  particular  in
        removal  (as  distinct  to  the   separate   public   interest   in
        deportation).

    16. We note in this regard what is said at [35] of the  Decision  about
        the Appellant's immigration history.   We  accept  Mr  Youssefian's
        point that the Judge did not have to keep repeating the point there
        made about her poor immigration history.  There is recognition also
        in that paragraph that the  Appellant  should  have  gone  back  to
        Jamaica (although the Judge perhaps does not give sufficient weight
        to the fact that she should have done so when her leave expired and
        not simply when served with a removal  notice).   Contrary  to  the
        views of Judge Lambert, however, we consider  that  the  Judge  has
        erred in giving weight to the Respondent's failure  to  remove  the
        Appellant at [36] of the Decision.  We recognise that  the  context
        of the Supreme Court's judgment in Patel  is  different  from  this
        case (relating to whether there is an obligation to give a  removal
        decision) and  that  the  case  of  Xu  also  concerns  a  slightly
        different issue  whether  those  in  the  "legacy"  programme  were
        entitled to leave to remain based  on  Home  Office  delays.   That
        latter decision does however make  clear  that  the  Respondent  is
        entitled to expect those here unlawfully to leave and that there is
        no obligation to remove within any particular period.

    17. We accept of course that this is not to say that delay in effecting
        removal can never be a relevant factor.  Mr Youssefian referred  us
        for example to  [52]  of  the  judgment  in  Agyarko  and  Ikuga  v
        Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  11  in
        support of his  submission  that  protracted  delay  can  still  be
        relevant if, during that period, family life is strengthened.  That
        does no more than state one  of  the  principles  derived  from  EB
        (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL
        41.  However, when analysing the difference which the delay made in
        this case, we consider the Judge to have erred in placing  reliance
        on MN-T (Colombia) without having regard to the other factors there
        which strengthened that appellant's case and failing to  take  into
        account  the  separate  public  interest  in  the  maintenance   of
        effective  immigration  control  when   considering   whether   the
        Appellant should have left the UK  whilst  here  unlawfully  rather
        than waiting to be removed.

    18. There is a further reason which leads us to find that the Judge has
        erred in her Decision and that is the manner in which  she  reached
        her conclusion.  This is based on an extension of the  Respondent's
        third ground.

    19. Whilst the third ground as pleaded is confined to whether the Judge
        made adequate findings in relation to the  unduly  harsh  test,  we
        permitted Mr Lindsay to extend his submissions to an argument  that
        the Judge had not applied that test in the way in which the Supreme
        Court now says that this should  be  assessed  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The
        hearing of this appeal pre-dates that judgment and it is  therefore
        unsurprising that the Judge was not taken to it.  Although judgment
        was handed down shortly before the Decision was dated, we  take  no
        point about the Judge's failure to refer to it.  She may  not  have
        recognised the significance.  Mr Lindsay  also  accepted  that  the
        Respondent could have referred to it in his grounds but did not  do
        so.  Again, though, he submitted that this was probably due to  the
        person drafting the grounds having  been  unfamiliar  with  a  test
        which had  only  recently  been  changed  by  the  Supreme  Court's
        judgment.

    20. Mr Lindsay accepted that the Judge was entitled to adopt a "balance
        sheet" approach.  That is the approach  advocated  by  the  Supreme
        Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
        [2016] UKSC 60.  Hesham Ali pre-dates Section 117C and that section
        is therefore not there considered by  the  Supreme  Court,  but  we
        accept as did Mr Lindsay that the approach continues to apply  when
        looking at whether there are compelling circumstances  outside  the
        exceptions laid down in Section 117C.

    21. However, as a twelve months' sentence case, the Judge first had  to
        consider whether the Appellant meets either of the  exceptions  set
        out in Section 117C which she sets out at [19] of the Decision.  We
        do not criticise her for not dealing with  exception  1  concerning
        the Appellant's private life.  It was  abundantly  clear  on  these
        facts that the Appellant could not succeed on this basis, not least
        because she had not been in the UK lawfully.  It might though  have
        been helpful for the purposes of  the  overall  assessment  if  the
        Judge had reached findings whether the Appellant was integrated  in
        the UK and whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to  her
        integration in Jamaica.

    22. However, the position in relation to exception 2 is relevant as the
        Judge implicitly recognises  in  her  conclusion  at  [40]  of  the
        Decision.  That paragraph of the  Decision  bears  setting  out  in
        full:

           "When taking account of all these factors  I  have  reached  the
           view that the public interest  in  deporting  the  appellant  is
           substantially less than it might be in  other  cases.   This  is
           because the 'critical difference' has been the significant delay
           in taking the deportation action which has allowed the appellant
           to substantially strengthen her family life and demonstrate  her
           rehabilitation from an  offence  committed  16  years  ago.   In
           addition there is the impact on the appellant's partner  of  her
           deportation which I consider -  particularly  in  light  of  his
           serious medical condition and at the age of 84 - would be unduly
           harsh as to fall within s.117C (5) of the 2002 Act.  In summary,
           I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  sufficient  factors  in  the
           appellant's favour to amount to "very compelling  circumstances"
           that outweigh the public interest  and  render  her  deportation
           disproportionate."


    23. As we point out above, the Judge referred to Section 117C  at  [19]
        of the Decision.  She accepts at [25] that the issue is whether the
        effect of deportation on the Appellant's partner is "unduly harsh".
         However, in the section which follows dealing with  the  case-law,
        the  Judge  is  unfortunately  led  into  referring  to  cases,  in
        particular MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
        [2016] EWCA Civ 450 which suggest that the harshness of the  effect
        is to be balanced against other factors such as the immigration and
        criminal history.  Thereafter, the  Judge  moves  to  the  "balance
        sheet approach" to which we have already referred.   In  so  doing,
        and by considering the impact of the deportation on the Appellant's
        partner in the overall context of the other factors  including  the
        delay on which the Judge has placed "critical weight", there is  no
        reflection of the degree of interference which is required in order
        to reach the relevant  threshold.   It  is  not  clear  to  us,  by
        reference to the case-law to which the Judge had regard at [25]  to
        [29] of the Decision, whether the Judge at  [40]  of  the  Decision
        intended to conclude that exception 2 was met  because  deportation
        of the Appellant would be unduly harsh for  her  partner  when  the
        factors to which she had regard were  balanced  into  the  equation
        (which is contrary to the approach laid down  in  KO  (Uganda))  or
        whether the conclusion at [40] of the Decision is  intended  to  be
        that the consequences of deportation would be  unjustifiably  harsh
        following the carrying out of  a  balance  sheet  approach  outside
        consideration of the exceptions.  If the latter, that would need to
        take  into  account  the  Judge's  conclusion  (if  that  were  her
        conclusion) that exception 2 could not be  met.   It  follows,  for
        those reasons, that we accept that the Respondent's ground three is
        made out for failure to make clear findings on the  "unduly  harsh"
        issue.

    24. Having been alerted to the point, and particularly in light of  the
        reference to MM (Uganda), Mr Youssefian was obliged to accept  that
        the Judge may have erred in this regard.  He said however  that  if
        there were an error, it made no difference because of  the  factors
        set out at [38] of the Decision.  We  accept  that  some  of  those
        factors may point in the direction of being able  to  meet  a  high
        threshold particularly in  relation  to  consideration  of  Mr  [S]
        leaving the UK with the Appellant.  However, other than  the  final
        sentence at [38] of the Decision, there is no clear finding why  it
        would be unduly harsh for him to remain here without  her.   It  is
        also impossible to read [38] when looked at in the context  of  the
        rest of that section, including the "critical difference"  made  by
        the delay as anything other  than  the  performance  of  a  balance
        between the public interest and the level  of  interference.   That
        may become relevant if the degree of interference  is  insufficient
        to meet the threshold in  exception  2  but  was  not  the  correct
        approach for determining whether exception 2 was met.   Ultimately,
        the result may be the same given the test outside the Rules whether
        deportation  would  lead  to  "unjustifiably  harsh"  consequences.
        However, we are unable to say with confidence that the outcome will
        be the same (for  the  reason  we  give  above)  and  we  therefore
        consider the error to be material.

    25. For those reasons, we are satisfied that the Decision  contains  an
        error of law and we set it aside.  There is  little  dispute  about
        the facts of this case and we therefore consider it appropriate  to
        re-make the decision in this Tribunal.  We are however reluctant to
        do so without hearing evidence for ourselves.   We  have  therefore
        given directions  for  the  filing  of  further  evidence  (if  the
        Appellant wishes to do so) and a further oral hearing at  which  we
        will be able to hear from the Appellant and Mr [S].




    DECISION
    We are satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law. We
    set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  promulgated
    on 19 November 2018.  I make the following directions for the re-making
    of the decision:








    DIRECTIONS


    1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated,  the
       Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent
       any further evidence on which she relies.


    2. The appeal will be relisted for a hearing before Judge Smith to  re-
       make the decision on the first available date  after  28  days  from
       when this decision is promulgated.  Time estimate  day.




       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 27 February 2019
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith




       Signed               [pic]
       Mr Justice Waksman


