
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10023/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|conference on 01 June 2021           |On 28 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involved sensitive issues relating  to  his  partner's  background  and
health. I find that it is appropriate to  continue  the  order.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S. Winter, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 23 May  2019  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge S.P.J. Buchanan ("the judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 05 December  2019. In  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 November 2020 the Upper Tribunal found that there was
    no error of law in the judge's findings relating to the  allegation  of
    deception regarding a TOEIC certificate. Those findings were preserved.
    However,  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  judge's  findings
    relating to Article 8 were flawed. That aspect of the decision was  set
    aside and is now being remade by the Upper Tribunal.

3.   Due to the continued need to take precautions to prevent the spread  of
    Covid 19 the hearing took place in a court room at Field House with the
    legal representatives and witnesses appearing by video conference,  and
    with the facility for others to attend remotely. I was  satisfied  that
    this was consistent with the open justice principle, that  the  parties
    could make their submissions clearly, and that the case could be  heard
    fairly by this mode of hearing.

Decision and reasons

Article 8(1) - right to family life

4.   The appellant entered  the  UK  in  December  2010  and  remained  here
    lawfully until 30 September 2014 when it seems that he was served  with
    a notice curtailing his existing leave and a  decision  to  remove  him
    because  he  had  submitted  a  fraudulent   TOEIC   English   language
    certificate with a previous application. The appellant left the  UK  on
    26 November 2014 and travelled to the Republic of Ireland where he made
    a protection claim. It is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  claim  was
    refused because he was returned to the UK on 07 September 2015. He  has
    remained in the UK without leave since then.

5.   Although there is little evidence of  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
    private life in the UK, it is reasonable to infer  that  it  is  likely
    that he has made friends and other connections  here  during  the  nine
    year period he has lived in the UK. The case  turns  primarily  on  his
    relationship with his partner 'A', who he met in 2017. She is a British
    citizen who was born in the  UK  and  has  lived  here  all  her  life.
    Although the appellant is 26 years younger than  his  partner  and  has
    shown himself willing to use deception to remain in the UK, it  is  not
    disputed that the relationship is genuine and subsisting. In  light  of
    these connections I am satisfied that removal  in  consequence  of  the
    decision is likely to interfere with the appellant's right  to  private
    and family life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the  operation
    of Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

6.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to private  and
    family life. However, it is not an absolute right and can be interfered
    with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law  that  the
    state has a right to control immigration and that rules  governing  the
    entry and residence of people into the country are "in accordance  with
    the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference with the  right
    to private or family life must be for a legitimate reason and should be
    reasonable and proportionate.

7.   Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 applies where a court or tribunal is  required
    to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts
    breaches a person's right to private or family life and as a result  is
    unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In  considering  the  'public
    interest question' a court or tribunal must have regard to  the  issues
    outlined in section 117B in non-deportation cases. The 'public interest
    question' means the question of whether interference  with  a  person's
    right to respect for their private or family life  is  justified  under
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

8.   It is in the  public  interest  to  maintain  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control. The requirements of the immigration rules and  the
    statutory provisions are said to reflect the respondent's  position  as
    to where a fair balance is struck for the purpose of Article 8  of  the
    European Convention.

9.   The appellant does not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.
    He does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B on  grounds  of  10
    years lawful residence. The appellant does not meet  the  20-year  long
    residence requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). It is  not
    argued, nor arguable, that there are 'very  significant  obstacles'  to
    the appellant being able to integrate in Pakistan for  the  purpose  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). He was born and brought  up  in  Pakistan  and
    continues to have linguistic, cultural and family ties there. He is  an
    educated man. There is no evidence to suggest  that  he  would  not  be
    capable of finding work in Pakistan. He is  still  in  regular  contact
    with close family members there.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal judge was satisfied  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proving that the appellant used deception in a
    previous application by submitting a fraudulent TOEIC certificate.  For
    this reason the respondent refused the human rights claim as a  partner
    under the 'Suitability' requirements of S-LTR4.1 of Appendix FM of  the
    immigration rules.

11.  In conducting an overall balancing exercise under Article 8(2)  I  have
    considered  what  weight  can  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining an effective system of immigration control.  The  appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the immigration rules and significant
    weight must be given to the fact that the appellant has been  found  to
    have used deception in an application  for  leave  to  remain  and  has
    remained in the UK for many years without leave.

12.  The evidence relating to the strength of his private life in the UK  is
    weak. Section 117B states that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established at a time when a person's  immigration  status
    is precarious or unlawful. The appellant speaks English  and  would  be
    able to work and be financially independent if had had permission to do
    so. Those factors  are  neutral  in  the  balancing  exercise.  If  the
    appellant's position was the only consideration in this appeal I  would
    have no hesitation in finding that it would be proportionate to  remove
    him from the UK.

13.  However, in my assessment the  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    partner is compelling. Mr Kotas made clear that there  was  no  factual
    dispute about her history or  the  content  of  the  psychological  and
    medical evidence produced in support of the appeal. In  light  of  this
    concession it is not necessary to set out her  history  in  any  detail
    because both parties are aware of the content of the evidence  although
    it is necessary to summarise her situation in  general  terms  for  the
    purpose of explaining this decision.

14.  'A' is a 60 year old woman who was born and brought up in the  UK.  She
    only speaks English. She told me that she has never left  the  UK.  She
    suffered physical abuse from her step-mother as a child and  was  taken
    into care when she was six years old. She remained in  care  until  she
    was 16 years old. She met her former husband shortly after she came out
    of care. He was at least 10 years older than her. She was  married  for
    39 years during which time she had eight children. She suffered serious
    domestic abuse, including rape, throughout her marriage. She  was  only
    able to extricate herself from the marriage after being diagnosed  with
    cancer in 2012. Even then, she could only do so by moving  out  of  the
    area to a women's refuge in another town and by  severing  all  contact
    with her children so that her husband could not find out where she  was
    living.

15.   Dr  Fraser  Morrison  conducted  a  psychological  assessment,   which
    included a review of her medical records.  He  said  that  the  records
    showed that 'A' has long standing  mental  health  problems,  including
    three suicide attempts.  His  own  assessment  was  that  she  met  the
    criteria  for  Major  Depressive  Disorder  and  was   suffering   from
    significant symptoms of depression. In his opinion she  was  likely  to
    suffer a significant deterioration in her mental health if her  husband
    was returned to Pakistan because he appeared to  'occupy  a  supportive
    role within her life'. He went on to say that given the nature  of  her
    mental health difficulties he considered that 'it is unlikely that  she
    would be able to function in Pakistan'. Although he did not  go  on  to
    explain this opinion in more  detail,  it  is  clear  from  an  overall
    reading of his conclusions that  any  destabilisation  of  the  fragile
    equilibrium she has found since  leaving  her  husband,  including  the
    possibility of having to relocate to Pakistan, was  likely  to  have  a
    significant impact on her mental health.

16.  Dr Morrison's report contains a summary of 'A's' medical records. As  a
    result of prolonged exposure to violence and abuse since childhood  'A'
    is a particularly  vulnerable  person  who  has  required  considerable
    support from health professionals as well  as  the  police.  She  found
    further support and solace when she became a born again Christian.  The
    medical records show management of depressive symptoms over many  years
    and notes to indicate that she was also  presenting  with  symptoms  of
    Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). At one  point  they  also  noted
    that she reported being the subject of an online dating scam.  By  2017
    her GP noted that she was in a relationship with the  appellant,  which
    seemed to be supportive. However, her  doctor  expressed  some  concern
    that she was vulnerable to the relationship being used for  immigration
    purposes.

17.  At the hearing both witnesses were consistent in  saying  that  'A'  is
    now tentatively rebuilding a relationship with her adult children.  She
    explained that they did  not  know  about  her  relationship  with  the
    appellant yet because reconciliation was still at an early  stage.  'A'
    told me that her health has been improving  since  the  appellant  came
    into her life. She is cancer free. She still has  some  counselling  as
    and when she wants it, which is around once a month. 'A' said that  she
    has had some contact with the appellant's parents over  the  telephone.
    She said that she would like to visit Pakistan to meet the  appellant's
    family but did not think that she would cope  with  living  there.  Her
    roots are in the UK and she had just begun  the  tentative  process  of
    reconciliation with her children. At some point she would  be  able  to
    tell them about  her  marriage  to  the  appellant.  She  is  a  devout
    Christian who goes to church every Sunday. She heard  that  there  were
    Christian churches in Pakistan but did not know 'how easy it  would  be
    for a white woman there'. 'A' told me that the appellant was her  world
    and that she would be devastated if he was removed to Pakistan.

18.  'A' entered into the relationship with the appellant in  the  knowledge
    that he did not have leave to remain and that his position  in  the  UK
    was precarious. It is trite law that the European Convention  does  not
    oblige a state to respect the  preferred  country  of  residence  of  a
    couple. There would be no breach of the  appellant's  right  to  family
    life if there are no insurmountable obstacles to the couple  continuing
    their life together outside the UK.

19.  In practical terms the appellant could return to  Pakistan,  a  country
    he is familiar with, find work and accommodation, and could support his
    partner. He has close family members there who may be able  to  provide
    some practical support even if his evidence is  that  his  parents  are
    retired and have limited means.

20.  Mr Kotas said that he had been minded to concede that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to 'A' living in Pakistan, but he did  not  do
    so because (i) the evidence given at the hearing indicated  that  'A's'
    health had improved; and (ii) she gave evidence to say that she got  on
    well with the appellant's family. Nevertheless,  his  submission  still
    only went so far as to suggest that the  case  for  'A'  relocating  to
    Pakistan was borderline. He emphasised  the  fact  that  the  deception
    relating to the TOEIC certificate was a weighty  factor  and  that  the
    statutory framework contained in section  117B  indicated  that  little
    weight  should  be  given  to  his  private  and  family  life  in  the
    circumstances. He emphasised that compelling circumstances  would  need
    to be shown to outweigh the public interest considerations. I note that
    he did not go so far as to ask the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeal
    when he closed his case for the respondent.

21.  I have already outlined why I would have no  hesitation  in  dismissing
    this appeal  if  I  was  only  considering  the  appellant's  position.
    However, I conclude that 'A's' position is  very  compelling  and  that
    this  outweighs  what  would  otherwise  be  weighty  public   interest
    considerations relating to  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control.
    After a lifetime of abuse 'A' has been able to  rebuild  her  life  and
    find some semblance of safety and  stability  with  the  assistance  of
    professional services. According  to  her  evidence,  the  support  she
    receives from the appellant has also played an important part  in  this
    recovery. The evidence shows that the fragile  stability  that  she  is
    beginning to find for the first time  in  her  life  is  likely  to  be
    extremely important to her health and wellbeing. It is allowing her  to
    begin the slow process of reconciliation with her children.

22.  'A' is a white British woman who has no experience of life  in  another
    country. Although English is spoken in Pakistan,  she  does  not  speak
    Urdu or any other local languages which are likely to  be  more  widely
    used. She would be a Christian in a  Muslim  country  where  there  are
    still problems with elements of religious extremism. She would also  be
    a woman in  a  country  that  still  has  widespread  and  deep  seated
    patriarchal attitudes towards women.  Whilst  some  medical  and  other
    support services are likely to be available in Pakistan, she  would  be
    removed from an established support network in the UK that has  created
    the conditions for some improvement in  her  health  in  recent  years.
    Given the compelling circumstances surrounding the  fracturing  of  her
    relationship with her children as a result of  severe  domestic  abuse,
    relocating to Pakistan would also hinder  the  progress  that  she  has
    recently  made  towards  reconciliation.  She  also   has   established
    connections and ongoing  support  through  her  regular  attendance  at
    church in the UK, which would be lost if she relocated to Pakistan.

23.  It is not disputed that the couple are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. Although the appellant does appear to play  a  supportive
    role in 'A's' life, and the couple have  been  in  a  relationship  for
    several years, it is also the case that he  has  been  willing  to  use
    deception to remain in the UK in the past. Like her doctor, I have some
    concerns about 'A's' vulnerability to exploitation and cannot  entirely
    discount the possibility that the appellant may have mixed motives  for
    being in this relationship. The appellant should be under  no  illusion
    that the only basis for allowing  him  to  remain  in  the  UK  is  his
    continued support for 'A'. But for his relationship with 'A', it  would
    be proportionate to remove him to Pakistan.

24.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied that 'A's' circumstances are  sufficiently
    compelling to show that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  the
    couple continuing their family life outside the UK and that the  impact
    of his removal would be equally damaging to 'A' if she had to remain in
    the UK without his support. The decision to refuse leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds did not strike a fair balance on the facts of this
    case.

25.  For these reasons I conclude that removal of  the  appellant  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds



Signed   M. Canavan        Date 17 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email



ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10023/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|conference on 12 August 2020 (V)     |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves [sensitive issues relating to  his  partner's  background  and
health]. I find that it is appropriate to continue  the  order.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S. Winter, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 23 May  2019  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge S.P.J. Buchanan ("the judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 05 December 2019.

3.    The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on   the
    following grounds:

    (i)  The judge erred in his assessment of the expert evidence of  Chris
         Stanbury in relation to the allegation of deception in  an  English
         language test. He failed to recognise that references to  the  case
         of 'MA' throughout the report were to the reported decision of  the
         Upper Tribunal in MA (ETS-TOEIC  testing)  [2016]  UKUT  00450,  in
         which Mr Stanbury gave evidence. The decision was also referred  to
         in the appellant's skeleton argument and a copy of the decision was
         included in the appellant's bundle if it was  not  clear  from  the
         face of the report.

    (ii)     The judge failed to give adequate weight to the  psychological
         report relating to the appellant's wife and erred in  his  approach
         to the  assessment  of  'insurmountable  obstacles'  test  for  the
         purpose of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix A and the broader  Article  8
         balancing exercise.

Decision and reasons

Assessment of fraud allegation

4.   In most cases it is open to a judge to  place  less  weight  on  expert
    evidence when the underlying evidence referred to in a  report  is  not
    before the Tribunal to put the expert's opinion in context. However, in
    this case nothing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  appears  to
    indicate that the  judge  placed  Mr  Stanbury's  references  to  other
    materials, or his expertise to comment, in proper context.

5.   Although Mr Stanbury's report did not provide  the  full  citation  for
    the reported case in which he gave oral evidence, it was referred to in
    the appellant's skeleton argument and a copy of the decision was before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The decision in MA did not purport to make any
    factually binding findings about the way in which voice recordings were
    processed by a college conducting fraud or  by  ETS.  However,  it  was
    relevant that the Upper Tribunal acknowledged the  expertise  of  those
    who prepared expert evidence in that case. The Upper Tribunal also  set
    out the expert evidence given by Mr Stanbury in detail. Given that this
    was a reported decision of the Upper Tribunal it was at least necessary
    for the First-tier Tribunal to acknowledge and give appropriate  weight
    to the fact that Mr Stanbury was an expert who had given oral  evidence
    to the Upper Tribunal on a previous occasion and to take  into  account
    the fact that his evidence was deemed helpful to the assessment in that
    case: see (13) MA.

6.   Mr Stanbury accepted that  his  opinion  involved  a  "high  degree  of
    speculation" albeit in the context of his many years of  experience  in
    IT [5.2.1]. He concluded that it was possible that voice files of tests
    could be inadvertently or deliberately substituted by another recording
    at a particular test centre before the file was sent to ETS in the  USA
    [5.2.33]. He discussed the unlikely  possibility  of  candidates  being
    able to manipulate the test result from the computer at the test centre
    and/or the possibility of 'mirror rooms' being used by the test  centre
    with reference to other expert evidence that was produced in  the  case
    of  MA.  However,  his  discussion  took  place  on  a  high  level  of
    generality.  Both  scenarios  only  go  to  the  possibility  of  fraud
    occurring rather than suggesting circumstances where it was less likely
    to occur.

7.   In the summary of his conclusions Mr Stanbury noted that it was  agreed
    that the voice recording provided to ETS was  not  the  appellant.  The
    appellant asserted that he took the test himself, but the  Home  Office
    alleged that he used a proxy  test  taker.  In  his  opinion  the  test
    recording was either never made because the test centre was  falsifying
    all tests. If it was made, it might have been  either  deliberately  or
    accidentally lost or  confused  with  another  recording  by  the  test
    centre. It was at least possible that this could have been done without
    the appellant's knowledge or involvement [5.7.2].

8.   Mr Stanbury said that he had investigated nine cases and  now  believed
    that it was more likely that there was a 'mirror' system used by  proxy
    test takers and that all the candidates, genuine or otherwise, may have
    had their input ignored and substituted for that of proxy test  takers.
    This view was reached independently by ETS assessors [5.7.3].  However,
    this observation was made in response to a tiny  sample  of  cases  and
    without reference to any particular college. The extent  of  ETS  fraud
    may have been more  serious  in  some  colleges  than  others.  Without
    knowing what the extent of  the  fraud  might  have  been  in  Darwin's
    College, Mr Stanbury's general observation could not be given all  that
    much weight when assessing whether this appellant was  likely  to  have
    cheated in the test or was an unwitting casualty of  generalised  fraud
    at that particular test centre.

9.   Mr Stanbury's  overarching  conclusion  was  that  there  were  several
    alternative scenarios that might explain why the  voice  recording  was
    not of the appellant. He made clear that he  could  not  say  with  any
    certainty whether a candidate did or did not cheat by using a proxy but
    it was at least possible that a candidates voice files could have  been
    swapped with or without their knowledge [5.7.5].

10.  Even if the judge had placed Mr Stanbury's evidence in  proper  context
    of the reported decision in MA, at highest, his opinion was that it was
    possible that a voice recording could be substituted at the test centre
    before being sent to ETS. The fact  that  it  could  be  done  with  an
    applicant's knowledge and consent would clearly  go  to  the  issue  of
    fraud and was a matter that would support the  respondent's  case.  The
    fact that it might have been done by a  test  centre  as  a  matter  of
    course, and that some genuine candidates might  have  had  their  tests
    substituted without their knowledge as part of a widespread fraud,  was
    only a possibility. It might go to support an appellant's evidence, but
    the issue could not be assessed on Mr Stanbury's evidence alone without
    further evidence about the nature and extent of any potential fraud  at
    Darwin's  College.  Whether  the  substitution  was   done   with   the
    appellant's knowledge or not was a  matter  for  the  judge  to  assess
    having  considered  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  which  included   his
    assessment of the appellant's evidence in response to the allegation.

11.  The judge found that he could place  little  weight  on  Mr  Stanbury's
    conclusions because his comments at [5.7.2] appeared to contradict  his
    conclusion at [5.7.5]. My reading of Mr Stanbury's report at [5.7.2] is
    that he only suggested that there was  a  possibility  that  the  voice
    recording could have been substituted  by  the  test  provider,  either
    deliberately or accidentally, without the appellant's knowledge.  I  do
    not read what he says as suggesting that the appellant  did  not  as  a
    matter of fact have knowledge of  the  substitution.  This  is  broadly
    consistent with his overarching conclusion at [5.7.5] that he could not
    say in any individual case whether a substitution  was  done  with  the
    candidate's knowledge or not.

12.  Although the judge's reasons for giving little  weight  to  the  expert
    evidence failed to put Mr Stanbury's references to the case  of  MA  in
    proper context, and may have read more into his conclusion  at  [5.7.2]
    than was intended by the expert,  even  if  the  judge  had  taken  his
    evidence at its highest, it only explained in technical  terms  why  Mr
    Stanbury considered that there was a possibility  that  a  substitution
    could take place before the  voice  recording  was  sent  to  ETS.  The
    overall possibility that a substitution of voice recordings could  take
    place was obvious given the scale of ETS fraud.

13.  I conclude that even if there was some error of approach by  the  judge
    it was still necessary for  him  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant had provided an  innocent  explanation  in  response  to  the
    allegation, which was a matter that Mr Stanbury  could  not  and  quite
    rightly did not comment on. That  was  entirely  within  the  realm  of
    judicial assessment. For this reason, I find that any error of approach
    relating to the expert report was not material.

14.  It is trite law that the production of a Home  Office  'Look  up  tool'
    print out combined with the 'generic evidence' of Rebecca Collings  and
    Peter Millington is sufficient to meet the  initial  evidential  burden
    raising the possibility of fraud. In  this  case,  the  appellant  also
    accepted that the voice recording held by ETS was not  him.  There  was
    also a document to show that all 27 tests taken at Darwin's College  on
    17 April 2012 were deemed 'invalid' i.e. suggesting widespread  concern
    about fraud.

15.  The judge considered the appellant's evidence  in  response,  including
    his witness statement, oral evidence and the expert report, which  only
    suggested a rather remote possibility that  voice  recording  could  be
    substituted without a person's knowledge. The judge's assessment of the
    appellant as a witness was a key aspect of the decision. The judge gave
    a series of detailed reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence  in
    response.  He  concluded  that  there  were  inconsistencies   in   the
    appellant's evidence about how he booked the test. Other aspects of his
    account of how he chose and travelled  to  the  test  centre  with  the
    assistance of a friend lacked detail. The judge also found  that  there
    was a material discrepancy in the appellant's evidence as to  how  many
    people sat the test. In assessing whether the appellant's evidence  was
    credible, he also  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    admitted that he did not disclose the fact that he left the UK in  2014
    and claimed asylum  in  Ireland  before  being  removed  by  the  Irish
    authorities in the application form.

16.  The grounds make three points in relation to these findings,  but  none
    disclose a material error of law in the  judge's  approach.  The  first
    point asserts that the judge mischaracterised the appellant's  evidence
    relating to the arrangements made to book the test. The wording in  the
    appellant's witness statement at [8] was vague. Even if he did not mean
    that he booked the test by telephone, it was open to the judge to  find
    that it was implausible that the appellant would go to the  trouble  of
    travelling to Manchester to book the test  directly  when  on  his  own
    evidence he had been given the telephone number for  the  test  centre.
    The second point makes a general assertion that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider alternative explanations as to why the  appellant  might  book
    the test in person but  does not refer to any evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal that would have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    judge's findings. The third point makes a general  assertion  that  the
    judge failed to consider how the passage of time  might  have  affected
    the accuracy of the appellant's evidence  without  particularising  the
    point any further. One of the key  inconsistencies  identified  by  the
    judge related to the discrepancy in the number of people  who  sat  the
    test. Although it is obvious that a person's  memory  might  fade  over
    time,  this  key  discrepancy  was  between  evidence  given   in   the
    appellant's witness statement, signed on 30 August 2019, and  his  oral
    evidence, given only eight weeks later on 04 November 2019.  Given  the
    marked difference between the  appellant's  initial  recollection  that
    there were only 4-5 people in the room and his oral evidence that there
    were 35-40 people  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  place  weight  on
    inconsistencies in recent accounts.

17.  Having rejected the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  explanation  in
    response to the allegations I conclude that it was open to the judge to
    find  that  the  respondent's  evidence  showed  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities that the test result was likely to have been obtained  by
    fraud and was not the result of an innocent error on the  part  of  the
    test centre as suggested  by  the  appellant  .  For  these  reasons  I
    conclude that the judge's findings relating to the TOEIC issue did  not
    involve the making of a material error of law.

Article 8 assessment

18.  The  grounds  relating  to  the  judge's  approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment have greater force. I am satisfied that the judge  erred  in
    his assessment  of  the  diagnosis  given  by  a  qualified  Consultant
    Clinical  Psychologist,  mischaracterised  aspects  of   the   expert's
    opinion, failed to take into account relevant matters arising from  the
    report, and his partners long  history  of  neglect  and  abuse.  These
    errors of law undermine the findings  relating  to  the  assessment  of
    whether there were 'insurmountable obstacles' to the couple  continuing
    their family life in Pakistan for the  purpose  of  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules and the overall balancing exercise
    under Article 8 of the European Convention.

19.  At [70] the judge stated that Dr Morrison found  that  the  appellant's
    partner presented with symptoms of depression that met  the  diagnostic
    criteria for Major Depressive Episode. At section 5 of  the  report  Dr
    Morrison stated that she  "presented  with  a  number  of  symptoms  of
    depression including depressed mood, lack of  interest  in  pleasurable
    activities, suicidal ideation and poor concentration." At section 7 the
    report states that Dr  Morrison  completed  the  Hospital  Anxiety  and
    Depression Scale (HADS), which "is used as a source of  information  in
    the diagnostic process." Dr Morrison said that HADS has been researched
    extensively and proven as a reliable and valid measure of  symptoms  of
    anxiety and depression.  Dr  Morrison  recorded  that  the  appellant's
    partner scored 12/21 for depression.  A  score  of  over  11  indicated
    "significant symptoms".

20.  The judge did not  acknowledge  Dr  Morrison's  expertise  to  diagnose
    Major Depressive Disorder. Instead, at [71] he appeared  to  embark  on
    his own assessment of the diagnosis with reference  to  the  diagnostic
    criteria appended to  the  report.  He  noted  that  according  to  the
    diagnostic criteria for Major Depressive Episode at least five or  more
    symptoms are needed. He appeared to reject the  doctor's  diagnosis  on
    the basis that five or more symptoms had not been listed in the body of
    the report. Given that Dr Morrison is  an  expert  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist  who  is  clearly  qualified  to  make  a  mental   health
    diagnosis,  and  confirmed  that  he  had  carried  out  the   relevant
    diagnostic tests, it was not open to the  judge  to  suggest  that  the
    diagnosis was not reliable by reference to his own observations of  the
    diagnostic criteria. There is no evidence to suggest that the judge has
    any medical expertise. Dr Morrison's reference to a number of  symptoms
    "including" three examples did not  suggest  an  exhaustive  list.  The
    doctor made clear that he had conducted the relevant diagnostic  tests.
    In the circumstances, the fact that Dr Morrison  had  not  listed  five
    diagnostic criteria in the report was insufficient reason to reject the
    diagnosis of a qualified medical professional.

21.   There  is  some  force  in  the  submission  that   the   judge   also
    mischaracterised Dr Morrison's opinion that the appellant's partner was
    unlikely to be able to function in Pakistan to some extent  and  failed
    to place his opinion in the context  of  other  relevant  evidence.  Dr
    Morrison gave his opinion in the context of her long-term mental health
    difficulties arising  from  childhood  neglect,  abuse  and  subsequent
    domestic violence. This was consistent with the  long  summary  of  her
    medical notes appended to the report, which showed that the appellant's
    partner had found a measure of stability in her life  having  left  her
    husband after many years of domestic abuse.  Dr  Morrison  noted  that,
    even with the support and treatment available to her  in  the  UK,  the
    appellant's partner was recorded as having attempted to commit  suicide
    on three occasions. It is in light of this background that Dr  Morrison
    concluded that separation from the appellant was likely to  lead  to  a
    "significant deterioration in her mental health" if he was  removed  to
    Pakistan. Although Dr Morrison could  have  provided  a  more  detailed
    explanation as to why he considered it unlikely  that  the  appellant's
    partner would be able to "function in Pakistan", and it was open to the
    judge to observe that he did not indicate any particular  knowledge  of
    the conditions she might face, when his opinion is read in context with
    his other comments and  the  background  relating  to  past  abuse,  it
    becomes clear that Dr Morrison considered that any  destabilisation  of
    the fragile equilibrium she had established, whether by separation from
    the appellant or relocating to Pakistan, would lead  to  a  significant
    deterioration in her mental health and an increased  risk  of  suicidal
    ideation.

22.  Mr McVeety acknowledged that he was on weaker  ground  in  relation  to
    the Article 8 points. He shared concerns that the  judge  purported  to
    express greater knowledge than the medical expert, but  submitted  that
    any error of approach was not material. I disagree. The diagnosis of  a
    qualified Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist  should  have  been  given
    appropriate weight and  Dr  Morrison's  opinion  about  the  effect  of
    separation or relocation to Pakistan should have  been  put  in  proper
    context. The issue of suicide risk was not  considered  at  all.  These
    failures were sufficiently serious to affect the evaluative  assessment
    of whether there were likely to be 'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  the
    couple continuing  their  family  life  in  Pakistan  and  the  overall
    balancing exercise under Article 8.

23.  For the reasons given above I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error of law in  relation  to
    the allegation of dishonesty arising from the TOEIC  certificate.  That
    finding shall stand. However, the First-tier Tribunal decision involved
    the making of errors of law in assessing the evidence relating  to  the
    vulnerability of the appellant's  partner  which  were  material  to  a
    proper assessment of Article 8. That aspect  of  the  decision  is  set
    aside and will need to be remade.

24.  I find that this case is not suitable for remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal given that some of the findings have been preserved  and  only
    part of the decision needs to be remade. It is  appropriate  to  remake
    the decision in the Upper Tribunal. My preliminary  view  is  that  the
    decision could be remake without  an  oral  hearing  based  on  written
    submissions and any up to date evidence.  The  genuine  nature  of  the
    relationship is not in  dispute.  The  case  hinges  on  an  evaluative
    assessment of whether there would be 'insurmountable obstacles' to  the
    couple continuing their family life in Pakistan  and/or  where  a  fair
    balance should be struck for the purpose of Article 8.

DIRECTIONS

25.  The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note:  No  1
    2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19  Pandemic  when  complying  with
    these directions.

26.  If there is an  objection  to  the  decision  being  remade  without  a
    hearing, the parties shall  file  written  reasons  for  any  objection
    within 7 days of the date this decision is sent and making  submissions
    on the mode for remaking i.e. remote or face to face hearing.

27.  If there is no  objection  to  the  decision  being  remade  without  a
    hearing, the following directions apply.

      i) The appellant shall file on the Upper Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
         respondent an electronic copy of any further evidence  relied  upon
         and written submissions relating to remaking within 21 days of  the
         date this decision is sent.

     ii) The respondent shall file written submissions within 21 days of the
         date the appellant files his written submissions.

    iii) The appellant shall file any response within 7 days of the date the
         respondent files her written submissions.

     iv) The Upper Tribunal  will  consider  the  written  submissions,  and
         subject to any submissions made about the mode  of  hearing,  shall
         then decide the case without a hearing.

28.  The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
    reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.

29.  Documents and submissions filed in response to  this  decision  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number as the subject line.  Attachments must not  exceed  15
    MB.

30.  Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
    original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use
    of any address apparent from the service of this decision.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law

The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal



Signed   M. Canavan        Date 10 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

