
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/10047/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 June 2017                            |On 07 July 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MS PREMALATHA PANCHADCHARAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by David Benson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 29 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge
    Aujla allowed the appeal of the  respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)
    against the decision of the appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State
    or SSHD) dated 21 October 2015 concluding that  the  claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 352A of the Immigration  Rules.   At
    paragraphs 29 - 31 the judge said:

         "29. On the limited information available  to  me  from  the  court
             file, I find that the sponsor was granted refugee status as  a
             sur place asylum seeker.  Whilst the Appellant did not satisfy
             the requirements of paragraph 352A of the  Immigration  Rules,
             it is clear that she comes within the policy  referred  to  by
             counsel in his advice to the, part of which are set out about.


         30.  If remittal to the Respondent for her to reconsider the matter
             in the light of the policy  was  open  to  me,  I  would  have
             remitted the matter back the Respondent.  However, as I can no
             longer remit the matter and must either allow  the  appeal  on
             dismiss it, I have no option but to allow the  appeal  in  the
             circumstances.  The Appellant clearly comes within the  policy
             as the spouse of a sur place refugee and she should be treated
             in the same way as a pre-flight spouse, in accordance with the
             policy.


         31.  I allow the Appellant's appeal and direct  the  Respondent  to
             grant the Appellant leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
             the spouse of a refugee".


2.   The  SSHD's  written  grounds  of  appeal  cited  firstly  that  having
    concluded that the claimant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
    352A(2) the judge should have gone no further and dismissed the  appeal
    as the judge incorrectly relied  on  the  claimant's  Counsel's  advice
    regarding the existence of a Home Office policy equating the  situation
    of post-flight spouses  with  pre-flight  spouses  where  the  spouse's
    refugee claim was based on a sur place claim.  The SSHD's grounds  also
    took issue with the judge's directions that  the  claimant  be  granted
    leave to remain as the spouse of a refugee.

3.   I can be brief in deciding this appeal because Mr Nath  confirmed  that
    the policy referred to  by  the  judge  did  exist  and  was  correctly
    described by Counsel.  Mr Nath also  accepted  that  where  a  claimant
    benefits from such a policy it cannot be in accordance with the law  or
    proportionate within the meaning of Article  8  of  the  ECHR  for  the
    respondent to refuse a person's application simply because she did  not
    fall under paragraph 352A(2).

4.   Accordingly the challenge to the judge's decision to allow  the  appeal
    falls away.  The claimant had raised Article 8 as a ground  of  appeal.
    Although he did not state so expressly, the only possible basis for the
    judge allowing the appeal was on Article 8 grounds.  Not only was  that
    the only possible ground it was entirely correct of the judge to  allow
    the appeal on that basis.

5.   That is not to say the judge's  decision  is  entirely  free  of  legal
    error.  As both parties agreed, his direction that the SSHD  grant  the
    claimant leave to remain was ultra vires.  That error, however, was not
    material to the judge's decision to allow the appeal and even if it had
    been, I would not have regarded it as an  error  justifying  a  setting
    aside of FtT Judge Aujla's decision.

6.   For the above reasons:

    The FtT did not err in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


    The subsequent direction that the SSHD grant leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a refugee is to be treated as a nullity.  The grant of  leave
    to a person who is a beneficiary of a Home Office policy  is  a  matter
    for the SSHD.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 6 July 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal







