
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10202/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2020                     |On 18 August 2020                    |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                         CHARMAINE DELGADA O'CONNOR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a visitor on 20 March 2002 and has not  had  any  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom since 20 September 2002. She made a human-
    rights claim on 20 December 2018, which was refused on 28 May 2019. She
    appealed against this decision and her appeal was dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Anthony in a decision promulgated  on  9  September
    2019.

2.   She appealed  against  this  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson granted her permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  10
    February 2020.

3.   An error of law hearing was  set  down  for  23  April  2020  but  this
    hearing was vacated due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan made further directions on 22 April 2020, having  come  to  the
    view that it would be appropriate to determine whether there  had  been
    an error of law on the papers.

4.   The Appellant's solicitors filed  a  response  to  the  directions  and
    further submissions prepared by counsel on 30 April 2020. He  submitted
    that it would be appropriate for there to be an oral hearing as opposed
    to a paper hearing. He also submitted that "there may well be questions
    of factual clarification, and indeed questions as to the weight  to  be
    given to the alleged legal errors in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which would require oral amplification and indeed debate".

5.   However, on 5 May 2020 the Respondent wrote to the Upper  Tribunal  and
    the  Appellant's  solicitors  stating  that  she   only   opposed   the
    Appellant's appeal in part and accepted that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony's decision contained a material  error  of  law  on  a  limited
    basis. She also stated that a re-hearing would be appropriate.

6.   I have taken into account the submissions made by counsel  in  relation
    to the need for an oral error of law hearing.  However, these were made
    before the acceptance by the Respondent that there were material errors
    of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony's decision. It was also the
    case that both parties accepted that the errors of law necessitated the
    appeal  being  re-heard.  Therefore,  and  in   accordance   with   the
    overwhelming objectives of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, as amended, I have decided that it was in the interests  of
    justice to have a paper error of  law  hearing.   The  parties  are  in
    agreement as to the error made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony  in
    relation to whether the Appellant's was entitled  to  leave  to  remain
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human  rights   grounds.   As   a
    consequence, setting the matter down for a remote error of law  hearing
    would merely delay the proper  resolution  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
    which should be in the First-tier Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   In the Appellant's grounds of appeal,  counsel  submitted  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Anthony had not considered  whether  the  Appellant
    could succeed outside the Immigration Rules  in  any  particularity  or
    detail.  The Respondent did not attempt to contend that  this  was  not
    the case.

8.   Her findings of fact in paragraphs 7 to 24 of her decision  dealt  with
    the Appellant's entitlement to leave under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules. She then purported to  address  the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  in
    paragraphs 25 to 30 of her decision.  When doing so she applied section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act but failed to refer
    to a significant amount  of  evidence  relating  to  her  work  in  the
    community and with her church to the benefit  of  individuals  and  the
    community as a whole in any detail. In addition, her only brief mention
    of this evidence was in paragraph 20 of  her  decision,  when  she  was
    considering whether the Appellant  was  entitled  to  leave  to  remain
    within the Immigration Rules.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony also  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant case law relating to the weight to be given to an  Appellant's
    contribution to a local community, such as UE (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975 and Thakrar (Cart JR;
    Art 8: value to the community) [2018] UKUT 00336 (IAC).

10.  Therefore, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony's  decision
    did contain material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Anthony or Simpson.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 6 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
