
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10440/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing Under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |On 17th November 2020                |
|On 13th November 2020                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                               RHEMA NGOH AKUM
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who was born on 4th May  2002.
       He applied for entry clearance to come to the UK on 14th January 2019
       as the adopted child of the sponsor, his aunt,  Mrs  CA  Georgestone,
       who is a British citizen settled  in  the  UK.  The  application  was
       refused on 3rd May 2019  with  reference  to  paragraph  297  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  His appeal against this decision was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas in a determination promulgated on the
       23rd March 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on
       27th July 2020 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law because it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal
       failed to determine the appeal with reference to paragraph  297(1)(f)
       of the Immigration Rules and failed to take  into  account  with  any
       particularity the evidence contained in the appellant's bundle; there
       was a failure to consider what status  the  certificate  of  adoption
       accorded the appellant in Cameroon and there was a  failure  to  give
       weight to the fact that the appellant was a child when he applied for
       entry clearance.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object  set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and   justly
       directions were sent out to the parties on 15th September  2020  from
       Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor  setting  out  that  it  was  his
       provisional view that the decision of Judge Lucas should be set aside
       and the appeal remitted for a complete rehearing  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal with directions  that  the  respondent  should  provide
       written submissions within 10 days relating to this preliminary  view
       and if she disagreed with that view set out written submission as  to
       why the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was sustainable.  If  the
       respondent argued the decision was  sustainable  provision  was  also
       made for the appellant to respond.  Nothing  was  received  from  the
       respondent in response  to  these  directions,  but  a  response  was
       received from the appellant dated 8th October 2020  noting  that  the
       respondent had made no submissions and urging that the proposed cause
       of allowing the appeal should proceed without further delay.

    4. I must determine whether it is in the interests of justice to  decide
       this matter without a hearing, and if so then determine  whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal has erred in law. The appellant does  not  object
       to the matter being determined on the papers and the  respondent  has
       made no submissions despite being given the opportunity to do  so.  I
       give weight to the fact that serious human rights issues relating  to
       a young adult are  raised  in  this  appeal,  but  find  that  it  is
       appropriate that this stage of the proceedings is dealt with  on  the
       papers as I find that this is an issue which can fairly and justly be
       decided in this way.

       Conclusions - Error of Law

    5. I note that the respondent has failed to comply with directions but I
       am satisfied that they were sent to the Presenting Officers  Unit  on
       15th September 2020 and that the opportunity was therefore  given  to
       the respondent to make any submissions that she wished in relation to
       this appeal, and thus that it is fair and just for me to proceed.

    6. I find, in keeping with the provisional findings  of  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Norton-Taylor, that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
       apply the substantial  evidence  before  him  from  the  sponsor  and
       Cameroonian sources and make relevant  findings  of  fact  so  as  to
       conclude  whether  the  appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  of
       paragraph 297(1)(f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  thus  whether
       ultimately the appellant  qualified  for  entry  in  accordance  with
       Article 8 ECHR.

    7. The appellant is referred to as female at many points in the decision
       when he is in fact male, which I find is indicative of  the  lack  of
       care taken  in  preparing  this  decision  and  engagement  with  the
       evidence. There is insufficient reasoning as to why DNA was  required
       to  show  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  aunt,
       particularly as there is no finding on the credibility of the sponsor
       who attended the First-tier Tribunal and who gave evidence. Likewise,
       it is unclear why the certificate of adoption was not  accepted  just
       because other documents from the  proceedings  were  not  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. A key question  under  paragraph  297(1)(f)  was
       whether  there  were  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
       considerations which made the appellant's exclusion  undesirable.  In
       these circumstances it was irrational of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
       have placed little or no weight on material  about  violence  in  the
       Cameroon on the basis that it was not a  protection  appeal  and  the
       appellant was not in any different position to any other 18 year old.
       The First-tier Tribunal also fails to  make  it  clear  that  it  was
       understood that when considering whether the appellant could meet the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules, a matter  highly  relevant  to
       the public interest in the Article 8 ECHR  proportionality  exercise,
       it was his age at the time of application which was relevant.

    8. As I find that the appellant has not had a  proper  determination  of
       the facts of his case in relation to the legal framework in any shape
       or form, and thus that there will be extensive fact finding,  I  find
       that it is proper  to  remit  this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for a complete re-hearing with no findings preserved.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  and
       all of the findings.

    3. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking before any
       First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Lucas.


Signed    Fiona Lindsley   13th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

