
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/10113/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th of December 2017                     |On 11th of January 2018       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                  MS WATHSALA MADHUSHANI MIHINDUKULASOORIYA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 14th of February 1989.
      She appeals against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Khan sitting at Taylor House on 8th of December 2016 who dismissed the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 23rd  of
      October 2015. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's  application
      for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the
      Human Rights Convention.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student  on  23rd  of
      September 2010 and remained with leave as a student until 28th of July
      2014. She next made a further application for leave  to  remain  as  a
      student which was refused by the Respondent. On 13th of July 2015  her
      previous solicitors sent a  letter  to  the  Respondent  enclosing  an
      application for further leave to remain. It was the  refusal  of  that
      application which gave rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was that she had established a private and family
      life in the United Kingdom and was in a relationship  with  a  partner
      who was a British citizen. At the time  of  the  application  she  was
      expecting her first child. She had spent over four years in the United
      Kingdom and would not be able to uproot  herself  and  return  to  Sri
      Lanka. Her partner had never visited the country and was accustomed to
      the British way of life. The Appellant had built up social ties in the
      United Kingdom and had  a  close  and  caring  relationship  with  her
      partner. The  Appellant  argued  that  she  met  the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules for limited leave to remain as  a
      partner under section R-LTRP  and  she  met  all  of  the  eligibility
      requirements under section E-LTRP.


   4. The Appellant began her relationship with her partner in July 2014 and
      they began living together in February 2015. She made her  application
      for leave some five months later. The Appellant gave birth to a son on
      10th of September 2015 who at the date of the hearing before the First-
      tier was not quite 15 months old.


   5. The Respondent refused the application on  suitability  grounds  under
      section S-LTR.1.6 stating that the Appellant's presence in the  United
      Kingdom was not conducive to the  public  good  because  her  conduct,
      character, associations or other reasons made it undesirable to  allow
      her to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  was  because  when  the
      Appellant had made an application for leave to remain as a student  on
      5th of April 2012 she had submitted a false TOEIC certificate from the
      Educational Testing Service (ETS). They had a record of  her  speaking
      test and using voice verification software ETS  were  able  to  detect
      when a single person was undertaking multiple tests. They checked  the
      Appellant's test and confirmed that there was significant evidence  to
      conclude  that  the  Appellant's  English  language  certificate   was
      fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker. The Respondent
      was satisfied that the certificate was fraudulently obtained and  that
      the Appellant had used deception in her application of  5th  of  April
      2012.


   6. The Respondent considered whether the  Appellant's  application  could
      succeed under section EX.1 of Appendix FM but the fact that she failed
      to satisfy the suitability requirements outweighed that exception.  By
      the time of the decision the Appellant had given birth  and  this  was
      considered by the Respondent. The Appellant did not have sole parental
      responsibility for her child and again she could not meet section EX.1
      for the same reasons as before.


 7. The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision  arguing  that
    her certificate was genuine and there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.



The Decision at First Instance

   8. At [17] of his determination the Judge held that the  first  issue  to
      decide was whether the  Appellant  had  genuinely  taken  the  English
      language test herself or whether she had arranged for a proxy to  take
      it for her. After reviewing the evidence at [18] the  Judge  concluded
      at [19] that there was a reasonable suspicion that the  Appellant  did
      not take her English language test herself. The Appellant's attempt at
      a plausible and innocent explanation was sadly lacking  in  supporting
      evidence. She was unable to remember the date of the tests  and  could
      not remember how much was paid in respect of the  fee.  She  said  she
      took the 2nd test a few days after the first test  but  there  was  in
      fact a gap of one month between the two tests. The Appellant had  very
      little to say about taking the tests and the Judge found her  evidence
      on the point to be very short on detail.


   9. The Judge concluded at [20]  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
      suitability requirements under Appendix FM. The Appellant did not meet
      the definition of a partner under section GEN.1.2.  (iv)  because  she
      had not been living together with her partner in a  relationship  akin
      to marriage  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
      application. Even if she was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with her partner who was a British citizen she could not avail herself
      of the exception under section EX.1 (b) because of her failure to meet
      the suitability requirements.


  10. The Appellant could not demonstrate insurmountable obstacles to family
      life with the partner  continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      Appellant had lived in Sri Lanka for most of her life and she had only
      been in the United Kingdom since 2010 when she had permission to  come
      here as a student knowing that she would be expected to return to  her
      own country once those studies had  been  completed.  It  would  be  a
      matter of choice for the British citizen partner whether he would wish
      to accompany the Appellant to Sri Lanka but there was no  evidence  of
      very significant difficulties  to  be  faced  by  either  of  them  in
      continuing their family life together in Sri Lanka.


  11. In relation to the child the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements
      for limited leave to remain as a parent because she fell  for  refusal
      under the suitability requirements. She did  not  have  sole  parental
      responsibility. Whilst she  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with a child who was under the age of 18, in  the  United
      Kingdom and was a British citizen, it would  not  be  unreasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom given the  child's  young
      age. The Judge considered at [23] whether there  were  any  compelling
      circumstances which existed outside the  Immigration  Rules  regarding
      either the Appellant's private or her family life which might  warrant
      a grant of leave to remain but found there  was  nothing  which  could
      show this.


  12. At [26] the Judge considered section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009 but found that the welfare of the child would not
      be prejudiced by going to Sri Lanka. The best interests of  the  child
      did not dictate that she should remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  They
      were a  primary  consideration  but  not  the  primary  consideration.
      Looking at the evidence in the round the best interests of  the  child
      lay in accompanying his mother to Sri Lanka. The Judge  dismissed  the
      appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  13. The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing that there needed
      to be shown powerful reasons to depart from the starting point that it
      was not reasonable to expect a British  citizen  child  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. Reliance was placed on the Respondent's  own  guidance
      that save in cases involving criminality  a  decision-maker  must  not
      take a decision in relation to the parent of a British  citizen  child
      where the effect of that decision would be to force that British child
      to leave the European Union regardless of the age of  the  child.  The
      case must always be assessed on the basis it would be unreasonable  to
      expect British citizen child to leave the European Union.


  14. In the Court of Appeal decision of MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705  it
      was said that powerful  reasons  were  required  to  depart  from  the
      starting point that leave should be granted. It  would  be  relatively
      rare for it to be reasonable to expect  a  child  who  was  a  British
      citizen to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  had  erred  in  his
      assessment of section 117B (6) of the 2002 act. The sole basis for the
      Judge's conclusion that it would be reasonable to expect the child  to
      leave the United Kingdom was the age of the child. This was a material
      error of law and breached the Respondent's own guidelines.


  15. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure  on  22nd  of
      September 2017. In granting permission to appeal  he  wrote  that  the
      issue appeared to be whether or not it  was  reasonable  to  expect  a
      British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom with a  parent.  The
      Judge at [25] had made a specific finding that it was not unreasonable
      to expect the British citizen child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  In
      the light of  that  approach  to  the  issues  and  in  light  of  the
      Respondent's own guidance it was arguable that the Judge had failed to
      take  account  of   the   Respondent's   policy   in   assessing   the
      proportionality issue.


  16. The Respondent replied to the grant by letter dated  31st  of  October
      2017 opposing the Appellant's appeal. The grounds were misconceived as
      the Respondent's guidance referred to her position in relation to  the
      authority from the Court of Justice of the European Union of Zambrano.
      There was no question of the Appellant's child being forced  to  leave
      the United Kingdom if the Appellant was removed. The  only  issue  was
      whether it was reasonable to expect the child to leave.

The Hearing Before Me

  17. The matter came before me to decide in the first place  whether  there
      was a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  such
      that it fell to be set aside and the decision remade. If there was not
      then the decision would stand. For the Appellant, counsel argued  that
      the Respondent's guidance had been held to be unlawful by the  Supreme
      Court in MM  because  it  paid  insufficient  attention  to  the  best
      interests of children. Even so under that guidance the Appellant ought
      to have been allowed to stay. The Immigration Rules had  been  amended
      in response to MM but only for decisions taken on  or  after  10th  of
      August 2017. The decision in this case was taken before that date  and
      not a great deal therefore turned on that point.


  18. The First-tier Judge had failed to take into account the  Respondent's
      own guidelines and therefore the  decision  should  be  remade  today.
      There had been an unjustified interference with the Appellant's  right
      to stay. The Appellant could not meet the suitability requirements  of
      the rules but she was not a foreign criminal therefore the case turned
      on the provisions of section 117B only. The child was now 2 years old.
      There was a requirement when considering the  child's  best  interests
      under section 55 of the 2009 Act to give practical effect to the  duty
      to consider. The child would be forced to leave the United Kingdom  if
      the Appellant were removed  because  the  child  was  very  young  and
      therefore needed his mother. The Appellant had sought to withdraw  her
      student application but was not permitted to do so by the Respondent.


  19. If the Appellant were to return to Sri Lanka to  make  an  application
      for entry clearance from there, the child's father would have to  stay
      at home to look after the child. He would then be unable to  work  and
      would be unable to meet the financial requirements of the  Immigration
      Rules. An application for entry clearance would be  refused  in  those
      circumstances. The parties would face a very lengthy separation  of  a
      small child from his mother. To avoid that the whole family would have
      to leave and that brought in the authority of Zambrano.


  20. For the Respondent the Presenting Officer argued that there  might  be
      no problem in allowing this appeal if it was not for  the  Appellant's
      fraudulent behaviour in using a proxy test taker.  The  Appellant  had
      willingly taken part in an  attempt  to  defraud  the  Respondent  and
      others. It was appropriate and in accordance with  the  guidance  that
      her application was refused. She had engaged in activity  said  to  be
      criminal therefore the Respondent was permitted to refuse  this  case.
      The Judge had considered the best interests of the child see [26].  He
      had applied the relevant case law including MA Pakistan. He could have
      said  more  but  one  could  say  that  about  a   large   number   of
      determinations. The failure to mention the guidance was not a relevant
      matter as the Judge was applying Article  8  outside  the  Rules.  His
      findings were sustainable. The weight to be given to  the  Appellant's
      behaviour in the  proportionality  exercise  against  the  Appellant's
      family life in The United Kingdom was a  matter  for  the  Judge.  The
      Appellant's argument in the end came down to a disagreement  with  the
      Judge's decision.


  21. In conclusion counsel responded that the grounds did not say the Judge
      had failed to engage with the issues but that he had got it  wrong  in
      his understanding of what the authorities were  saying.  He  gave  too
      much weight to the  issue  of  the  English  language  test  and  paid
      insufficient attention to the remainder of  the  other  evidence.  The
      Judge did not mention the Respondent's  guidance  where  the  Zambrano
      point was taken. His approach went against the law  as  well  as  that
      guidance.

Findings


  22. The first issue the Judge had to  decide  was  whether  the  Appellant
      could succeed in her appeal under the Immigration  Rules.  That  meant
      the Judge had to make a finding on the issue of whether the  Appellant
      had employed a proxy test taker and thus had  sought  to  deceive  the
      Respondent by submitting an English language test certificate to which
      she was not entitled. The Judge considered this issue at some  length,
      quite rightly since it was a key part of the case. On it  depended  an
      important factor in the eventual balancing  act  that  the  Judge  was
      required to carry out when  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
      children and the weight to be given to those  best  interests  in  the
      proportionality  exercise.  The  Judge's  conclusion  was   that   the
      Appellant had employed a proxy  test  taker  and  the  Respondent  had
      established that fact to the appropriate standard. That  part  of  the
      Judge's decision was not appealed.


  23. As  a  result  of  the  finding  there  were  a  number  of  important
      consequences. Firstly, the Appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration
      Rules since she fell for refusal under the  suitability  requirements.
      The exception to the eligibility requirements set out in section  EX.1
      did  not  apply  because  of  the  failure  to  meet  the  suitability
      requirements. As has been pointed out by the Upper Tribunal if that is
      not the case and section EX.1 applies regardless of  both  eligibility
      and suitability requirements then it  is  effectively  a  freestanding
      ground of application and that is not the intention of Appendix FM.


  24. Section EX.1 does raise two issues which would eventually have  to  be
      considered under Article 8 in any event. The first is  whether  it  is
      reasonable to expect a British  citizen  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom consequent  upon  the  removal  of  that  child's  non-citizen
      parent. The 2nd issue is whether there are insurmountable obstacles to
      family life with a partner continuing outside the United Kingdom. Even
      if those 2 points do not fall for  consideration  at  the  Immigration
      Rules stage they nevertheless fall for consideration under the general
      provisions of Article 8. What is important is whether  the  Judge  has
      correctly considered the issues.


  25. The reasonableness test in the Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to  a
      child leaving the United Kingdom is reproduced  in  the  2002  Act  by
      virtue of section 117B (6). The Judged specifically  directed  himself
      to the subsection at [25].  MA  Pakistan  makes  clear  that  powerful
      reasons are required before it can be shown to be  reasonable  that  a
      British citizen child should be expected to leave.  What  however  the
      Appellant did not take into account in that submission in the  grounds
      is that that is not the only guidance that MA Pakistan gives. What the
      case  also  makes  clear  is  that  when  assessing  the  question  of
      reasonableness of a child leaving  the  United  Kingdom,  all  of  the
      surrounding facts need to be taken into account and these include  the
      conduct of the parent. Whilst it is correct that the Appellant is  not
      a foreign criminal as defined in the 2002 Act,  she  has  nevertheless
      committed a fraudulent act in seeking to deceive the  Respondent  with
      an English language test certificate to which she  was  not  entitled.
      Her conduct could therefore be taken into  account  in  assessing  the
      reasonableness or otherwise of expecting her child to leave the United
      Kingdom with her in the event of her removal.


  26. This was an issue which the Judge was  clearly  aware  of  as  can  be
      demonstrated by a careful reading  of  the  determination.  There  was
      nothing wrong in law with the Judge's approach to this issue.  As  the
      Presenting Officer fairly conceded before me if there was no issue  as
      to the Appellant's fraudulent behaviour, the outcome of the case might
      have been different but the Judge had to deal with  the  case  on  the
      basis of the facts as they were. One of those facts was the  behaviour
      of the Appellant which her grounds of onward appeal did not adequately
      address. The age of the child was also  a  relevant  consideration  in
      this case in the proportionality  exercise.  At  that  age  a  child's
      interests would be focussed on his parents.


  27. The best interests of the child were to remain  in  the  care  of  his
      parents but if the Appellant were removed the  child  could  accompany
      her as could the Appellant's partner and  those  best  interests,  the
      Judge found, would be satisfied.  The  best  interests  would  lie  in
      accompanying the Appellant to Sri Lanka. That was a  conclusion  which
      was open to him on the evidence. The child was young and with the help
      of his mother would be able to adapt  to  life  in  Sri  Lanka.  As  a
      British citizen, he would be entitled return to this  country  at  any
      time  he  chose  in  the  future.   Ultimately   the   assessment   of
      reasonableness was a matter for the Judge.


  28. The Respondent's guidance  dealt  with  the  issue  of  Zambrano.  The
      difficulty for the Appellant in arguing that the Judge had  failed  to
      follow the Respondent's guidance was that the case of Zambrano was not
      of great relevance in this case. Zambrano has recently been  explained
      by the Court of Appeal in the case of Patel [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 which
      considered the issue of whether a European Union citizen  child  would
      be forced to leave the United Kingdom in the event that one parent was
      removed. The Court of Appeal made  clear  that  consideration  of  the
      respect for family life although a relevant  factor  could  not  be  a
      trump card enabling the Tribunal to conclude that the child  would  be
      compelled to leave because Article 8 was engaged and family life would
      be diminished by the departure of  one  parent.  The  question  to  be
      considered was whether the departure of  the  parent  would  mean  the
      child would be compelled to follow.


  29. In this case if the Appellant were removed and then sought to make  an
      application for entry clearance from Sri Lanka, the child could remain
      in this country in the care of his British citizen father. It is by no
      means inevitable that the child's father would have to give  up  work,
      there are many single working parents in this country.  The  threshold
      to show that the child would be compelled to leave the country if  the
      Appellant were removed is not met in this case. The Judge  found  that
      due to the very young age of the child at the date of  hearing  before
      him there was no reason why the child could not go to Sri  Lanka  with
      the Appellant. Even if that was not the result the  case  of  Zambrano
      would still not apply in this case for the reasons I have  given.  The
      issue  of  whether  the  Judge  did  or  did  not  take  heed  of  the
      Respondent's guidance which concentrates  on  the  Zambrano  point  is
      irrelevant.


  30. The question  of  what  weight  to  attach  to  the  Appellant's  poor
      immigration history in the balancing exercise of the  public  interest
      against the right to a family life was a matter for the Judge. Another
      Judge might weigh the issues differently and yet neither be  wrong  in
      law. The issue is whether the Judge adequately reasoned  his  findings
      in relation to the child and I conclude that he did.


  31. Whilst the Appellant's partner might  not  wish  to  relocate  to  Sri
      Lanka,  that  would  not  be  a  very  significant   factor   in   the
      proportionality exercise, see the authority of Agyarko. The  Judge  at
      [23] noted that the Appellant's partner was  a  British  citizen,  was
      established in the United Kingdom and ran an off-licence but  did  not
      find that compelling circumstances existed  such  that  the  Appellant
      could succeed outside the Rules under Article 8.  Again,  that  was  a
      matter for the Judge on the basis of the  facts  before  him  and  the
      Appellant's objections to those findings are a mere disagreement  with
      them. They do not thereby demonstrate any material error of law.


  32. The Appellant's leave to be here meant her status was  precarious  and
      any private life she built up could be  given  little  weight  in  the
      proportionality exercise. The Judge had that in  mind  see  [24].  The
      Appellant could not succeed in this case under the  Immigration  Rules
      but there was a British citizen child  and  the  Judge  was  therefore
      required  to  consider   that   child's   best   interests   and   the
      reasonableness or otherwise of  expecting  that  child  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom with his parent. The Judge did  that  and  gave  cogent
      reasons for his findings. There is no material error of  law  in  this
      determination and I dismiss the onward appeal.  I  make  no  anonymity
      order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                                     Signed  this
5th of January 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge                                    Signed  this
    5th of January 2018

