
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10914/2019(V)
                                                            HU/10917/2019(V)
                                                            HU/10919/2019(V)
                                                            HU/10920/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2020                  |On 27 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mrs Jing [Y] (first Respondent)
                      mr Lihong [L] (second Respondent)
                           [ZH] (third Respondent)
                          [LL] (fourth Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing to which all parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and none of the
parties expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  However, for  convenience
    I will refer to the parties as they were designated in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of China.  They are a family unit.

 3. The second appellant entered the UK  in  November  2014  as  a  Tier  1
    (Investor) with leave until January 2018.  The  other  appellants  came
    with him as his dependants.

 4. The  first  appellant  is  the  second  appellant's  wife.   The  third
    appellant is his eldest child, born on 20 February 2008.   She  is  not
    his biological child, but nothing turns on this.  The fourth  appellant
    is his youngest child, born on 2 August 2013.

 5. In December 2017 the appellants applied to  extend  their  leave.  They
    then varied the application to apply for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of their family and private life.  On 10 June 2019, the application was
    refused.

 6. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their appeal  was  heard
    by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Anthony  ("the  judge").   In  a
    decision promulgated on  25  September  2019,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal.  The respondent is now appealing against that decision.

 7. This appeal was previously considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  a
    decision made without a hearing pursuant to Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  That  decision  was  set  aside
    under Rule 43 as the judge making the decision had not been  aware  of,
    and therefore had not had regard to, written submissions made on behalf
    of the appellants.  I have not had regard to  -  or  even  read  -  the
    decision that was set aside.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. It was common ground before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellants
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of their private or family lives.

 9. It was also common ground that, as they had not lived  in  the  UK  for
    seven years or more, neither  the  third  or  fourth  appellant  was  a
    qualifying child as defined in  Section  117D(1)  of  the  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  Act")  and  therefore  Section
    117B(6) was not applicable.

10. The judge found that the first and second appellants are well educated,
    own at least  one  property  in  China,  and  would  be  able  to  find
    employment, or start a  business,  in  China.   She  expressed  a  firm
    conclusion  that  they  would  not  face  very  significant   obstacles
    integrating into China.

11. The focus of the judge's decision was  on  the  third  appellant.   The
    judge found that the  third  appellant  speaks  Mandarin,  has  visited
    China, and has loving and caring Chinese parents  who  provide  a  safe
    environment and who own a property  -  and  would  be  able  to  secure
    employment - in China. Despite this, the judge concluded that (a) it is
    in the best interests of the  third  appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK
    (paragraph 27); (b) it would be unreasonable for her to be expected  to
    leave the UK (paragraph 48); and (c) it would  be  harmful  to  her  to
    leave the UK. The finding that the third appellant will suffer harm  as
    a consequence of leaving the UK is expressed unambiguously.  The  judge
    stated:

          i) "a return to China is likely to cause permanent  harm  to  her
             welfare" (paragraph 48);




         ii) returning to China would be "hugely  disruptive  for  her  and
             would decimate the friendships, relationships  and  activities
             that form the core of her private life" (paragraph 45);


        iii) "emotionally, [returning to China] would undoubtedly be highly
             stressful and potentially damaging to her health and  welfare"
             (paragraph 45).


12. At paragraph 48 the judge stated:

             "The factors to which I  give  determinative  weight  are  the
             following: her deep emersion in all aspects of  life  in  this
             country and  her  minimal  connections  with  her  country  of
             origin.  I conclude that it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
             third appellant to return to China.  I find that a  return  to
             China is likely to  cause  permanent  harm  to  her  welfare".
             [emphasis added]

Grounds of Appeal

13. A single argument is advanced by  the  respondent  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, which is that  the  judge  approached  the  appeal  as  if  the
    relevant issue  to  determine  was  the  reasonableness  of  the  third
    appellant's removal when she was not a qualifying child  under  Section
    117D of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

14. Mr Kotas, in  his  submissions,  elaborated  on  the  argument  in  the
    grounds.  He submitted that the judge misdirected herself  in  law  as,
    despite recognising and acknowledging that the third appellant was  not
    a qualifying child under Section  117D  of  the  2002  Act,  the  judge
    focused exclusively on the question of whether it would  be  reasonable
    for her to leave the UK.  He  stated  that  the  judge  looked  at  her
    circumstances "in a vacuum" and treated them as determinative.

15. Ms Rutherford argued that when the decision is considered as a whole it
    is apparent that the judge took into consideration, and  balanced,  all
    relevant factors.  She argued that the judge conducted a careful  fact-
    finding  exercise  where  all  material  parts  of  the  evidence  were
    addressed and that clear findings of fact were made,  including  as  to
    the best interests of  the  children.   She  observed  that  the  judge
    correctly recognised that neither child was a  qualifying  child  under
    Section 117D and addressed factors other than the question  of  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave  the  UK.



Error of Law

16. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that:

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


17. The term "qualifying child" is defined in Section 117D as a person  who
    is under the age of 18 and who is a British citizen or has lived in the
    UK for a continuous period of seven years or more.

18. Section 117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision in the sense
    that parliament has stipulated  that  where  the  conditions  specified
    therein are satisfied, the public interest will  not  justify  removal.
    Meeting the conditions of Section 117B(6) will  therefore  normally  be
    determinative of an appeal.  See  R  (MA  Pakistan  and  Ors)  v  Upper
    Tribunal [2016] EWCA Civ 705. On the other hand, where  the  conditions
    of Section 117B(6) are not met, it is necessary for  a  judge  to  take
    into consideration all material matters when assessing  proportionality
    under Article 8(2) ECHR. In such cases the reasonableness  of  a  child
    leaving the  UK  will  be  a  material  consideration,  to  be  weighed
    alongside other factors, but it will not be determinative.

19. The judge fell into error by treating her finding that it would not  be
    reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK as determinative  of
    the appeal even though the third appellant was not a  qualifying  child
    and therefore  Section  117B(6)  was  not  applicable.   I  reach  this
    conclusion not only because the judge used the word "determinative"  in
    paragraph 48 of the decision but  also  because,  reading  the  judge's
    analysis as a whole, it is apparent that the judge looked in  isolation
    (or in a "vacuum" to use  the  phrase  adopted  by  Mr  Kotas)  at  the
    circumstances of the third appellant and then decided that  because  it
    would not be reasonable for her to leave the UK the family unit  should
    not be removed.  The judge, therefore, fell  into  error  because  even
    though she recognised that the third appellant  was  not  a  qualifying
    child for the purposes of Section 117B(6)  she  nonetheless  approached
    the appeal as  if  she  was.  This  was  a  material  error  and  as  a
    consequence the decision cannot stand.

Remade Decision

20. After delivering my decision in respect of the error of  law,  I  asked
    the parties to make submissions on (a) whether  the  findings  of  fact
    made in the First-tier Tribunal should be preserved and (b)  whether  I
    should proceed to re-make the decision without a further hearing.

21. Ms Rutherford and Mr Kotas agreed that the findings of fact  should  be
    preserved and that I should proceed to re-make the decision.

22. I drew to Mr Kotas's  attention  that  the  judge  made  a  finding  at
    paragraph 48 that a return to China would be likely to cause the  third
    appellant "permanent harm to her welfare". I asked if this was accepted
    by the respondent. He stated that as this finding was not challenged in
    the grounds of appeal he was not in a position to challenge it now.  Ms
    Rutherford expressed the same view: stating that, it having been agreed
    by the parties that the findings of fact should be preserved,  I  could
    not now go behind them.

23. I pause to make the observation that I do not understand how the  judge
    reached the conclusion that the third  appellant  would  be  likely  to
    suffer permanent harm as a consequence of moving to China,  and  it  is
    certainly not a finding I would have made.   The  third  appellant,  if
    returned to China, will be moving to the country  of  her  citizenship,
    where she speaks the language, with both parents; and her parents  will
    not face difficulties obtaining employment  and  accommodation.  Whilst
    she may experience  some  challenges  adapting  to  a  new  school  and
    environment, it is difficult to see how this would cause her  permanent
    (or indeed  any)  harm.  That  said,  as  this  finding  has  not  been
    challenged, I proceed on the basis - as I  must  -  that  returning  to
    China is likely to cause permanent harm to the  welfare  of  the  third
    appellant.

24. The appellants have lived in the UK for six years and during this  time
    have developed connections and relationships, including, in the case of
    the third and fourth appellant, through their attendance at school.   I
    am satisfied - and it was not questioned at the  hearing  -  that  they
    have established a private life that meets  the  threshold  of  Article
    8(1) ECHR.

25. I now turn to consider whether removal will be  disproportionate  under
    Article 8(2) ECHR.

26. I  approach  this  issue  by  adopting  the  "balance  sheet"  approach
    recommended by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali Iraq v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60.
    In so doing, I have regard to the  relevant  considerations  listed  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act, as well as all other considerations  that
    are material.

27. Weighing against the appellants is that there is a public  interest  in
    the maintenance of effective immigration controls. I attach significant
    weight to this because the appellants  do  not  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules and have never  had  any  reason  to
    believe that they are, or ought to be, entitled to settle in the UK.

28. The public interests in immigrants speaking English  and  not  being  a
    burden on the taxpayer do not weigh  against  the  appellants  as  they
    speak English and are  financially  independent  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act.

29. Apart from the finding that there is likely to be permanent harm to the
    third appellant's welfare arising from a move to China, there  is  very
    little  weighing  on  the  appellants'  side  of  the  scales  in   the
    proportionality  assessment.  They  have  only  ever   had   precarious
    immigration status in the UK and therefore little  weight  attaches  to
    their private lives (section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act). Removal will not
    negatively impact the family life they enjoy with each  other  as  they
    would be removed  together  as  a  family  unit.  Nor  will  they  face
    obstacles (and certainly not "very significant obstacles", which is the
    test under the Immigration Rules) integrating in China as  the evidence
    indicates not only that they are familiar with the society and  culture
    but that they will be able, with relative ease, to  find  accommodation
    and employment.

30. With respect to the third and fourth appellants, the conclusion I would
    have drawn from the evidence - had no findings of fact been preserved -
    is that it is in their best interests to  remain  with  their  parents,
    whether in the UK or China; and that  it  is  no  more  in  their  best
    interests to be in the UK than to be in China. I would also have  found
    that it is reasonable for them to move to  China  with  their  parents.
    However, it is  not  for  me  to  draw  such  conclusions  because,  as
    explained above, the findings of fact in the First-tier  Tribunal  were
    not challenged and the parties agree they  are  to  be  preserved.  The
    preserved findings include that (a) it is in the best interests of  the
    third appellant to remain in the UK and (b) moving to China is  "likely
    to cause permanent harm to her welfare".

31.  Constrained  by  the  preserved  findings  of  fact  about  the  third
    appellant, I find that the balancing exercise under Article 8(2)  falls
    in favour of the appellants.  I reach this conclusion  because  of  the
    significant weight I attach to the finding  that  the  third  appellant
    would  be  likely  to  suffer  permanent  harm  to  her  welfare  as  a
    consequence of a move to China.  This is not determinative,  and  could
    be outweighed by other factors, but  it  is  a  matter  of  significant
    weight, and  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls (in circumstances where a
    family have complied with immigration rules and there are no issues  of
    criminality or poor conduct) is outweighed by a likelihood of permanent
    harm to a child.



Notice of Decision

32. Error of Law decision: The Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

33. Remaking of the decision: I allow the appeal of  the  four  respondents
    (who, as explained in paragraph 1 above, have been referred to  as  the
    appellants in this decision).

34. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge  Sheridan                                   13  January
2021


