
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10307/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2019                |On 12th February 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 ADEEL RIAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoare, H & S Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms. H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the United
      Kingdom in January 2010 with entry clearance as a student valid until
      28 February 2011. He was granted further leave to remain as a student
      until 23 October 2011. On 22 October 2011 he made and in time
      application for further leave to remain as a student. That application
      was refused by the respondent and an appeal against that decision was
      dismissed by the First tier Tribunal on 22 February 2012.  The
      applicant remained in the UK unlawfully.  Although the applicant made
      a further application for leave to remain as a student, that
      application was refused in June 2012 and did not attract a right of
      appeal. Following a lengthy period of inactivity, on 6th November
      2017, the appellant made an application for leave to remain in the UK
      on the basis of his family and private life with his partner Hannah
      Candice, and her child from a previous relationship.  The application
      was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated
      25 April 2018.


   2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed for reasons
      set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes
      promulgated on 19 December 2018. In reaching his decision the Judge
      considered the evidence given by the appellant and his partner that is
      summarised at paragraphs [9] and [10] of the decision. The Judge's
      findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [11] to [23] of the
      decision.


   3. It is uncontroversial that the appellant entered the United Kingdom
      with entry clearance as a student but remained in the UK unlawfully,
      after the FtT dismissed is appeal in February 2012. It was also
      uncontroversial that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements for
      leave to remain in the UK on the basis of family and private life as
      set out in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.


   4. The appellant relied upon s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 in support of his claim that the decision to refuse
      his application for leave to remain is in breach of his right to
      respect for private and family life under Article 8.  He claimed that
      the public interest does not require his removal because he has a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
      that is, a person under the age of 18 who is a British citizen, and it
      would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.  At paragraphs [18] and [19] of his decision, the judge
      stated:


         "18. The problem that arises is that the appeal has to be
         considered in line with Article 8 and the overall circumstances. It
         may be unreasonable to expect a child to leave the UK but that does
         not address the underlying circumstances. In this case the
         appellant is playing a paternal role but has been doing so for less
         than a year in circumstances where he remains in the UK illegally
         (unless and until an appeal succeeds) and has no expectation of
         being permitted to remain where his partner is entitled to remain
         and I find will remain. The situation is to be assessed not on a
         hypothetical basis as paragraphs 18 and 19 (sic) of KO make clear
         but on the situation that exists.

         19.  Even being the parent of a child entitled to remain in the UK
         does not answer the question that arises under article 8, a child
         is not a bypass to the immigration rules. In assessing a child's
         best interests the circumstances themselves have to be considered
         and while the child is not to be blamed for the actions of the
         parent or parents their behaviour or the behaviour of one of them
         may be relevant in assessing proportionality. Ordinarily it is
         considered to be in a child's best interest to live with both
         parents in a stable caring environment but that has already ceased
         to be the case to be replaced by the current arrangements and there
         is no guarantee that those will endure either. Given the fairly
         short period of time that the appellant has been involved in the
         child's life the evidence does not show that he can be said to have
         established a parental relationship that engages the rules or that
         his presence is particularly significant to the extent that his
         departure would be contrary to the child's best interests."

   5. At paragraph [21], the judge stated:


         "The current arrangements between the appellant and sponsor are not
         sufficiently durable to meet the requirements of the immigration
         rules. Taking that as a guide I find that while the appellant plays
         a parental role in some aspects of the sponsor's son's life it
         would be going too far to say that he has a parental relationship
         within the meaning of the immigration rules or the guidance that
         applies."

The appeal before me


   6. The appellant claims in the grounds of appeal that the respondent does
      not deny that the appellant is in a subsisting relationship with his
      partner's child, who has no relationship with his birth father.  It is
      said that in considering whether the appellant has a genuine and
      subsisting parental relationship with the child, the respondent's
      published guidance recognises that a 'parental relationship' goes
      beyond the strict definition of parent set out in paragraph 6 of the
      immigration rules.  The guidance recognises that an applicant living
      with a child of their partner and taking a step-parent role in the
      child's life could have a "genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship", even if that person had not formally adopted the child
      and  if the other biological parent played some part in the child's
      life.  The appellant claims the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepts that
      the appellant plays a parental role and that it may be unreasonable to
      expect the child to leave the UK, but erroneously proceeds upon the
      premise that the reality is that the 'sponsor's' child will not be
      required to leave the UK, and can remain with his mother with whom he
      clearly has the stronger relationship. The appellant claims the judge
      failed to answer the question that arises when considering whether the
      public interest requires the appellant's removal under s117B(6).  That
      is, whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
      United Kingdom.


   7. The appellant claims the decision also contains a mistake as to fact.
      The appellant claims the judge concluded that the oral evidence of the
      appellant's partner was that she and her son would not leave the UK.
      It is said the appellant was not asked in cross-examination whether
      she would leave the UK. In her witness statement she had said that if
      the appellant could not remain, she and her son would have to leave
      with him, but they have no experience of life in another country,
      speak no languages other than English and her son would lose contact
      with his schoolfriends and would have his education disrupted. Her
      evidence was that it would not be in her son's best interests to
      expect him to leave the United Kingdom.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on
      22 February 2019.  It was noted the judge, arguably, did not consider
      or make findings as to whether it would be reasonable to expect the
      child to leave the United Kingdom as required by s117B(6) of the 2002
      Act.


   9. Before me, Mr Hoare submits the judge accepts the appellant plays a
      parental role in the life of his partner's child and that it may be
      unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. The judge then
      erroneously focuses upon whether the child will in fact leave the UK
      without addressing the question whether it would be reasonable to
      expect the child to leave the UK. I referred Mr Hoare to the language
      used by the judge in paragraph [18] of his decision.  The judge noted
      the claim that the appellant is playing a 'paternal' role in the
      child's life but has been doing so for less than a year.  Mr Hoare
      submits the judge does not properly direct his mind to the test as to
      whether the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with the child and there is no thorough analysis of the
      issue.  The judge found that the appellant plays a paternal role, and
      Mr Hoare submits, that must be a parental relationship.  Mr Hoare
      submits the decision does not properly address the framework of the
      rules and the legislation.


  10. In reply, Ms Aboni submits the judge gave adequate reasons for
      dismissing the appeal.  She submits that at paragraph [21], the judge
      states that while the appellant plays a parental role in some aspects
      of the sponsor's sons' life, it would be going too far to say that he
      has a parental relationship. She submits that having rejected the
      appellant's claim that he has a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with a qualifying child, it was open to the judge to
      dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out in the decision.


Discussion


  11. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s 6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998.   In reaching his decision, the judge had regard to the
      explanations provided by the appellant regarding his immigration
      history, and the fact the appellant had remained in the UK unlawfully
      since March 2012.  The Judge found the appellant cannot meet the
      requirements of the immigration rules, and Mr Hoare does not challenge
      that conclusion.


  12. The core issue in the appeal was whether the decision to refuse the
      appellant leave to remain is a justified or a disproportionate
      interference with the right to respect for family life.  In that
      context, Courts and Tribunals must have regard in particular to the
      matters set out in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002, as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.


  13. The Court of Appeal confirmed in SSHD -v- AB (Jamaica) & Another
      [2019] EWCA Civ 661 that for the purposes of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act,
      the public interest does not require a person's removal where that
      person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child
      and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom. Whether there was such a parental relationship depends on the
      individual circumstances of the case, and it is not a requirement of
      s.117B(6) for there to be a realistic prospect of the child leaving
      the UK as a consequence of the person's removal.


  14. I have carefully considered the witness statements and evidence that
      was before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant simply claims that
      he has developed a deep bond of affection with his partners child who
      has no contact with his birth father. He claims to play a "paternal
      role in his life" and states "Since January 2016 I take him out
      regularly, to school, tuition classes, swimming classes and GP
      appointments.".  That is confirmed in the witness statements of the
      appellant's partner. In her second witness statement the appellant's
      partner refers to the child's admission to hospital in July 2016,
      during which the child was greatly comforted by the appellant's
      presence.  The headteacher of the school attended by the child
      confirms that the appellant is known to the school as a 'significant
      adult' in the life of the child.


  15. I accept a person can have a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with a child of their partner, but the determination of
      that issue turns upon the particular facts of the case.  In SR
      (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)), the appellant was the
      biological parent of a child and was found to have a genuine and
      subsisting parental relationship with his child even though he had not
      been taking an active part in his upbringing, and only saw the child
      for 3 hours every two weeks.


  16. Here, the First-tier Tribunal judge did not accept the appellant has a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his partner's child.
       That is clear from a careful reading of the decision as a whole and a
      careful reading of paragraphs [18] and [21] of the decision.  At [18],
      the judge noted it may be unreasonable to expect a child to leave the
      UK but that does not address the underlying circumstances. The judge
      states, ".. in this case the appellant is playing a paternal role but
      has been doing so for less than a year in circumstances where remains
      in the UK illegally...".  The use of the words 'paternal role' is
      taken from the witness statement of the appellant an in my judgment,
      demonstrates the judge considering the part played by the appellant in
      the life of his partner's son.  However, at paragraph [21], the judge
      states that ".. while the appellant plays a parental role in some
      aspects of the sponsor's son's life, it would be going too far to say
      that he has a parental relationship ...".  When read as a whole, it is
      clear in my judgement that the judge was not satisfied that the
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
      qualifying child.  That was relevant to the judge's Article 8
      proportionality assessment and having reached that conclusion it was
      open to the Judge to dismiss the appeal. The question therefore
      whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom did not arise.  Any error in the Judge's approach to that
      second question, or the evidence that was before the Tribunal, is in
      the circumstances immaterial.


  17. The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge is not as well-
      structured or well-expressed as it might be, but to identify an error
      of law based on inadequate reasoning or consideration, there has to be
      more than a general literary criticism. Although "error of law" is
      widely defined, it is not the case that the UT is entitled to find an
      error of law simply because it does not agree with the decision, or
      because the Tribunal thinks the decision could be more clearly
      expressed or another judge can produce a better one. Baroness Hale put
      it in this way in AH (Sudan) v SSHD at [30]:


         "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirection simply
         because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts
         or expressed themselves differently."

  18. It follows that in my judgement there is no material error of law in
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the appeal is
      dismissed.


Notice of Decision


  19. The appeal is dismissed, and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Parkes shall stand.

      Signed                                 Date     20th January 2020


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
