
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10239/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 25 November 2020                        |On 7 December 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             CHHAM BAHADUR RANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr M West, counsel, instructed by Everest Solicitors


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The Entry Clearance Officer  ("the  appellant")  has  been  granted
         permission to appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Mehta ("the judge"), promulgated on  14  April  2020,
         allowing the human rights appeal of Mr  Chham  Bahadur  Rana  ("the
         respondent") against the appellant's  decision  dated  7  May  2019
         refusing the respondent's human rights  claim  in  the  form  of  a
         refusal of entry clearance.

      2. The respondent is a national of Nepal born on 20 February 1983.  He
         is the son of an ex-Gurkha and, on 20 February  2019,  applied  for
         entry clearance to settle in the UK as an adult  child  of  an  ex-
         Gurkha. The appellant  refused  the  application  noting  that  the
         respondent did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's discretionary policy for Gurkhas and their  family  members
         and that the refusal of entry clearance would not breach Article  8
         ECHR. The appellant noted, inter alia, that the respondent  was  36
         years old at the date of his application, that his  father  entered
         the UK on 12 January 2010 and his mother on 29 May  2011,  that  he
         had  been  married  (although  divorced  at   the   date   of   the
         application), and that he had 4 children.  The  appellant  rejected
         the respondent's claim that he was unemployed and  emotionally  and
         financially  dependent  on  his  father,  and  concluded  that  the
         respondent had lived independently, was capable of working and  had
         formed his own family unit. The respondent appealed the appellant's
         decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      3. There was no Presenting Officer at the hearing  before  the  judge.
         The  respondent  provided  bundles  of  documents   that   included
         statements from himself and from  his  father,  evidence  of  money
         transfers from the father to the  respondent,  evidence  of  visits
         made  by  the  respondent's  parents  to  Nepal  and  evidence   of
         communication between the respondent  and  his  parents.  Both  the
         respondent's mother and father  adopted  their  statements  at  the
         hearing. Mr West (who also  appeared  for  the  respondent  at  the
         'error of law' hearing)  provided  a  skeleton  argument  and  made
         submissions on the respondent's behalf.

      4. In his decision the judge carefully set out [3] the basis  for  the
         appellant's refusal of entry clearance and treated the Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter as the appellant's written submissions [5] and  that
         he considered any obvious points that could be made  in  favour  of
         the  appellant's  position.  The  judge  indicated  that   he   had
         considered all the evidence before him  and  that  if  he  did  not
         specifically mention certain evidence or a  particular  submission,
         it did  not  mean  that  it  had  not  been  considered  and  given
         appropriate weight [15]. The judge accurately set out the  relevant
         burden and standard of proof and the legal principles to be applied
         when considering whether Article 8 family life had been established
         between adult children and their parents [13] - [27]. In  so  doing
         the judge made reference to and set out extracts from a  number  of
         relevant authorities including  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  Kugathas
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Singh v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630,  Ghising
         (family life-adults-Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160, Rai v ECO
         [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and Pun & Anr (Nepal) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         2106.

      5. The judge then considered whether Article  8  family  life  existed
         between the  respondent  and  his  parents.  The  judge  found  the
         witnesses consistent and  credible  in  relation  to  the  historic
         living arrangements, noting that the respondent married at the  age
         of 16 and lived in his parents' house with his wife  prior  to  his
         parents coming to the UK, and that he and  his  wife  and  children
         continued to  live  in  his  parents'  home  until  his  wife  left
         following their separation  [29].  At  [31]  the  judge  considered
         whether there was real, effective, and  committed  support  between
         the respondent and his parents. from [31] (a) to [31] (d) the judge
         considered in detail the evidence before  him  and  concluded  that
         there was ongoing financial dependency between the  respondent  and
         his parents, that the respondent continued to live in his  father's
         family home, that there was in continued to be regular and frequent
         contact between  the  respondent  and  his  parents  and  that  the
         respondent's parents regularly visited him in Nepal.  At  [32]  the
         judge reminded himself that the question  of  whether  family  life
         exists under Article 8 (1) ECHR was a question of fact and that the
         evidence  demonstrated  real  emotional   support   and   committed
         financial dependency.

      6. Having satisfied himself that Article 8 (1) protected  family  life
         did exist  between  the  respondent  and  his  parents,  the  judge
         considered whether the refusal of entry clearance was proportionate
         under Article 8 (2). At [34] the judge noted the evidence from  the
         respondent's father and accepted that, but for the  historic  wrong
         (established in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8) the  respondent's  father
         would have settled in the UK earlier and that he would have  fought
         the respondent to the UK with him. At [35] the judge considered and
         applied the case of Ghising and found that, there were  no  matters
         over  and  above  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   a   firm
         immigration policy that outweighed the  historic  wrong,  that  the
         respondent's father had at all times been lawfully resident in  the
         UK,  and  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  constituted   a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  respondent's  Article  8
         rights. The appeal was allowed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      7. The grounds of appeal contend,  firstly,  that  family  life  under
         Article 8 (1) EHCR did not exist as the respondent had a family  of
         4 children and the judge erred in law in finding that  family  life
         had been established to the Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  standard,
         and secondly, that even  if  there  was  family  life,  the  judges
         proportionality assessment was unlawful because he failed  to  take
         into account the respondent's dependents.

      8. In her oral submissions Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  the  judge's
         decision did not reflect the  factual  matrix  before  him  as  the
         respondent had established his own family unit and the judge failed
         to grapple with the appellant's position that  the  respondent  had
         lived independently. In respect of the  proportionality  assessment
         Ms Isherwood reiterated the contention in  the  grounds  of  appeal
         that no assessment had been made of the respondent's  other  family
         members when determining whether the historic injustice  outweighed
         the public interest considerations.

Discussion

      9. The first ground of appeal challenges the judge's  conclusion  that
         family life, as understood and protected by Article 8 ECHR, existed
         between the respondent and his parents given  that  the  respondent
         had been married and had four children. It is therefore instructive
         to consider the authorities relating to  family  life  relationship
         between adults.

     10. Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  concerned  the  relationship  between
         adult children and their parents. At [14],  Sedley  LJ  cited  with
         approval the report of the Commission in S v United Kingdom  (1984)
         40 DR 196 at [198]:

             "Generally, the protection of  family  life  under  Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case. Relationships between adults ... would  not  necessarily
             acquire the protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without
             evidence of further elements  of  dependency,  involving  more
             than the normal emotional ties."

     11. Sedley LJ considered the issue of dependency at [17]:

             "But if dependency is read down as meaning "support",  in  the
             personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence, "real" or "committed"  or  "effective"  to  the
             word "support", then it represents in my view the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies."

     12.  When  considering  the  material  factors  that   constitute   the
         "irreducible minimum" of what  constitutes  family  life  Arden  LJ
         stated, at [24]:

             "There is no presumption that a person has a family life, even
             with the members of a person's immediate family. The court has
             to scrutinise  the  relevant  factors.  Such  factors  include
             identifying who are the near relatives of the  appellant,  the
             nature of the links between them and the appellant, the age of
             the appellant, where and with whom he has resided in the past,
             and the forms of contact he  has  maintained  with  the  other
             members of the family with whom he claims  to  have  a  family
             life."

     13. And at [25] Arden LJ stated:

             "Because there  is  no  presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not  established  between  an  adult
             child and  his  surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal emotional ties ... Such ties
             might exist if the appellant were dependent on his  family  or
             vice versa."

     14. In Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338,  having  considered  Kugathas,
         the Senior President of Tribunals stated, at [31]:

              "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense, is accordingly not a term
             of art. It is a question of fact, a matter  of  substance  not
             form. The irreducible minimum  of  what  family  life  implies
             remains that  which  Sedley  LJ  described  as  being  whether
             support is real or effective or committed."

     15. Careful consideration must be given to the particular circumstances
         of each case, and the situations in which an Article 8 family  life
         relationship exists may be highly fact-sensitive (Uddin, at [32]).

     16. In the present appeal the judge had before him  evidence  that  the
         respondent had always lived with his parents,  even  after  getting
         married (statements from the respondent and his parents). No  issue
         has been taken with these findings. The judge also had  before  him
         evidence (including an Unemployment Certificate dated  10  February
         2019 issued by the Galkot Municipality in Nepal and the  statements
         from the respondent and his father) that the respondent, who  lived
         in a rural part of Nepal, was unemployed and that, although he  had
         worked as a seasonal labourer, that income had been insufficient to
         support the family in terms of food and accommodation.  At  [31(a)]
         the judge considered in detail  the  documentary  evidence  showing
         continuous financial support provided by  the  respondent's  father
         including the regular remittance of funds and documents relating to
         the father's pension. The judge found the respondent's  parents  to
         be credible witnesses and there was nothing in the evidence  before
         the judge to suggest otherwise. In his covering letter accompanying
         his entry clearance application the  respondent  said  he  had  not
         previously appreciated the importance of education and only  had  a
         School Leaving Certificate qualification. Based  on  this  evidence
         the judge was undoubtedly entitled to conclude that there  was  on-
         going financial dependency.

     17. At [31 (c) & (d)] the judge found there was consistent and credible
         evidence of regular and frequent contact between the respondent and
         his parents by reference to the  statements  and  the  evidence  of
         telephone  communication  and  frequent  visits  to  Nepal  by  the
         respondent's  parents.  The  judge  properly  directed  himself  in
         respect of the appropriate legal  test  for  the  establishment  of
         family  life  and  it  is  abundantly   clear   from   a   holistic
         consideration of the judge's decision that he fully appreciated the
         need for dependency between the Gurkha and his adult child in order
         to establish Article 8 protected family life (e.g. [27]).

     18. To the extent that the appellant contends that the judge failed  to
         grapple with the fact that the respondent had been married and  had
         four children, and the appellant's view  that  the  respondent  had
         consequently established an independent family life, I reject this.
         The judge was demonstrably aware of the  relevant  factual  matrix.
         The judge specifically referred to the  respondent's  marriage  and
         his children ([3], [29]), and the respondent's  circumstances  were
         also clear from the witness statements and  the  other  documentary
         evidence that the judge indicated he had  considered  even  if  not
         referred to [15]. It is necessarily and irresistibly clear from the
         judgement, read as a  whole,  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  but
         rejected the appellant's view that, because the respondent had been
         married and had 4  children,  he  had  established  an  independent
         family life such that he no  longer  had  an  Article  8  protected
         family life relationship with his parents.

     19. Whilst having a  spouse  and  children  is  clearly  relevant  when
         assessing whether an independent family life has been  established,
         it cannot be determinative. It is important that decision-makers do
         not adopt an overly Anglocentric approach when assessing Article  8
         family life relationships. In many countries families may  live  in
         multigenerational households that include  married  adult  children
         who themselves have children but where, for a variety  of  possible
         reasons, the  adult  children  do  not  work  and  are  financially
         dependent on their parents, who provide the accommodation, in order
         to meet their everyday needs and those of their  families.  As  has
         been made clear from all the authorities (see Uddin for one of  the
         most recent pronouncements) the situations in which  an  Article  8
         family life relationship exists will be highly facts  specific  and
         will always depend on the particular facts.

     20. In Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  (at  [40]),  and  more
         recently in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at [41]),  the
         Court of Appeal  emphasised  that  it  is  not  permissible  for  a
         Tribunal to interfere with a decision merely because it would  have
         reached a different conclusion. On the evidence  before  the  judge
         there was little to indicate that the  respondent  had  ever  lived
         independently outside the family home provided by  his  parents  or
         that he was ever financially independent of his parents. The  judge
         lawfully applied the Kugathas principles and reached  a  conclusion
         rationally open to him based on his specific factual findings.

     21. There is no merit in the second ground of  appeal.  The  judge  was
         aware  that  a  balancing  exercise  was  required,   despite   the
         significant weight that would attach to  the  historic  wrong,  and
         noted the absence of any significant countervailing public interest
         factors. There were no issues, for example, relating to criminality
         or bad character or poor immigration history.  The  judge  did  not
         treat the  historic  wrong  as  being  determinative.  Nor  was  it
         necessary for the judge to have regard to the appellant's  children
         as they had not made applications for entry clearance and were  not
         seeking to enter the UK. If the children do, in  the  future,  make
         entry clearance applications those applications will  no  doubt  be
         considered on their merits in accordance with the immigration rules
         and Article 8 ECHR  principles.  But  in  determining  whether  the
         refusal of entry clearance  to  the  respondent  was  proportionate
         there was no reason or basis to speculate as to any future,  lawful
         application by children, and it is difficult to see how any  future
         applications that meet the requirements of the immigration rules or
         Article 8 principles could be held to  add  weight  to  the  public
         interest considerations.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed


D.Blum   27 November 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
