
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10358/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            miss Amoy Amara Grant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Soloman of Counsel, instructed by Aschfords Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Mill who, in a determination promulgated on  21
    November 2018 dismissed her appeal against a decision of the  Secretary
    of State made in March 2016 to refuse her leave to remain as the  carer
    of her aunt.

2.   The appellant entered Britain on 8 January 2015  as  a  family  visitor
    and thereafter overstayed.  She  made  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain on 19 June 2015, which was refused on 8 October  that  year.   A
    further application was made  on  21  December  2015  and  she  appeals
    against refusal of that application.

3.     The appellant applied on the basis that she  was  the  carer  of  her
    aunt, Ms Imogen East who is a citizen  of  Jamaica,  who  was  born  in
    December 1943.  The judge noted that Ms Grant had a  number  of  health
    problems but commented that the primary source of evidence in  relation
    to the medical problems was rather poor as  there  were  no  up-to-date
    reports of any treating clinicians and that the very brief letter  from
    her general practitioner  was  dated  3  August  2004.   There  was  no
    evidence to state that Ms East required day-to-day care and  there  was
    no occupational therapy assessment which appeared to have been  carried
    out which would indicate the extent of care which was required on a day-
    to-day basis.

4.   The judge noted a psychological report from a Dr Benjamin  Piper  based
    on an assessment made on 20 February 2018  and  an  independent  social
    work report but stated that they were based on snapshot evaluations  of
    the facts and circumstances of Ms East and it did not appear  that  the
    authors had had any access to medical records.  The judge  pointed  out
    that even if Ms East required significant care there were a  number  of
    other family members in Britain who could provide this.   Ms  East  has
    three daughters in Britain who all live in the same  geographical  area
    of South East London and the judge stated that it was clear that  they,
    along with a number of other individuals, were able to support and care
    for their mother at all times.  The judge  noted  that  the  claim  was
    based around the fact that the  significant  numbers  of  other  family
    members were unable to devote time to Ms East and that  that  was  what
    the appellant was now doing.  The  judge  considered  that  there  were
    nothing beyond normal emotional ties that  are  commonly  seen  between
    adults and extended family members.  The appellant had only lived  with
    her aunt for five months after arrival in  Britain  before  making  the
    original application which was rejected  and  when  she  reapplied  the
    application was refused.  The judge referred  to  the  public  interest
    requiring firm immigration  control  and  stated  that  there  were  no
    factors which outweighed the public interest  in  the  context  of  the
    appeal and the matters which he had taken into account.

5.   The judge noted that  the  appellant  was,  at  the  time  of  hearing,
    pregnant with an estimated due date of 23 January and  that  the  child
    had significant health complications.  The judge  considered  that  the
    appellant would have a significant commitment to caring for  the  child
    and therefore she would not, in any event, always be available to  meet
    the needs of Ms East.

6.   There had been an application for an adjournment at  the  beginning  of
    the appeal on the basis that Ms East had travelled  to  Jamaica  a  few
    days prior to the appeal on what was asserted was urgent business which
    appeared to relate to property matters in Jamaica.  The judge was  told
    that Ms East would return within the following week.

7.   The judge found the  explanation  surprising.   There  appeared  to  be
    urgency and as the appeal was based upon the apparent ill-health of the
    appellant's aunt, both psychologically and  physically,  it  did  raise
    issues about the extent of the state of her ill-health.  There  was  no
    documentation submitted to establish the apparent  urgent  reasons  for
    the appellant's aunt's travel to Jamaica given her undoubted  knowledge
    that the appeal was set down to be heard in the very week that she  was
    absent from the United Kingdom.  The judge  concluded  that  there  was
    nothing unfair about proceeding with the hearing, noting that there was
    a written witness statement from the appellant's aunt.  The judge  also
    took into account that there had already been two adjournments  of  the
    appeal, one in September 2017 and the other  in  April  2018,  both  of
    which had been made on the application of  the  appellant.   The  judge
    therefore had refused the application.

8.   The lengthy grounds of appeal first stated that the judge was wrong  to
    adjourn the appeal, firstly because Ms East was abroad and secondly  to
    allow the respondent to consider giving consent to new  matters  raised
    in the appeal: the appellant's  relationship  with  a  British  citizen
    partner and her pregnancy.  Secondly, it was argued that the judge  had
    failed to give adequate  account  of  material  considerations  by  not
    engaging with the oral submissions at  the  hearing  and  the  detailed
    skeleton argument and that he had failed to direct himself with  regard
    to the burden and standard of proof.  It was suggested that  the  judge
    had applied too high a standard of proof by stating  that  he  was  not
    convinced there were any compelling reasons to  justify  an  Article  8
    assessment.  Moreover, it was argued that the judge had  erred  in  his
    consideration of the rights of the appellant under  Article  8  outside
    the Rules; that he should have noted  that  the  appellant's  aunt  was
    British and considered the  further  evidence,  including  the  written
    evidence, which was before him.  It was stated that  the  judge  should
    have taken into account the issue of a blue badge to Ms East  and  that
    the judge was wrong to conclude that she  did  not  require  day-to-day
    care.  It was stated that the judge was wrong to give little weight  to
    the reports from the psychologist and the social worker.  It was stated
    that the judge had erred in his appraisal of the daughter's  statements
    and that he should have considered the appeal with reference to the new
    matters raised: given that the Secretary of State was  not  represented
    at the appeal and therefore could not  give  his  consent  to  the  new
    matter which had arisen, the judge should have considered that  it  was
    implicit that consent was granted.  It was also argued that  the  judge
    should have taken into account that the appellant, if allowed to  work,
    would assist in the economic wellbeing of the country and had failed to
    recognise that the term "little weight" in part 5 of the 2002  Act  did
    not entail an absolute rigid measurement or concept.  Finally,  it  was
    argued that the judge had erred in stating that Ms East was Jamaican.

9.   At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Mr  Soloman  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal asserting that  the  appellant  was  in  a  committed
    relationship with her partner, albeit that they did not  live  together
    nor had the relationship continued for two years and moreover that  the
    judge should not have adjourned the appeal.

10.  I consider that there is no error of law in the  determination  of  the
    judge.  I consider that the judge  was  fully  entitled  to  refuse  to
    adjourn the appeal.  It is surprising that Ms East left the country for
    a short break when the appeal, which had been adjourned on two previous
    occasions had been listed for  hearing.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider that Ms East could have delayed  her  trip  and  there  is  no
    evidence to show that she could not have done so.  He was  entitled  to
    take into account the fact that the appeal had been  adjourned  on  two
    occasions before this hearing.  The Immigration Procedure  Rules  (Rule
    2) make it clear that an overriding objective is to ensure that appeals
    are properly determined effectively  and  speedily  and  moreover  that
    there is an obligation  on  the  parties  to  further  that  overriding
    objective by cooperating with the Tribunal.  I consider that  in  these
    circumstances the appellant should have ensured  that  those  whom  she
    wished to be witnesses at the appeal attended and the fact that she did
    not so shows a lack of cooperation. Moreover, in any event,  the  judge
    was fully entitled to take into account the evidence  before  him  when
    concluding that there was sufficient evidence to determine the  appeal.



11.  The assertion  that  the  judge  had  not  taken  adequate  account  of
    material considerations by engaging with the oral  submissions  at  the
    hearing in the detailed skeleton argument is unsubstantiated.  There is
    nothing to show there was an argument put forward which could have  led
    to any different conclusion.

12.  The assertion that the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  in
    paragraph 19 by stating that he was  "not  convinced"  is  a  complaint
    which is taken entirely out of context, what the judge said was:- "I am
    not convinced in this case there is any compelling reason to justify an
    Article 8 assessment, but in order to determine all relevant  issues  I
    proceed to do so."     It is clear therefore that he did go on to  make
    the Article 8 assessment and that he was not referring to the burden of
    proof when he made that comment.  It was disingenuous for  the  drafter
    of the grounds of appeal to suggest that that was the case.   Moreover,
    the grounds of appeal which assert that the judge has stated that there
    required to be something compelling to assess the appellant's Article 8
    rights outside the Rules is again taking that comment out  of  context.
    The reality is that the judge did consider the Article 8 rights of  the
    appellant properly and thoroughly.

13.  I do not consider that the issue of the nationality of the  appellant's
    great aunt is relevant given that she is resident here and there is  no
    question of her not being entitled to do so.

14.  The judge did properly assess the evidence put before  her  and  indeed
    the detailed statements.  I have considered the statements  of  Jasmine
    Smith, Shantel East, Neslin Newell and of Asher Burnett,  the  grandson
    of Ms East, as well as the statements of Ms  East  and  the  appellant.
    The reality is that the judge was correct to  indicate  that  while  Ms
    East's daughters lead busy lives there is  nothing  to  show  why  they
    could not give the care and assistance  to  their  mother  which  could
    surely be expected of children who live nearby.   Moreover,  the  judge
    was correct in his analysis of the reports  and  his  conclusion,  that
    there was nothing in those to show that Ms East required the  permanent
    care of this appellant or indeed permanent care of any sort was clearly
    open to him.  It is clear that Ms East has medical problems and suffers
    from psychological difficulties primarily related,  it  appears,  to  a
    burglary at her home when she was absent from the house, but  there  is
    nothing to indicate that she could  not  live  on  her  own  let  alone
    anything to indicate that her children, nine in all, could not  assist.
    I note that the social worker's report refers  to  a  son,  Colin,  and
    comments that he is not assisting but gives no  reason  why  he  should
    not.  Moreover, I consider that the judge was entitled  to  find  there
    was nothing beyond normal emotional ties.  It is not the case that  the
    appellant lived with her aunt from her entry  into  Britain  until  the
    present time.  I would add that the fact that a "blue badge"  had  been
    issued to Ms East does not indicate that she needs permanent support. I
    note the statement of the appellant's father but he does not appear  to
    have any  strong relationship with her such there are any  ties  beyond
    the usual ties between  a parent and an adult child.

15.  The grounds refer to the issue of financial support  but  that  is  not
    really a relevant factor in this case.  The fact that the appellant  is
    not dependent on the state does not mean that she would be entitled  to
    remain, as indeed the fact that she could work here is not a factor  of
    any weight in  an  Article  8  assessment.   The  judge  was  entitled,
    moreover, to consider that  little  weight  should  be  placed  on  the
    private life of the appellant built up at a time when she did not  have
    leave to remain in Britain.  In all these respects I consider that  the
    judge made no error of law in his assessment.

16.   The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred by  not  considering
    the fact that the appellant was pregnant at the date of hearing  -  she
    has now given birth - and she has  a  claimed  partner  here  who  gave
    evidence.  Consent from the Secretary of State was required for that to
    be  taken  into  consideration  and  the  fact  that   there   was   no
    representative for the Secretary of State at the hearing does not  mean
    that consent was implicitly given.  Indeed, the reality is  the  matter
    of the appellant's relationship with her claimed  partner,  and  indeed
    the birth of their child, is a matter which should be considered  in  a
    fresh claim.  It is of note that the child, who  was  born  in  January
    this year, has not yet been assessed as requiring an operation  on  his
    heart although it appears that that is likely.  But in any event, there
    is nothing to indicate the strength of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant  and  her  claimed  partner.   Although  her  partner,   Dean
    Richards, states that he is committed to both the appellant  and  their
    child, he does not live with the appellant and the child and  there  is
    no indication of his support for them in the papers.   It  is  asserted
    that he is British and therefore the child would be British but that is
    not clear from his statement.  I consider that this issue  is  a  fresh
    matter which, should the appellant wish, should be put to the Secretary
    of State.  As it is, the judge was fully entitled not to deal with that
    issue which was obviously not before the Secretary of  State  when  the
    decision was made and  I  endorse  the  judge's  comment  in  the  last
    sentence of his determination that he would urge consideration of  that
    issue by the respondent prior to the removal of the appellant.

17.  As it stands however, there is no error of law in the determination  of
    the judge in the First-tier Tribunal and his  decision  must  therefore
    stand.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 1 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
