
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: HU/10755/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Business                         |                                 |
|On 22 February 2021              |              On 3 March 2021    |
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                 Mustafa [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Daykin, instructed by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on 5 April 1981.  He
    appeals, with permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce, against
    a decision which was issued by FtT Judge Cockburn on 16 September 2020.
      By  that  decision,  Judge  Cockburn  ("the  judge")  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim.

Background

 2. The appellant is a man with little regard for immigration control.   He
    entered the UK unlawfully in 2002 and made an  unsuccessful  claim  for
    asylum.  He did not leave the UK, and  was  convicted  in  2008  of  an
    identity card offence.  Having served the  fifteen  month  sentence  of
    imprisonment for that offence, he accepted that he should be  deported.
    The respondent deported him on 6 November 2008.  That deportation order
    remains in force.  Less then three months later, he re-entered  the  UK
    unlawfully for a second time.  He made no  attempt  to  regularise  his
    status until, on 16 November 2018, he was joined as a dependent  on  an
    application made by his partner and their children for leave to  remain
    on human rights grounds.


 3. The appellant's  partner  and  children  were  granted  leave  but  the
    appellant's application was refused.   The  respondent  considered  the
    circumstances set out in the appellant's representations  but  she  did
    not accept that there were very exceptional circumstances such that the
    extant deportation order should not be implemented.   In  so  deciding,
    the respondent applied the test  set  out  at  paragraph  399D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant appealed to the FtT(IAC).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appeal came before the judge by  way  of  a  remote  hearing  on  8
    September 2020.  The appellant was represented by  counsel,  instructed
    by Marsh & Partners Solicitors.  The respondent was  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  Counsel provided the judge with  copies  of  three
    authorities, one of which was the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    SSHD v SU (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1069; [2017] 4 WLR 175.   In  that
    decision, the Court of Appeal found that the FtT had erred  in  failing
    to have regard to  paragraph  399D  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    "encapsulates the public interest in ensuring that a deportation  order
    is not only implemented but fully effective.": [41] refers.


 5. So it was that the judge took as her focus the test in paragraph  399D.
    She adopted the balance sheet approach advocated by the  Supreme  Court
    in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799,  weighing  the  'pros'
    and 'cons' of the appellant's deportation.  Although she accepted  that
    it would be in the best interests of the appellant's three children for
    him to remain in the UK, and that it would have a 'significant  impact'
    upon them if he were deported, she found that there was  nothing  which
    permitted  her  to  conclude   that   there   were   very   exceptional
    circumstances.  She dismissed the appeal accordingly.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by the FtT but granted by  UTJ  Bruce.
    She was unimpressed by the principal argument advanced in the  grounds,
    which was that the judge had given insufficient reasons for  concluding
    that the threshold in paragraph 399D had not been crossed.   UTJ  Bruce
    gave permission, however, so that counsel could develop  the  arguments
    he sought to advance in the grounds  concerning  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; [2020] HRLR 21.


 7. In a rule 24 reply to the grounds which was  filed  and  served  on  19
    February 2021, Mr Melvin argued for the respondent that the  judge  had
    not erred in the manner contended in  the  grounds.  She  had  directed
    herself to the authorities provided, including HA (Iraq), and had  come
    to a properly reasoned  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  deportation
    should be implemented.  The final sentence  in  Mr  Melvin's  response,
    however, was "The Respondent is aware of the recent  Tribunal  decision
    in Binaku (s11 TCEA: s117C NIAA; para 399D) [2021] UKUT 34 (IAC)."


 8. The appeal was listed to be heard at 1430 today.  At  1401,  the  Upper
    Tribunal received an application to amend the grounds  of  appeal.   It
    was apparent that the appellant was no longer represented  by  Marsh  &
    Partners but by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors.  The additional  ground  of
    appeal upon which the appellant sought to rely was that the  judge  had
    erred in law in taking paragraph 399D  as  her  focus,  when  her  task
    should have begun and ended with the statutory  framework  provided  by
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This  new
    ground was premised on the decision in Binaku, to which Mr  Melvin  had
    referred.


 9. I began the hearing  by  asking  Mr  Melvin  what  he  said  about  the
    application to amend.   He  submitted  that  it  had  been  made  late,
    although he accepted that the decision in Binaku, on which the  amended
    grounds were entirely based, had been published as a reported  decision
    on the website on 11 February 2021.  He submitted somewhat  tentatively
    that the FtT had not fallen into error in failing to follow a  decision
    which was not in existence at the date of its decision.  He  reiterated
    his argument that the original grounds  did  not  disclose  a  material
    error of law but he accepted  that  he  would  be  in  some  difficulty
    meeting the new ground of appeal in the event that permission to  amend
    was granted.  He had already sought instructions from senior  staff  in
    the Home Office to see whether a fresh decision might be issued but had
    not received a response.


10. I indicated to Ms Daykin that I did not need to  hear  from  her.   She
    nevertheless sought to explain that the application to amend  had  been
    made very  late  in  the  day  because  there  had  been  a  change  of
    representatives.  I indicated that I would permit the amendment to  the
    grounds and would find that the judge had erred in law for the  reasons
    given in the amended grounds.  Both advocates submitted that the proper
    relief, in those circumstances, was for the appeal to be remitted to be
    heard afresh.  I  was  able  to  intimate  that  I  agreed  with  those
    submissions and I would order accordingly.

Analysis

11. For the avoidance of doubt,  I  agree  with  the  submissions  made  in
    writing by Mr Melvin about the original grounds of appeal.  The reasons
    why the judge found that  the  threshold  in  paragraph  399D  was  not
    reached are clear from her decision.  She  was  plainly  aware  of  the
    threshold and she took account of the authorities with  which  she  had
    been provided.  The original grounds fail to disclose a legal error  on
    the part of the judge.


12. I therefore turn to the amended grounds.  The first question is whether
    I should permit the amendment to the notice of appeal, given  that  the
    application was made half an hour before the hearing of the appeal.   I
    have written in the past about the public interest in discouraging late
    applications of this nature: Das [2019] UKUT 354 (IAC)  refers.   I  am
    satisfied, however, that the circumstances  in  this  case  are  rather
    different.  The application to amend was prompted by  the  decision  in
    Binaku, which was only published on 11 February 2021.   An  application
    to amend could certainly have been made more promptly but, as Ms Daykin
    observed, the appellant was in the process of changing  representatives
    and it was only this morning  that  the  papers  were  actually  placed
    before her, at which point she realised that a  written  amendment  was
    necessary.  There is still a delay and it is  a  delay  for  which  the
    appellant must be held responsible, but there is some  explanation  for
    it.


13. It remains for me to consider all the circumstances  of  the  case.   I
    recognise that courts and tribunals should, in considering applications
    for relief from  sanctions  or  extensions  of  time,  avoid  extensive
    considerations of  the  merits.   It  is  only  where  the  merits  are
    particularly strong or particularly weak that they  might  be  relevant
    and, in Al Saud v Apex Global [2014] UKSC 64; [2015] 2 All ER 206  Lord
    Neuberger went so far as to say that the merits were only relevant  (in
    a relief from sanctions case) were they were so strong that  there  was
    no real answer to them.


14. I consider this to be one of the  comparatively  rare  cases  in  which
    there is no real answer to the amended  grounds.   It  was  decided  in
    Binaku that a judge in the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  FtT
    and the UT who is considering an appeal of this nature should focus not
    on paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules but  on  the  provisions  of
    s117C of the 2002 Act.  The judge in  this  appeal  did  not  have  the
    benefit of Binaku and she failed to adopt that approach.  She  did  not
    turn her mind to the statutory exceptions to deportation  contained  in
    s117C(4) and s117C(5).  The first of those was of no application, since
    the appellant has spent precisely no part of his life lawfully resident
    in the United Kingdom.  The  second  exception  might  well  have  been
    relevant, however, as the children are  qualifying  children  who  have
    ostensibly been in the UK for more than seven years.  The judge  should
    - in light of Binaku -  have  considered  whether  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation upon those children was unduly harsh.   Because
    she took  her  focus  as  paragraph  399D,  instead  of  the  statutory
    framework in s117C, she did not consider  that  important  question  at
    all.


15. In the circumstances, I considered that there  was  a  minor  delay  in
    amending the grounds following Binaku's publication eleven days ago but
    that there was some explanation for that delay and that the  merits  of
    the amendment were very strong indeed.  I permitted Ms Daykin to  amend
    the grounds of appeal for these reasons.  Mr Melvin  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment in which to consider the amended  grounds.   As  Ms  Daykin
    noted in her application, it was he who had first raised  the  decision
    in Binaku and he could not suggest that the respondent  was  prejudiced
    by the belated reference to it.


16. Mr Melvin recognised, in fairness to him,  that  there  was  little  he
    could say in defence of the judge's decision if the  amendment  to  the
    grounds were permitted.  Rather half-heartedly, he suggested  that  the
    declaratory theory of the common law could not apply  to  decisions  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  The submission was  not  made  with  reference  to
    authority and this is not the place for detailed consideration  of  it.
    I proceed on the basis that a decision of a superior  court  of  record
    such as the Upper  Tribunal,  presided  over  by  a  puisne  judge,  is
    certainly one to which that rule applies.  In a reported decision  such
    as Binaku, therefore, the Upper  Tribunal  declares  how  the  law  has
    always been, and not how it is from that point onwards. In  approaching
    her task as she did, therefore, the judge necessarily fell into  error,
    although  it  was  not  an  error  for  which  she  could  properly  be
    criticised.


17. The result of the judge's error  is  that  there  are  no  findings  on
    material  matters  in  her  decision.   Uppermost  amongst  the  absent
    findings is that which I have mentioned above:  resolution  of  whether
    the appellant's deportation would bring about unduly harsh consequences
    for  the  appellant's  children.   That  question  must  be  confronted
    squarely by a decision-maker who is uninfluenced by paragraph  399D  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The proper course, given the scope of the FtT's
    error and the necessity for a hearing afresh, is for the appeal  to  be
    remitted to the FtT .


18. I add this.  Mr Melvin suggested that the respondent might issue a  new
    decision letter in which she follows the structured  approach  required
    by NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1  WLR  207,  rather  than
    focusing upon paragraph 399D.  That is a matter for the respondent and,
    for my part, I consider  there  to  be  no  need  for  her  to  do  so.
    Paragraph 399D contains the policy which she applies to  those  in  the
    appellant's position.  The fact that the IAC is not bound to adopt  the
    same approach establishes no fault in the existing decision; it  merely
    shows that decision making in the  appellate  body  is  governed  by  a
    different framework from that  which  applies  in  the  decision  under
    challenge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law
and that decision is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to  the  FtT  to  be
heard de novo by a judge other than Judge Cockburn.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               18 March 2021
