
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            ms Nadia Sarah Carrey
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel, Vine Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, born in 1998, challenges a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Moore sent on 19 May 2017 dismissing
    on human rights grounds her appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on  1  October  refusing  to  grant  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependant of her mother, pursuant to paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge did not accept that the appellant's mother  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant.

2.   The appellant's written grounds  allege  four  errors  in  the  judge's
    reasoning.

3.   The first  error  alleged  is  that  the  judge  placed  weight  on  an
    erroneous belief that the sponsor had failed  to  provide  evidence  to
    corroborate that she had visited the appellant in Ghana  on  an  annual
    basis.  I do not find this ground made  out.   The  judge  was  clearly
    aware that the evidence showed that the sponsor had travelled to Ghana:
    that had been accepted by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal  decision.
    Indeed the judge himself accepted that the sponsor had visited Ghana on
    "numerous occasions".  The judge also had photos showing the  appellant
    and sponsor together in Ghana at different times over the  past  decade
    or so.  What the judge did not accept - and was entitled not to accept -
     was the sponsor's claim that her visits were annual (on some occasions
    twice a year) nor her claim that on these visits she  stayed  with  the
    appellant.  The photographic evidence comprised ten  photos  but  "very
    few photographs taken over the years showing the appellant  growing  up
    and her  development"  (paragraph  26).   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider that if the sponsor's visits and contact  with  the  appellant
    had been as frequent as claimed, she could have produced  more  photos,
    but that the sponsor had not provided them despite saying more were  on
    her laptop at home.  (I  observe  that  no  further  photos  have  been
    adduced with the grounds of appeal either).   Given  that  the  sponsor
    identified that she had a number of family members in  Ghana  that  she
    cared about, I see no legal error in the judge's  assessment  that  the
    sponsor had failed to substantiate  the  claim  to  annual  visits  and
    visits during which she stayed with the appellant.

4.   The second ground takes further issue with  the  judge's  treatment  of
    the significance of the photographic evidence, as a record of both  the
    appellant's growth and development and of the fact that  the  appellant
    visited the sponsor during the latter's visits to Ghana.   It  is  said
    the judge failed to "consider or attach any weight to  this  aspect  of
    the evidence".  In my judgment this ground  cannot  succeed.   For  one
    thing, it is simply incorrect that the  judge  failed  to  attach  "any
    weight" to  such  evidence.   At  paragraph  26  the  judge  finds  the
    photographic evidence to be of "limited value".  That is not  the  same
    as no  value.   For  another,  this  body  of  evidence  was  correctly
    described by the judge as identifying only a very few  times  when  the
    two were together during the year since the sponsor left Ghana in 2009.



5.   The appellant's third ground takes issue with the judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 24 regarding evidence of online money transfers.  The grounds
    state that


         "[t]he sponsor's evidence was that between 2009 and  2014  she  had
         receipts for the over the counter remittances ... and from  therein
         until  2015  when  the  EC  application  was  made,  she  had  bank
         statements for the remittances made online to "First African Remm".
          The purpose and use of the remittances  was  corroborated  by  the
         appellant's statement"


    and also, it was stated, by the sponsor's oral evidence.

6.   I do not consider that the grounds grapple correctly with  the  judge's
    concerns about the money transfer remittance receipts.  At paragraph 24
    the judge noted that if the reason  for  the  lack  of  money  transfer
    receipts after  2014  was  that  the  sponsor  had  shifted  to  paying
    remittances online, it was reasonable to expect online documentation to
    have been provided.  It  was  not.   The  judge  identified  additional
    problems with the money transfer receipts in that there was a  lack  of
    correspondence between the  bank  statements  and  the  money  transfer
    payments and the sponsor had not given any  explanation  for  this.   A
    further overall difficulty the judge had with  the  financial  evidence
    was that on the sponsor's own evidence the  money  transfers  were  not
    only intended for the welfare of the appellant but also  "to  help  our
    family" in Ghana.

7.   Ms Appiah sought to argue that the judge's treatment of  the  financial
    evidence failed to factor in that the sponsor  would  take  amounts  in
    cash when she visited Ghana.  Leaving aside that this was not  a  point
    raised in the written grounds, the fact remains that  the  sponsor  was
    required to substantiate her financial support and what she  relied  on
    in order to do so, failed to demonstrate that she had sent money  on  a
    regular basis or that the amounts were for the appellant  specifically.



8.   The fourth point of challenge raised in the  written  grounds  concerns
    the judge's assessment of the two letters - one a  letter  of  consent
    dated 27 July 2015 signed by the  appellant's  father,  the  other  the
    letter signed by the appellant's aunt, Ms A V Carrey.  At paragraph  23
    the judge found these to be unreliable because both  had  clearly  been
    typed by the same person and the sponsor  herself  had  confirmed  that
    they were typed by someone helping the aunt.  The judge considered that
    the unreliability of these two letters was confirmed by  the  following
    features identified in paragraph 23:

         "There is no ID document in relation to the father of the appellant
         despite the apparent letter of consent. The  sponsor  explained  in
         evidence that she  had  contacted  Abena  (the  aunt)  despite  the
         absence of any evidence of such contact. It would have  been  by  e
         mail or telephone and Abena would have told the appellant's  father
         that the appellant was in the custody of her aunt. I do not  accept
         such an account as reliable, I would have expected the  appellant's
         father to have known of the appellant's situation and that  he  was
         not relying on his own sister to inform him as to  the  whereabouts
         and residence of his daughter."

9.   The appellant's written grounds say this treatment of the  two  letters
    is fundamentally flawed because


         "[the] IJ failed to consider, address or attach any weight  to  the
         witness statement and ID document of Ms  V  Carrey  (paragraph  2).
         The statement directly addressed the concerns raised by the  IJ  as
         to the veracity of the two letters and therefore ought to have been
         considered, addressed and appropriate weight attached".

10.  I find this ground to also fail.  In the first place, it is clear  that
    the judge did consider the sponsor's purported explanation  as  to  why
    the two letters had been prepared by the same person.  At paragraph  27
    the judge found:

             "I should return to the issue of the two letters of consent to
         be found in the  Respondent's  bundle.  The  sponsor  gave  further
         explanation that these two documents had been  put  together  by  a
         travel agent friend of hers in Accra, Ghana. This friend  told  the
         sponsor that he had done this and that the father of the  appellant
         and Abena had  done  her  letter  of  consent,  and  the  sponsor's
         understanding was that she did not know whether the  friend  travel
         agent had typed the letters himself or not, but that Mr. Carrey and
         Abena had signed the letters themselves and given those letters  to
         the travel agent friend. Such an explanation adds further confusion
         as to the reliability of either of these documents. "

11.  I consider the judge  was  entitled  to  find  this  explanation  added
    confusion, rather than confirming reliability.

12.  Secondly, whilst the appellant's documentation included an ID of  Ms  V
    Carrey and whilst her witness statement attested that  the  appellant's
    father "signed [the]  letter",  that  evidence  did  not  overcome  the
    glaring omission of any identity documents relating to the father,  nor
    indeed has any further statement or affidavit  from  him  been  adduced
    with the grounds.  The judge was fully justified in considering it  had
    simply not been proven  that  the  appellant's  father  had  given  his
    consent - let alone that he had done so (as the witness statement from
    Ms V  Carrey  claimed),  because  "he  could  not  take  care  of  [the
    appellant] himself".

13.  In the skeleton argument Ms Appiah produced for  the  hearing  it  was.
    contended that the judge did not consider adequately the role (if  any)
    of the appellant's father.  It is clear from what I have set out  above
    that the judge was not  satisfied  the  evidence  established  (as  was
    claimed) that the father had no role.  It  was  for  the  appellant  to
    prove her case.  The judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  claimed
    complete absence of the father had not been demonstrated.

14.  Ms  Appiah's  skeleton  argument  also  took  issue  with  the  judge's
    treatment of the evidence regarding the appellant's schooling  and  who
    took the key decision regarding it.  Leaving aside that this  point  of
    challenge was not identified in the  written  grounds,  I  consider  it
    amounts to a mere disagreement with the  judge's  findings.   What  the
    judge properly took account of was:

    (i)  The fact that the financial evidence did  not  identify  that  the
         sponsor had paid the appellant's school fees, only that  "some"  of
         the monies sent by the sponsor would have been for payment  of  any
         school fees.


    (ii) The failure of the  sponsor  to  produce  any  school  reports  or
         explain why she had not asked the school for them.


    It was entirely open to the judge to find that  the  sponsor's  account
    that she kept in touch with the school via a gentleman  "who  works  in
    the finance of the school" to be an inadequate basis to show  that  the
    sponsor  made  the  important  decisions  regarding   the   appellant's
    schooling.  There is no basis for  considering  that  in  reaching  his
    findings the judge failed to  take  account  of  the  evidence  of  the
    witness statements and of the sponsor.

15.  Ms Appiah's skeleton highlights that the judge made  no  finding  about
    who chose the school,  but  I  do  not  see,  even  if  the  judge  had
    considered the sponsor did, that this would have overcome  the  failure
    to show ongoing concern with the quality of her education.  Ms Appiah's
    skeleton argument also alleges that the judge made  no  findings  about
    "who decided who the appellant should live with and move from the  home
    of Abena Konadu to the home of [Ms N Carrey]".   It  is  clear  however
    that whilst the judge did not fully accept the account presented by the
    appellant as regards her residence (see e.g. paragraph 23), he accepted
    that the appellant had first resided with Abena Konadu and subsequently
    with her aunt (see paragraphs 28 and 29).  Indeed it is clear that  the
    judge  considered  that  important  decisions  about  the   appellant's
    upbringing had been made by these carers, rather  than  the  appellant.
    That assessment was entirely within the range of reasonable  responses.



16.  In light of the judge's principal findings of fact -  in  my  judgement
    findings free of material error  -  the  appellant  plainly  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of the sole responsibility Rule.  The  judge's
    decision was entirely in accordance  with  the  guidance  given  in  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049
    and other leading cases on paragraph 297.  Nor can the appellant derive
    any assistance from the relevant IDIs set out in chapter 8, Section  FM
    3.2.  The fact that the judge did not deal with each bullet  point  set
    out at 4.3 of the above simply  reflects  the  state  of  the  evidence
    adduced.  Given the judge's findings of fact on para 297, I  also  find
    no error in the judge's findings the appellant could not establish  any
    compelling evidence outside the Rules.

17.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT Judge did not  materially
    err in law and that his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
  Dated: 6 September 2017
              [pic]

