
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10699/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2019                      |On 10 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                Mr Md Ali [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel, instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, Mr Md Ali [J], in respect of the
Decision and Reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen, promulgated on 7
March 2019 in which the appellant's human rights claim was dismissed.

2.   The grounds for permission argue two grounds.  Firstly, that the First-
tier Tribunal Judge was wrong to refuse an adjournment pursued on the basis
that the appellant was ill and unable to attend the hearing, and secondly,
that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider evidence in support
of the appellant's case that he was a member of the BNP, which was material
to his human rights claim.

3.      Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Landes on 3 May 2019.

4.   I heard full submissions from Mr West this morning in support of the
grounds of appeal, and in response Mr Tarlow did not oppose the
application.

5.    I have decided that there is a material error of law in the
determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen.

6.   Both grounds of appeal have been made out. I am satisfied that the
First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him more than adequate documents to
support the appellant's claim that on the day before the hearing he was
suffering from breathlessness and depression and had attended hospital for
treatment [12].  The First Tier Tribunal Judge focussed on the absence of
evidence to explain why the appellant was not fit to attend. There was no
proper consideration by the First-tier Tribunal Judge of the issue of
fairness and the decision was inadequately reasoned. In particular there
was no consideration of whether or not the appellant would be deprived of a
right to a fair hearing (Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418
(IAC).

7.   In addition, I am satisfied that the second ground is made out.  The
First-tier Tribunal Judge decided to proceed in the absence of the
appellant. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then failed to consider a material
issue, namely the appellant's membership of the BNP, which could have
impacted on the decision made.  This of course would have been a matter on
which the appellant could have given oral evidence.

8.   I have decided to set aside the Decision and Reasons and the matter
will be remitted to Taylor House for hearing do novo, excluding First-tier
Tribunal Judge Dineen.

Notice of Decision

9.   There is a material error in law and decision is set aside. The  matter
    will be heard afresh before the Tribunal at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 17.6.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the matter will be reheard.


Signed                                  Date 17.6.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



