
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10396/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 18 May 2021                     |On 15 June 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MR ROBERT CHOOMOLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Signature Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. By a decision promulgated on 22 January 2021, I found an error  of  law
    in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  L   Nolan,   itself
    promulgated on 8 April 2020, allowing the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision dated 30 May 2019 refusing his  human  rights
    claims in the  context  of  a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  to
    Zimbabwe. I  therefore  set  aside  Judge  Nolan's  decision  and  gave
    directions for the re-making of  the  decision  by  way  of  a  resumed
    hearing.  I gave directions permitting the filing of  further  evidence
    and for oral evidence to be given at the  hearing.   My  error  of  law
    decision is appended hereto for ease of reference.

 2. On 13 May 2021, the Appellant filed a small,  supplementary  bundle  of
    evidence.  Although that was  filed  outside  the  time  limits  in  my
    directions, I admitted that evidence with no objection from Ms Everett.
     However, since Ms Everett had not received that bundle  prior  to  the
    hearing, it was sent to her electronically and I permitted her a  short
    adjournment to read what was  a  short  bundle.   In  addition  to  the
    supplementary bundle to which I refer below as  [ABS/xx],  I  also  had
    before me the original Appellant's bundle (to which I  refer  below  as
    [AB/xx]), a core bundle of documents relating to  the  appeal  and  the
    Respondent's bundle.  I have read the documents but refer to them  only
    so far as necessary to support my reasoning and conclusions.

 3. The hearing was conducted via Skype for Business.  There were no  major
    technical issues affecting the conduct of the hearing.

 4. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his mother, Shaluza  Malunga,
    and  his  ex-partner,  Chelsea  Cooley.   The  Appellant's  stepfather,
    Alistair Taylor, was also available to give  evidence  but  Ms  Everett
    indicated that she had no questions for him.  There was  one  point  of
    clarification /amendment made to his statement but that did not  entail
    him giving oral evidence.  The Appellant's  sister,  Sharon,  was  also
    present at the hearing  but  had  not  provided  a  statement  and  she
    attended only to provide support to her brother.   I  have  taken  into
    account all the evidence I heard  but  refer  only  to  that  which  is
    relevant to my reasoning and conclusions.

    LEGAL FRAMEWORK

 5. The legal framework which applies in this appeal and passages of  case-
    law which are relevant to that framework are set out at [11] to [13] of
    my error of law decision.

 6. In summary, I am required first to consider whether the Appellant falls
    into either  or  both  of  the  two  exceptions  to  deportation  under
    paragraph 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("Paragraph  399A")/section
    117C(4)  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   ("Section
    117C(4)") and/or paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("Paragraph
    399")/ section 117C(5) Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("Section 117C(5)").  Paragraph 399A and Section 117C(4) are  concerned
    with the  impact  of  deportation  on  the  Appellant's  private  life.
    Paragraph 399 and Section 117C(5) are concerned  with  the  Appellant's
    family life.  In the context of this appeal, that is concerned with the
    relationship between the Appellant and his daughter ([R]).   His  other
    family relationships with his mother, stepfather, other family  members
    and his ex-partner are not relevant to the family  life  exception  but
    may be relevant to his  private  life  (in  terms  of  integration  and
    obstacles to deportation) and are relevant if I reach the stage  of  an
    assessment outside the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

 7. If I find that neither exception is met, I am  required  to  go  on  to
    consider whether there are  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above" those exceptions.  That  obligation  arises  in  practice  under
    paragraph  398  of  the  Rules  ("Paragraph  398")/   section   117C(6)
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C(6)").  If I
    carry out that exercise, I may still take into  account  factors  which
    fall within the two exceptions which I have identified.  At this stage,
    though, I am required to balance the impact on the Appellant's  private
    and family life  against  the  public  interest  which  includes,  most
    importantly, in this case  the  Appellant's  criminal  offending.   The
    public  interest  involves  a  consideration  not  only  of  that  past
    offending and the risk which the Appellant  now  poses  but  also  such
    factors as deterrence of  others  by  the  enforcement  of  deportation
    against foreign national offenders.

 8. I have to have  regard  to  the  impact  of  deportation  on  [R],  the
    Appellant's young daughter through the lens of  what  is  in  her  best
    interests.  Those best interests are a primary although not a paramount
    consideration.  Although they are a  primary  consideration,  they  are
    capable of being outweighed  by  the  public  interest  where  that  is
    appropriate.

 9. When dealing with the test under Paragraph 399 and Section 117C(5)  and
    the issue whether the deportation of the Appellant would have an unduly
    harsh impact on [R] (which incorporates what is in her best interests),
    I have regard to what is said by the Court of Appeal  in  HA  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA  Civ  1176  ("HA
    (Iraq)").  A summary of the test which applies in that regard is to  be
    found at [39] to [57] of the judgment informed also by the comments  of
    the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)").   The  salient
    points made by the Court are encapsulated in the below passages:

         "'THE MEANING OF UNDULY HARSH'

         39.  Both Appellants contend that the effect of  their  deportation
         on their children would be 'unduly harsh', within  the  meaning  of
         section 117C (5) - i.e. Exception 2 - and paragraph 399 (a) of  the
         Rules. There is  an  issue  before  us  about  the  height  of  the
         threshold which that phrase sets. The meaning of 'unduly harsh' was
         considered in KO (Nigeria) ...

         40.  ... It is important to bear in mind,  and  is  perhaps  rather
         unfortunate  for  our  purposes,  that  the  actual  issue  in KO
         (Nigeria) was a very specific one, namely whether the word "unduly"
         referred back to sub-section (2) of section 117C and thus  required
         what Lord Carnwath  described  at  para.  20  of  his  judgment  as
         "balancing of the relative  seriousness  of  the  offence"  -  "the
         relative seriousness issue" ...  Although  in  the  course  of  his
         discussion of that issue he does also express  a  view  as  to  the
         height of the threshold which the phrase "unduly  harsh"  connotes,
         that is not his primary focus.

         ...

         42.  ... Lord Carnwath considers the language of section 117C,  and
         more  particularly  sub-section  (5),  as  regards   the   relative
         seriousness issue ... He continues, at para. 23:

             'On the  other  hand,  the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             'reasonableness' under section 117B (6), taking account of the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. 'Unduly' implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C (1), that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of  the  Court  of  Appeal
             in IT  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras  55,
             64) can it  be  equated  with  a  requirement  to  show  'very
             compelling reasons'. That would be in effect to replicate  the
             additional test applied by section 117C (6)  with  respect  to
             sentences of four years or more.'

         That is an important passage,  and  it  is  necessary  to  identify
         exactly what Lord Carnwath is and is not saying.

         43.  The starting point is that the question to which the reasoning
         is directed is whether the word 'unduly' imports a  requirement  to
         consider 'the severity of the parent's offence:  that,  as  I  have
         said,  was  the  actual  issue  in  the  appeal.  Lord   Carnwath's
         conclusion is that it does not.... it follows that it is irrelevant
         whether the sentence was at the top or  the  bottom  of  the  range
         between one  year  and  four:  as  Lord  Carnwath  says,  the  only
         relevance of the length of the sentence is to establish whether the
         foreign criminal is a medium offender or not.

         44.  In order to establish that the word 'unduly' was not  directed
         to the  relative  seriousness  issue  it  was  necessary  for  Lord
         Carnwath to say to what it was in fact directed. That  is  what  he
         does in the first part of the paragraph. The effect of what he says
         is that 'unduly' is directed to the degree of harshness required:
         some level of  harshness  is  to  be  regarded  as  'acceptable  or
         justifiable'  in  the  context  of  the  public  interest  in   the
         deportation of foreign criminals, and  what  'unduly'  does  is  to
         provide that Exception 2 will only apply where the  harshness  goes
         beyond that level. Lord Carnwath's focus is not primarily on how to
         define the 'acceptable' level of harshness.  It  is  true  that  he
         refers  to  a  degree  of  harshness  'going  beyond   what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent', but that cannot be read entirely literally: it  is  hard
         to see how one would define  the  level  of  harshness  that  would
         'necessarily' be suffered by 'any' child (indeed  one  can  imagine
         unusual cases where the  deportation  of  a  parent  would  not  be
         'harsh' for the child at all, even where there was  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship). The underlying concept is clearly  of  an
         enhanced degree of harshness  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  in  the  medium
         offender category.

         45.  Lord Carnwath then turns more particularly to the case  of  KO
         ... The only part that is relevant for our purposes  is  para.  27,
         where he says:

             'Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of 'unduly harsh' in
             this context was given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
             President and  UT  Judge  Perkins)  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563 ... They referred  to  the  'evaluative
             assessment' required of the tribunal:

             'By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context denotes  something
             severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'
             raises an already elevated standard still higher.'

         ...

         50.  What light do those passages shed on the  meaning  of  'unduly
         harsh' (beyond the conclusion on the relative seriousness issue)?

         51.  The essential point is that the criterion of  undue  harshness
         sets a bar  which  is  'elevated'  and  carries  a  'much  stronger
         emphasis' than mere undesirability: see para. 27 of Lord Carnwath's
         judgment, approving the UT's self-direction in MK (Sierra  Leone),
         and para. 35. The UT's self-direction uses a  battery  of  synonyms
         and antonyms: although these should not  be  allowed  to  become  a
         substitute for the statutory language, tribunals may find  them  of
         some assistance as a reminder of the elevated nature of  the  test.
         The reason why some degree of harshness is acceptable is that there
         is a strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals
         (including medium offenders): see para. 23. The underlying question
         for tribunals is whether the harshness which the  deportation  will
         cause for the partner and/or child is of  a  sufficiently  elevated
         degree to outweigh that public interest.

         52.  However,  while  recognising  the  'elevated'  nature  of  the
         statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the fact  that
         the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by the test  of
         'very compelling  circumstances'  in  section  117C  (6).  As  Lord
         Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23 of his judgment,
         disapproving IT (Jamaica), if that were so the position of  medium
         offenders and their families  would  be  no  better  than  that  of
         serious offenders. It follows that the observations in the case-law
         to the effect that it will be rare for the test of 'very compelling
         circumstances' to be satisfied have no application in this  context
         ....  The  statutory  intention  is  evidently  that   the   hurdle
         representing the unacceptable impact on a partner or  child  should
         be set somewhere between the (low) level applying in  the  case  of
         persons who are liable to ordinary immigration  removal  (see  Lord
         Carnwath's reference to section 117B (6) at the start of para.  23)
         and the (very high) level applying to serious offenders.

         53.  Observations of that kind  are,  I  hope,  helpful,  but  they
         cannot identify an objectively measurable standard. It is  inherent
         in the nature of an exercise of the kind required by  section  117C
         (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals  should  in  each  case
         make an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect of the
         deportation of the parent or partner  on  their  child  or  partner
         would be 'unduly  harsh'  in  the  context  of  the  strong  public
         interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals;  and  further
         exposition of that phrase will never be of more than limited value.

         54.  The Appellants of course accept that Lord Carnwath  said  what
         he said in the passages to which I have referred. But they  contend
         that it is not a complete statement of the relevant law and/or that
         it is capable of  being  misunderstood.  In  their  joint  skeleton
         argument they refer to the statement in para. 23 of Lord Carnwath's
         judgment that 'one is looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent' and continue:

             'This statement, taken in isolation, creates  the  opportunity
             for a court  or  tribunal  to  reach  a  conclusion  on  undue
             harshness without due regard to the section  55  duty  or  the
             best interests of the child and without  careful  analysis  of
             all relevant factors specific to the child in  any  particular
             case. Instead, such considerations risk being 'swept up' under
             the general conclusion that the  emotional  and  psychological
             impact on the child would not  be  anything  other  than  that
             which is ordinarily expected by the deportation  of  a  parent
             ... that cannot have been the intention of the  Supreme  Court
             in KO (Nigeria), which would otherwise create an unreasonably
             high threshold.'

         ...

         55.  ... it is plainly not the case that Lord Carnwath was  unaware
         of  the  relevance  of  section  55  ...  The  reason  why  it  was
         unnecessary for him to refer explicitly to section 55  specifically
         in the context of his discussion of Exception 2 is  that  the  very
         purpose of the Exception, to the extent that it is  concerned  with
         the effect of deportation on a child, is to ensure  that  the  best
         interests of that child are treated as a primary consideration.  It
         does so by providing that those interests should, in the case of  a
         medium offender, prevail over the public  interest  in  deportation
         where the effect on the child  would  be  unduly  harsh.  In  other
         words, consideration of the best interests of the  child  is  built
         into the statutory test ...

         56.  The second point focuses on what are said to be the  risks  of
         treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the degree of
         harshness goes beyond 'that which is  ordinarily  expected  by  the
         deportation of a parent' ...  I  see  rather  more  force  in  this
         submission. As explained above, the test  under  section  117C  (5)
         does indeed require an appellant to establish a degree of harshness
         going beyond a threshold 'acceptable' level. It is not  necessarily
         wrong to describe that as  an  'ordinary'  level  of  harshness....
         However, I think the Appellants are right to point out that it  may
         be misleading if used incautiously. There seem  to  me  to  be  two
         (related) risks. First, 'ordinary' is capable of  being  understood
         as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in any event rare.
         That is not the correct approach: see para. 52 above. There  is  no
         reason in principle why cases of 'undue' harshness  may  not  occur
         quite commonly. Secondly, if tribunals treat the essential question
         as being 'is this level of harshness out of the ordinary?' they may
         be tempted to find that Exception 2 does not apply  simply  on  the
         basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some  commonly-encountered
         pattern. That would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a
         parent's deportation will depend on an almost  infinitely  variable
         range of circumstances  and  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  a
         baseline of 'ordinariness'. Simply by way of example, the degree of
         harshness of the impact may be affected  by  the  child's  age;  by
         whether the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or separated
         father may still have a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         child who lives with the mother); by  the  degree  of  the  child's
         emotional dependence on the parent; by the  financial  consequences
         of his deportation; by the availability of emotional and  financial
         support from a remaining parent and other family  members;  by  the
         practicability of maintaining  a  relationship  with  the  deported
         parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of  the
         child.

         57.  ... Tribunals considering the parent case  under  Exception  2
         should not err in law if in each case they carefully  evaluate  the
         likely effect of the parent's deportation on the  particular  child
         and then decide whether that effect is not merely harsh but  unduly
         harsh applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with  the  guidance  at
         paras. 50-53 above."

10. The main points which I take from that passage are that  the  threshold
    to be applied is a high one. It is higher than that which applies in  a
    removals case but is not as high as that which applies when considering
    whether there are "very compelling circumstances over  and  above"  the
    exceptions for the purposes of Section 117C(6)  (although  that  latter
    test also incorporates a balance  between  the  impact  of  deportation
    against the seriousness of the  offending  which  is  relevant  to  the
    public  interest).   Although  the  test  is  an  "elevated"  one,  the
    consideration is of the impact on the individual child in  the  context
    of that child's relationship with the  parent  to  be  deported.   That
    child's circumstances in the UK  are  also  a  relevant  part  of  that
    consideration.  There is no base standard of harshness which is  to  be
    expected due to the context of deportation.  Ultimately, though, what I
    have to consider is whether, in the context of deportation of a foreign
    national offender (which is in the public interest), the impact of  the
    deportation of the Appellant on the  child  has  an  impact  which  can
    legitimately be described on  the  evidence  as  meeting  the  elevated
    threshold of undue harshness.

11. The burden of proving the strength and extent of his private and family
    life and the effect of interference with that private and  family  life
    lies with the Appellant.  Thereafter,  it  is  for  the  Respondent  to
    justify the necessity and proportionality of that interference  in  the
    public interest.   I have to consider the position as at  the  date  of
    the hearing before me.

    ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE

    The Appellant's Family Life with [R]

12.  [R] is aged six years old.  She lives  with  her  mother,  Ms  Cooley.
    However, she has regular contact with the Appellant (including  staying
    contact) as I will come to below.

13. I begin with the Appellant's witness statement dated 10  December  2019
    at [AB/1-7] where he says the following about the separation  from  his
    daughter when he was in prison:

         "12. The separation from my daughter when I was in prison  was  the
         absolute hardest thing for me.  Because I was  placed  in  Belmarsh
         which was a high security prison, I did not want my daughter to  be
         anywhere near that place and I didn't allow Chelsea to bring her to
         visit.  I saw more violence and crime  happen  during  my  stay  in
         prison than I probably will for the duration of my whole life.   It
         is not an environment for a child to be in and I  would  have  been
         horrified to see my daughter in a prison visiting room with me  and
         the other criminals.  It's not healthy and I hope to God  she  will
         never have to see anything like that in her life.  If she ever does
         it will not be because of me.

         13.  We never told [R] that I was in prison or arrested but I  told
         her that I was away working.  I spoke to her on the phone but  that
         was so difficult for both of us as she was desperate to know when I
         was coming home, why wasn't I coming home, couldn't  I  come  home.
         She was very young and just very persistent  because  she  couldn't
         understand. I was desperate to see her and talk to her but  it  was
         very painful having to talk to her and try to come up with  excuses
         as to why I couldn't come home and see her.

         14.  It is scary for me to think about being permanently  separated
         from my child and I don't know what I would do without my family.

         15.  While I was in jail, I was very close to depression and I have
         never entertained those kinds of thoughts until  then  and  I  feel
         that being removed from the UK would  be  similar.   I  would  lose
         everything.  My music and my child are what keeps me going.  I  can
         do my music wherever I am but my daughter is based here in the UK."

14. The Appellant goes on to speak about the struggles faced by  Ms  Cooley
    coping as a single parent when he was in prison.  Ms Cooley's statement
    dated 10 December 2019 at [AB/8-14] deals  with  the  period  of  [R]'s
    separation from the Appellant as follows:

         "17. After Robert was arrested, it had a terrible  effect  on  [R].
         She was really young but she was really close to her  dad  and  she
         didn't understand why her dad had  just  disappeared.   Her  entire
         routine was changed overnight and at that age even a  small  change
         in routine can have massive effect.  Her dad  disappeared  and  she
         was just distraught.  She would cry every day.  Even if she  calmed
         down in the morning when I took her to school she would  come  home
         and start crying that her dad wasn't home.

         18.  I never told [R] that her daddy had been arrested or  gone  to
         prison.  I told her that he had been naughty and had to go away for
         a while.  [R] is a very clever little girl and she  knew  something
         was wrong and there were enough people  around  her  talking  about
         'arrest' and 'prison' that I think she knew.   She  asked  for  her
         daddy every single day that he was away from her.

         19.  When Robert came out of prison and was on bail, he didn't want
         to leave the house.  I think he was too embarrassed about what  had
         happened to him and he didn't want to face anyone.  He  was  really
         down and just wanted to spend time with [R].  He took her to school
         and just spent time with her. [R] was over the moon when  Rob  came
         back and we tried to minimise the stress for her so we did tell her
         that her daddy would need to go away again.  We told  her  that  he
         would be going away again but we told her he was going on holiday.

         20.  She kept asking him where he had been and it took her a  while
         for her to settle.  It was really sad for me  to  see  her  getting
         herself upset and worried about whether her daddy would be home  if
         I took her out anywhere.  If I took her out to  the  shops  and  we
         left Rob at home, she [would] get really upset and  constantly  ask
         if he was going to be home when we got home.  The first  thing  she
         would do as soon as she got through the door was go and find him.

         21.  I think that when Rob went back to prison the second time, [R]
         was a bit better prepared so she didn't get hysterical like she did
         before but she still constantly asked where  he  was.   She  became
         very clingy with me and she would get in with me in bed a lot  more
         than she  ever  did  before.   I  don't  know  if  she  was  having
         nightmares but she built it up in her head and  at  one  point  she
         told me that her daddy had been hurt and that is why  he  had  gone
         away.  She built the situation up in her head  and  it  was  really
         hard to see the effect it had on her.

         22.  While he was in prison, Robert would call home at least  every
         2 or 3 days and he would speak to [R] at least 3 or 4  times  week.
         It was difficult and we started to worry whether it was  the  right
         thing for her to  speak  [to]  her  daddy  on  the  phone  but  she
         desperately wanted to speak to her daddy.  The  conversations  were
         usually  really  upsetting  for  both  Rob  and  [R].   She   would
         continuously [ask] when he was coming home and why he couldn't come
         home.  She was only 3 years old but she  was  so  persistent  about
         where her daddy was and why he wouldn't come home.  It  was  really
         upsetting for Robert as well and he would run out  of  excuses  and
         ways to tell her he couldn't come home because  she  just  couldn't
         understand."

15. The evidence of the Appellant and Ms Cooley is  consistent  as  to  the
    impact which separation of the Appellant from [R] had on her  while  he
    was in prison.  It is also consistent with what they said in their oral
    evidence about not having told [R] about  the  deportation  proceedings
    and prospect of a further separation.  I was particularly struck by  Ms
    Cooley's evidence that it might be worse for [R] to try to  continue  a
    remote relationship with her father (even though both  said  that  they
    would try to do this).  That is consistent with what Ms Cooley says  in
    her statement about [R] becoming upset by telephone  contact  with  the
    Appellant when he was in prison.

16. Ms Cooley also says, consistently with the Appellant's  evidence,  that
    she found it "really hard to cope" whilst the Appellant was  in  prison
    particularly because of the impact which the separation was  having  on
    their daughter.   She was prescribed anti-depressants.  As she  accepts
    in her evidence, however, she did have support from her own family  and
    from the Appellant's family.  That is  consistent  with  Mrs  Malunga's
    evidence that she had "always  helped"  and  "whatever  happens"  would
    continue  to  do  so  because  she  loves  her   granddaughter.     The
    Appellant's stepfather says in his statement at  [ABS/7-8]  that  their
    and the Appellant's priority is "what's best for [R]".

17. I turn then to the current contact which the Appellant  has  with  [R].
    This is dealt with in his statement dated 30 April 2021 (at [ABS/1-2]).
     Immediately following his separation from Ms Cooley they  agreed  that
    he would have [R] every weekend from Friday evening to Monday  morning.
    That arrangement  was  disrupted  by  the  pandemic.   The  Appellant's
    stepfather is clinically vulnerable and therefore they sought to reduce
    risk to him.  During the first lockdown therefore, it was  agreed  that
    [R] would stay with the Appellant only every other weekend. Since  July
    2020, the weekly contact has resumed.  Both the Appellant and Ms Cooley
    confirmed this arrangement and also confirmed that the Appellant  takes
    [R] if Ms Cooley needs him to  do  so  either  because  she  has  other
    commitments or "when it becomes too much for her".  It was  clear  from
    Ms Cooley's oral evidence that she is keen to  support  the  continuing
    relationship between the Appellant and their daughter and equally clear
    from the Appellant's evidence that  he  wishes  to  continue  with  the
    current arrangements.

18. As to the current relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  [R],  the
    Appellant says this in his April 2021 statement:

         "9.  Since the last hearing my relationship with  my  daughter  has
         only grown stronger and I cannot imagine what I would do if  I  was
         forced to leave her.  I don't want my daughter to lose  her  father
         because of my mistakes and  I  want  to  be  there  to  support  my
         daughter and her mother as she grows up.  My daughter is older now,
         she is talking more and understanding everything.  She  was  always
         very bright but as a child gets older they have more comprehension.
          It would be devastating for my daughter to lose her father and for
         us as a family.  Even though I am no longer in a relationship  with
         her mother, we work together to raise our daughter and I need to be
         here to support my daughter and her mother."

19. As the Appellant lives with his mother and stepfather at the moment, it
    is Mrs Malunga who is probably the best placed to provide corroboratory
    evidence about the current relationship between the Appellant and  [R].
    The Appellant has recently been ill and was  hospitalised  (as  I  will
    come to below).  Mrs Malunga says this about the relationship and [R]'s
    behaviour when the Appellant was in  hospital  and  when  he  came  out
    (statement dated 12 May 2021 at [ABS/3-6]):

         "13. Rob's relationship with [R] is so close and at the moment  the
         arrangements are for him to see her every weekend.  He will collect
         her from school on the Friday afternoon and she will stay with  him
         until he drops her to school on the Monday morning.  Even  when  he
         was sick, I collected her from school and  she  spent  the  weekend
         with us but she wanted to go and see Rob in the hospital.  When Rob
         got out of hospital, he couldn't get out, he was bed bound but  [R]
         just wanted to stay with him.  I asked her 'Do you want to  go  out
         with me and aunty Helen? But she said no she wanted  to  stay  with
         her father.  I tried to tempt her with TV time and she came to  sit
         with us in the lounge but after about 3 minutes  she  told  me  she
         'missed daddy' and I let her go back in with him.

         14.  I look at them together and it's so clear that it's  not  like
         she is one of those children who don't know her  dad.   I  see  how
         excited she is when she comes in for the weekend with him  and  she
         just wants to spend as much time with him as  she  can.   Sometimes
         when he goes to drop her back at  home  with  Chelsea,  we  usually
         check to see if he needs a lift home but he always  tells  me  that
         she asked him to stay until she goes to sleep and he always does."

20. The Appellant and Ms Cooley were asked by Ms  Everett  how  they  would
    prepare [R] if he were deported.  The Appellant said that he would have
    to prepare [R] for this as they had not told her about the prospect  to
    avoid frightening her.  He would sit down  with  [R]  and  explain  the
    situation. He said he would write to her when he got back to  Zimbabwe.
    He did not know what internet technology would be available to  him  in
    Zimbabwe.  He accepted that he could get a phone, but he did  not  know
    if he would be able to get internet access. He also  accepted  that  in
    principle, [R] could visit him in Zimbabwe.  His mother,  Mrs  Malunga,
    visits Zimbabwe generally about once per year to see her  mother  there
    (see below).  However, the Appellant said that he and Ms  Cooley  would
    not be able to afford the airfares for [R] to go.  Mrs Malunga and  his
    stepfather would not be able to help out in this regard as they had  to
    scrape together the money for Mrs Malunga's own flights.

21. Ms Cooley did not provide a supplementary  statement  for  the  hearing
    before me.   However, in her oral evidence, when asked  how  she  would
    prepare [R] if the Appellant were deported, she said it would  be  very
    difficult  for  [R]  to  adjust  because  of  the  closeness   of   the
    relationship  between  [R]  and  the  Appellant.   She  said  that  [R]
    constantly asks for her father.   She  even  said  that  [R]  sometimes
    "calls [her] dad by accident".  She could not imagine how [R] would  be
    if she were again separated from her father.  She also  said  that  she
    couldn't envisage being able to prepare [R] for a  further  separation.
    She would probably have to turn to other family members to do so.  When
    asked if she would facilitate contact via the phone  or  internet,  she
    confirmed that she would of course do so but  that  it  would  be  very
    difficult.  I have already referred to her comment that it might almost
    be worse if [R] had that remote contact  as  it  would  accentuate  the
    impact of physical separation.

22. I also have two reports of an independent social  worker,  Mr  Laurence
    Chester, which deal with the relationship between the Appellant and [R]
    and the potential impact of separation on [R].  Those reports are dated
    15 December 2019 ([AB/58-73]) and 9 May 2021 ([ABS/13-18]).

23. I do not set out the detail of the conversations which Mr  Chester  had
    with the Appellant, Ms Cooley and [R].  I have read what is there said.
     Nor do I make reference to what Mr Chester says about the  Appellant's
    mood or the situation [R] might face in Zimbabwe.  Mr Chester does  not
    purport to have any medical qualifications or to  know  anything  about
    Zimbabwe.  As I will come to below, in any event, Ms Everett,  although
    not conceding the point (rightly) did not  submit  that  [R]  could  be
    expected to go to Zimbabwe with her father on a permanent basis.

24. Mr Chester's opinion in his first report was that, notwithstanding  the
    estranged relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Cooley,  they
    remained a "close knit family, unified by their  strong  attachment  to
    each other and shared love for [R]".  He says that he "would be  deeply
    concerned for the significant emotional distress [R]  would  suffer  if
    her father were deported. Especially given the current  high  level  of
    involvement [the Appellant] has  in  her  life."   Such  distress  "may
    impact on [R's] overall wellbeing".  He goes on to say that deportation
    of the Appellant "would have  a  profound  impact  on  [R]'s  emotional
    wellbeing".  That concern is seemingly based on [R] having "experienced
    stress and anxiety when her  father  was  incarcerated".   There  is  a
    suggestion that [R]'s school attendance in reception class was affected
    at the time and a referral made to Children's Services.  I do not  give
    that aspect of Mr Chester's report weight as I can find no reference to
    this in the witness statements of either the Appellant  or  Ms  Cooley.
    There is no evidence from Children's Services.

25. Overall, the points  made  by  Mr  Chester  about  the  impact  of  the
    Appellant's deportation  on  [R]'s  well-being  are  based  on  generic
    factors rather than specific evidence about past or present impacts  of
    separation.

26. I place some weight on Mr Chester's more recent report,  in  particular
    what he says about the closeness of the relationship  he  was  able  to
    observe between the Appellant and [R] during the Zoom  interview  which
    he conducted on 2 May 2021.  Mr Chester describes [R] as  a  confident,
    happy child with "a loving, strong personality".  I have regard to what
    [R] said to Mr Chester about  her  relationship  with  her  mother  and
    father.  I accept that, notwithstanding that [R] lives with her  mother
    during the week and sees the Appellant at  weekends,  the  relationship
    she has with her father is close.  I was struck by the  fact  that  [R]
    apparently re-entered the chat after a few moments of being out of  the
    room "as she was missing her dad".

27. I also have regard to what the Appellant said to Mr Chester  about  the
    potential impact on [R] if he were deported.  He did not overstate  the
    position.  He fears that [R]'s "emotional stability would  suffer"  and
    that she would be "extremely sad".   I  have  regard  to  Mr  Chester's
    opinion that "[R] has a close, loving relationship with her father" and
    that her "close family attachments form an intrinsic part of [R]'s  own
    development" (as is indeed evident from the answers which [R]  gave  to
    Mr Chester's questions during interview).

    The Appellant's Private Life

28. The Appellant came to the UK in January 2008, then aged just  seventeen
    years.  He came to join his mother who had moved to the UK to join  his
    stepfather when he was aged about thirteen years.   The  Appellant  was
    left at boarding school in Zimbabwe.  During the  school  holidays,  he
    was left in the care of his grandmother.  She is still alive and living
    in the family home in Zimbabwe.  She is elderly and is cared for by Mrs
    Malunga's cousin.  The Appellant was given indefinite leave to enter on
    arrival.  The Appellant's sister also lives in the UK.

29. Although the Appellant was nearly an adult when he came to the UK,  his
    education in Zimbabwe was conducted in English.  He says in  his  first
    statement that he does not speak  much  Shona.   It  appears  that  his
    mother does speak that language.  I accept however that  the  Appellant
    has not had to speak the language every day since he left Zimbabwe.  He
    has not returned to Zimbabwe since he left in 2008.

30. Since leaving school and college, the Appellant has tried  to  forge  a
    career in music production.  He set up his own company but did  not  do
    well financially.  It was as a result of the premises he was using that
    he  became  involved  with  those  dealing  drugs  which  led  to   his
    conviction.  I will come on to the detail of the Appellant's conviction
    and rehabilitation below.  There is no direct evidence in  relation  to
    the Appellant's educational achievements but there is  mention  in  the
    OASys report at [AB/29] that  the  Appellant  completed  6  GCSEs  (A-C
    grades) at school in Zimbabwe and A levels in computer  science,  maths
    and English at college in  the  UK  (with  a  distinction  in  computer
    science).

31. Since he is subject to  a  deportation  order,  the  Appellant  is  not
    presently entitled to work.  As to his past integration in the  UK  and
    his ties with Zimbabwe, the Appellant says this in his first statement:

         "32.  Given  the  length  of  my  residence  in  the  UK   and   my
         circumstances in Zimbabwe before I came to the UK, I  believe  that
         the UK is my home.  It is where my family,  friends  and  life  are
         based.  I have no family or  friends  in  Zimbabwe  other  than  my
         elderly grandmother as everything I have is now in the UK.

         33.  I have no links or ties with Zimbabwe.  When I left, I  didn't
         keep in touch with friends because people  move  on.   It's  always
         hard when life goes in a different direction  to  try  to  maintain
         that sort of connection, particularly when you are young.   I  came
         to the UK and I built a life here with my family."

32. That position is corroborated by the evidence of  Mrs  Malunga  in  her
    statement as follows:

         "5.  In Zimbabwe, I don't know if  he  could  cope  or  what  would
         happen if he gets sick again as he would be  alone.   In  Zimbabwe,
         the only family that he really has is my mother,  his  granny,  but
         she is over the age of 80  and  cannot  even  look  after  herself.
         There is one aunty, my cousin that Rob met when  he  was  going  to
         boarding school, after I came to  the  UK.   She  would  help  with
         buying things for the children when they were home for the holidays
         but Rob never got along with her.  I  would  get  complaints  about
         them from her and complaints about [her] from them.  I  don't  know
         what happened in Zimbabwe after I came to the UK but Rob has  never
         had a positive thing to say about boarding school or  when  he  was
         staying with my mother in the holidays.

         6.   In terms of Rob returning to Zimbabwe, he has  lived  here  so
         long and has always found the  UK  more  of  a  home  to  him  than
         Zimbabwe.  When he left, he wasn't at an  age  or  in  a  situation
         where he had developed a connection  with  any  family  members  or
         friends really.  He has no real connection with anyone in  Zimbabwe
         and he has no relationship with his extended family members  there.
         As I said, I don't know what happened but Rob hasn't even agreed to
         speak to any of my family members on the phone since coming to  the
         UK.  My cousin who Rob met before coming to  the  UK  is  currently
         living in my house in Zimbabwe, looking after her mother.   She  is
         living there with her family but when my mother  passes  they  will
         return to their own home.  They are  only  staying  there  to  look
         after my mother who is her aunty so I'm not sure of what they would
         say if I had to ask them to look after Rob  in  the  future.   They
         have never got on."

33. Whilst I accept the consistency of that evidence as to  the  extent  of
    the ties which remain in Zimbabwe, I do not accept what  appears  there
    to be suggested of acrimony between  the  Appellant  and  his  extended
    family in Zimbabwe.  There is no mention of any such  acrimony  in  the
    Appellant's own statement.  The Appellant in  his  oral  evidence  said
    that if he was sent back to Zimbabwe, he would be able to stay  in  the
    house where his grandmother lived.  He did not say that he  would  feel
    uncomfortable doing so. He said only that he had  not  been  there  for
    some time  and  he  had  not  spoken  to  his  grandmother  because  he
    considered his life to be with his parents in the UK,  his  grandmother
    was too old and he "did not expect this to happen".  The  only  mention
    of the relationship between the Appellant and Mrs Malunga's  cousin  in
    her oral evidence was that her cousin had not been able to  look  after
    the Appellant when he was young and healthy and would be unable  to  do
    so now that he was sick.

34. That brings me on to the Appellant's medical conditions.  The Appellant
    was diagnosed with HIV when Ms Cooley was pregnant.  At the time of his
    first statement, the Appellant said that he  was  "not  managing  [his]
    HIV" at that time "as  it  was  very  difficult  for  [him]  to  juggle
    things".  He was on medication  whilst  in  prison  but  came  off  the
    medication  and  since  "[t]aking  the  drugs  intermittently  is   not
    medically  recommended  [he  was]   taking   a   break   with   medical
    supervision".  There is no documentary evidence in the original  bundle
    concerning the Appellant's medical condition or treatment  in  the  UK.
    There  is  no  evidence  in  either  bundle  concerning  the  treatment
    available for HIV in Zimbabwe.  There is reference in the  Respondent's
    decision letter to evidence from a MedCOI  database  to  the  following
    effect:

         "HIV specialists are all available in Zimbabwe.  Viral loading  and
         CD4 counts can be carried out in Zimbabwe.  As  regards  ARV  drugs
         for HIV - cobicistat and rezolta are not available, but  darunavir,
         emtricitabine, tenofir, alafenamide and  descoy  are  available  in
         Zimbabwe."

35. The Appellant has  recently  (in  January  2021)  become  ill  and  was
    hospitalised.  This was for an inflammation of the brain.  He  says  in
    his statement that his lungs were weakened by the illness and he has to
    be treated with a breathing machine every  four  weeks.   He  does  not
    however overstate his general health based on his HIV.  He says in  his
    latest  statement  that  "[his]  health  has  generally  been   stable"
    although, understandably, he has had to  be  very  careful  during  the
    pandemic because, as he  there  says,  "[he  is]  more  susceptible  to
    infections".

36. Dealing then with the Appellant's current medical condition and  recent
    illness, there is at [ABS/9] a letter  from  Dr  P  Saigal,  Consultant
    Physician in GUM/HIV, Queen Elizabeth Hospital dated 7 May  2021  which
    reads as follows:

         "Robert has longstanding HIV-1  infection  and  has  recently  been
         diagnosed with an opportunistic infection (PML).

         His most recent CD4 count is 199 and viral  load  412.  He  reports
         very good adherence to his treatment.

         He  does  remain  immunosuppressed.   He  needs  access  to   daily
         antiretroviral treatments, without which he risks  becoming  unwell
         from a potential life threatening illness.

         In addition, he  is  also  under  the  Surgical  Team  and  waiting
         debulking of a lower GI mass, which may potentially be a tumour.

         Given his ongoing current medical issues, I would strongly  support
         his application to stay in the UK.  Without access to both  medical
         and surgical intervention, he is at  risk  of  becoming  incredibly
         unwell."

37. Unfortunately, that letter does not deal with the extent to which it is
    the Appellant's current illness which has given cause  for  concern  or
    his longstanding medical condition.  The letter does not  explain  what
    "medical and surgical intervention" is required in the longer  term  in
    order to assess what would or might be available  in  Zimbabwe.   As  I
    have already pointed out, the Respondent has put forward evidence  that
    antiretroviral drugs are available in Zimbabwe.  There is also a letter
    dated 6 April 2021 at [ABS/11]  confirming  the  Appellant's  discharge
    from hospital on that  day.   The  diagnosis  at  discharge  is  "acute
    encephalitis; HIV".  The only actions set out are to see the  Appellant
    in the HIV clinic on 8 April 2021.

38. Mrs Malunga provides more evidence about the Appellant's recent illness
    in her statement as follows:

         "3.   Recently  my  son  has  not  been  very  well  and   required
         hospitalisation. I thought we would lose  him  around  Easter  this
         year but thankfully he is  getting  better.   It  was  such  a  bad
         situation that I had to [take] unpaid leave in order to be able  to
         look after him.  We didn't know exactly what was wrong with Rob  as
         he just tried to keep going so it wasn't until he was  in  so  much
         pain and couldn't walk properly that he went to hospital.   He  had
         an infection which caused swelling in his brain and he was on a lot
         of steroids so is really swollen from that.  He has to go for check-
         ups and we still don't have the full picture of  what  exactly  was
         wrong.

         4.   Rob is obviously as a grown up man but the condition he was in
         when he wasn't well was so bad he couldn't take a bath  or  get  to
         the bathroom himself.  For me I am a carer and I  understand  these
         things so I could help him but it made me start to worry about what
         will happen to him if he is sent to Zimbabwe. We can care for him."

39. Mrs Malunga goes on to talk about her concern that the Appellant  would
    not receive medical care on return to Zimbabwe as follows:

         "7.  Another concern I have is for the medical care that Rob  would
         be able to access in Zimbabwe.  Zimbabwe has a lot of problems  and
         the hospitals are not functioning as they used to.  The country  is
         suffering financially and even before Covid there just  wasn't  not
         sufficient treatment  for  everyone.   It  is  not  a  matter  [of]
         financials, we would support continue to support [sic] Rob if he is
         returned to Zimbabwe.  Just  having  money  doesn't  guarantee  you
         treatment.

         8.   I return to Zimbabwe maybe every other year and the last  time
         I travelled there I had a problem with my eye.  It was  so  painful
         but even a simple thing like getting my eye checked wasn't possible
         and I had money to pay. I paid a private optician  for  a  hospital
         referral  but  they  said  the  hospital  weren't  able  to  accept
         referrals. I know the struggle I faced to try to even get to see  a
         doctor about my eye so I can't image [sic] how hard it would be for
         Rob to get treatment for something a lot  more  complicated  if  he
         needed to."

40. Mrs Malunga's concern for her son's health and future medical treatment
    is entirely understandable.  I also accept that  it  is  genuine.   She
    became visibly distressed when talking about the prospect of his return
    to Zimbabwe  in  the  course  of  her  evidence.   As  I  have  already
    explained, however, there is very limited medical evidence  before  me.
    That which is included and indeed the Appellant's own evidence is  that
    he is generally in good health and that his HIV is controlled by check-
    ups and antiretroviral drugs, both  of  which  are,  according  to  the
    Respondent's evidence available in Zimbabwe.  I cannot place weight  on
    what Mrs Malunga says about medical treatment  in  Zimbabwe  generally.
    When trying to get treatment for herself, she was  a  visitor  to  that
    country.  It appears from what she says that it was not an emergency  -
    she was seeking a referral.  In  those  circumstances,  it  is  perhaps
    unsurprising that an optician was unwilling to refer her to a  hospital
    for treatment which could wait until she returned to the UK.  That is a
    very different situation to that of an individual  requiring  long-term
    treatment as a resident of Zimbabwe.

41. In relation to the Appellant's recent  illness,  whilst  I  accept  the
    seriousness of that episode (from which it  appears  the  Appellant  is
    continuing to suffer to some extent),  I  have  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has suffered any other serious illness in the six years since
    he was diagnosed with HIV.  There is no medical evidence  dealing  with
    the longer-term prognosis or treatment for this recent illness.   There
    is no evidence  that  Zimbabwe  does  not  have  functioning  emergency
    medical services should the Appellant require such treatment.

42. The Appellant lives with his mother and stepfather in the  UK.   It  is
    clear from their statements that they have a  close  relationship  with
    the Appellant.  Although Ms Cooley very candidly says in her  statement
    that the Appellant "was not  a  good  partner"  (although  "an  amazing
    father"), it is evident from her statement and oral evidence  that  the
    relationship between her and the Appellant remains a friendly one.  She
    has been willing to  support  him  in  this  appeal.   They  appear  to
    successfully cooperate to co-parent [R].  There are no signs  that  the
    breakdown of the relationship was an acrimonious one.  Although  I  did
    not have any evidence from the Appellant's sister, I am aware that  she
    attended the hearing remotely in order to support her brother.

43. Ms Cooley also notes in her statement that the  Appellant  was  "really
    well liked and respected" in the local area.  She says that,  when  the
    Appellant was in prison, she went round the shop owners and his  former
    college to obtain character references.  She says that  all  those  she
    asked gave her "statements in support just confirming  that  he  was  a
    polite and well-mannered young man".  Unfortunately, those are  not  in
    evidence before me but I take note of what is there said.

    The Appellant's Offending and Rehabilitation

44. The Appellant was convicted on 12 October 2018 of conspiracy to possess
    a Class A drug (cocaine) with intent to supply.  He  was  sentenced  to
    twelve months' imprisonment and ordered to pay a victim surcharge.  The
    particulars of the offence  are  set  out  in  the  Judge's  sentencing
    remarks as follows:

         "Robert Chomoola, as you have already heard me say, I take the view
         that you were involved in this conspiracy during the course of  one
         day and one day only. What you did was go to Zoe Orton's  flat  and
         there assist in the cutting and wrapping of Class A drugs that were
         going to be sold on the street  later  that  day  and  you  did  so
         because you were a user in the hope of getting some free  drugs  so
         that you could feed your own habit.

         You have never been in trouble before and so this fall  from  grace
         can be treated, in your case, as being entirely  out  of  character
         and I do.

         So transient was your involvement in this conspiracy, and on such a
         limited basis, that it  seems  to  me  that  to  follow  sentencing
         guidelines would end up with a sentence that was not a just one  in
         terms of it reflecting what you actually did and so I do not follow
         the guidelines for that reason.

         However, you pleaded guilty and so you cannot have any credit for a
         guilty plea and I am afraid, even those who get involved as you did
         only in passing, in the trade in Class A drugs must  expect  prison
         sentences because, if the courts do not react  in  any  other  way,
         people are encouraged to become involved in this trade which causes
         a good deal of misery and unhappiness.

         In all the circumstances, the sentence in your case is  one  of  12
         months' imprisonment.  Any time that you have spent in custody  and
         46 days as a result of the period you were on  bail  subject  to  a
         tagged curfew, will count towards that sentence.  As you know,  you
         will serve half of it, then you will be released. Again, as long as
         you behave yourself during the licence period and a period of post-
         sentence release that will also apply to this  sentence,  you  will
         hear no more of the matter.  Get into trouble again and you may  be
         recalled to serve some or all of the balance or  be  sentenced  for
         any breach of any  conditions  that  are  attached  to  your  post-
         sentence supervision.  The statutory surcharge applies in your case
         in the sum of 140 and again, I have no discretion to waive it."

45. There is an OASys report at [AB/17-57].  That is dated 2 December 2019.
     The Appellant's licence expired on 10 December 2019. The Appellant  is
    reported to accept responsibility for the offence.   The  risk  factors
    associated with the Appellant's offending are said to be his  lifestyle
    and  associates,  substance  misuse  and  lack   of   finances.     The
    Appellant's family is said to be a positive factor.  At the time of the
    OASys report, the Appellant was said to be using ecstasy and  Spice  on
    an occasional basis and cannabis daily.  However, the narrative records
    that the Appellant had only tried MDMA and Spice once and had not  used
    them again as they made him  sick.   He  said  that  he  had  not  used
    cannabis since leaving prison.  That is consistent with what Mr Chester
    records in his report that the Appellant told him that he had not  used
    drugs since he came out of prison.  I deal below with  the  Appellant's
    attitude to his offending  and  rehabilitation  on  the  basis  of  his
    evidence in this appeal.  The report concludes that the Appellant is at
    low risk of serious harm and low risk of reoffending (4% in first  year
    and 7% in second year).  The low risk is confirmed by the  letter  from
    the National Probation  Service  at  [AB/16]  which  also  reports  the
    Appellant's full compliance with his supervision requirements.

46. The Appellant's  evidence  demonstrates  his  contrition.   By  way  of
    example, in his first statement, he says this:

         "10. I was just kidding myself that I wasn't doing  anything  wrong
         because I convinced myself that  just  because  I  wasn't  actively
         doing anything, just opening the door and things like that, that  I
         wasn't really involved.  Drugs, dealing, being involved in anything
         criminal like that is just not who I am.  It's not who I was raised
         to be and it is not something I have ever wanted to  be  associated
         with.  I see what that sort of life does to a  person  and  I  want
         nothing to do with it.  The women whose house that  I  was  in  was
         murdered and one of the other people I was initially arrested  with
         was actually re-arrested  while  I  was  out  on  bail.   It  is  a
         situation that I will never let myself get  into  again.  I  deeply
         regret that I am now facing being defined for the rest of  my  life
         by my mistake."

47. The reference there to the offence being his  mistake,  thereby  taking
    responsibility for it, is a  thread  which  runs  through  all  of  his
    evidence.  For example, he says at [23] of his statement that "[he] can
    see what [his] actions have done to [himself] and [his] family".

48. The Appellant also appears to be genuinely ashamed of what he has done.
     At [26] and [30] of his first statement he says the following:

         "26. I have always tried to hold myself to a higher standard and  I
         know that I have lost that now.  I have lost a lot of trust with my
         family.  I have let down my little siblings and my elder sister  is
         devastated by what I have done.  I know I let  everybody  down  and
         what I did was just something my  family  will  never  be  able  to
         comprehend.  I have a lot of work to do  to  come  back  from  just
         being seen as a criminal.

         ...

         30.  The situation that I have put on my family is hard for  me  to
         accept and I deeply regret putting them through this.  Even now,  I
         am out of prison and have completed my sentence and  probation  but
         due to the ongoing threat of deportation my family are still having
         to go through it.  Because of me they have to go to court  to  give
         evidence.  My sister and Chelsea had to go to a  bail  hearing  and
         stand to offer sureties for me.  These are things that  they  would
         never have had to go through if it weren't for me.  For Chelsea  in
         particular, having to give evidence at the Court  is  difficult  as
         she gets quite anxious and having to go to court is an intimidating
         experience for anyone to go through.  For all of these  reasons,  I
         know I will never commit another crime.  It was a one-off situation
         and something that I will never let myself get into  again  I  will
         never do that to my family."

49. The statements of the Appellant's  ex-partner,  mother  and  stepfather
    reflect their disappointment in  the  Appellant's  actions.   They  are
    however consistent in their opinion that the experience has changed him
    for the better.  They say that, whereas he would  not  previously  talk
    about problems, he now does.  Prior to the offence, the  Appellant  had
    not even told his parents about his HIV status.

    General

50. As Ms Everett very fairly submitted (and I agree) the evidence I  heard
    was "cogent, reasonable and sensible" in relation to the impact of  the
    Appellant's deportation.  I have  indicated  in  the  foregoing  a  few
    aspects of the evidence generally  which  I  found  to  be  overstated.
    However, for the most part the evidence, both documentary and  oral  is
    consistent.  As Ms Everett also very fairly conceded,  this  is  not  a
    case where credibility is at issue.  The issue  is  how  the  facts  as
    presented are to be assessed within the legal  tests  which  apply.   I
    therefore move on to that assessment.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    Exception one: Paragraph 399A/ Section 117C(4)

51. It is accepted by the Appellant that  he  cannot  meet  this  exception
    based on his private life.  He has been in the UK for  less  than  half
    his life.  Although he had leave until the making  of  the  deportation
    order, he no longer has leave.  He has not therefore  been  in  the  UK
    lawfully for half his life.  He has however  been  here  now  for  over
    thirteen years and for most of that period was with lawful leave.

52. I accept that the Appellant is integrated in the UK.  His direct family
    members are all here.  I accept his evidence that he has not maintained
    contact with his family members in Zimbabwe.  His ex-partner is in  the
    UK.  Although I  do  not  have  much  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
    educational background either here or in Zimbabwe, it appears from  the
    OASys report that he  attended  college  in  the  UK  and  successfully
    obtained qualifications.

53. Based on the period he has spent in the UK moving  from  teenager  into
    adulthood, the family and relationships  he  has  built  here  and  his
    upbringing in the UK, I accept the Appellant's evidence that  he  views
    the UK as his home.

54. I will need to deal with the Appellant's criminal offending  later  but
    for the moment I note that this was a single  conviction  for  offences
    committed over a period of three months.  The Appellant was  apparently
    a drug user before he went into prison, but I do not consider that  his
    cannabis use impacts on his integration in  the  UK.   I  note  that  a
    number of local people and his former college were willing  to  provide
    character references for the Appellant during the criminal proceedings.



55. In terms of the situation in Zimbabwe,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    reasons advanced as being very significant obstacles to his integration
    meet the high threshold.

56. As was said in Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813   "[t]he idea of 'integration' calls  for  a  broad
    evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the  individual  will  be
    enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
    in that other country is carried on and a capacity  to  participate  in
    it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to  be
    able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to  build  up
    within a reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
    substance to the individual's private or family life".

57. Although I accept that the Appellant has  not  been  back  to  Zimbabwe
    since he left in 2008, he grew up in that country.   I  accept  he  may
    struggle to speak Shona presently, but he appears to be an  intelligent
    man who could re-learn the language if he needed to  do  so.  He  could
    probably get by in daily life speaking English.  Although I accept that
    his grandmother is elderly, the Appellant does have family  members  in
    Zimbabwe.  They may not be able to support him  either  financially  or
    emotionally.  However,  with  the  exception  of  his  HIV  and  recent
    illness, the Appellant appears generally well and there  is  no  reason
    why he could not work in Zimbabwe to support himself.  Although it  was
    said that the Appellant's  mother  and  stepfather  could  not  provide
    financial assistance, for example,  in  order  for  [R]  to  visit  the
    Appellant, his mother made  clear  in  her  evidence  that  they  would
    provide financial assistance after return for matters  such  as  health
    care if the need arose.  The Appellant says that he  has  lost  contact
    with his friends but there is no evidence that  he  could  not  re-form
    those relationships on return.  The Appellant might find  it  difficult
    to re-acclimatise to his home  country  and  there  are  likely  to  be
    obstacles to him settling there particularly given the age he was  when
    he left, but the obstacles put forward are not such  as  to  amount  to
    very significant ones.




    Exception two: Paragraph 399/ Section 117C(5)

58. Although Ms Everett did not expressly concede that [R] could not return
    to Zimbabwe with the Appellant, were he to be  deported,  she  sensibly
    did not press that suggestion.  As she pointed out, the decision  maker
    at the time of the deportation decision did not have  much  information
    about [R].  The Appellant and [R]'s mother are now separated.  For that
    reason, I accept that there is no question of  Ms  Cooley  leaving  her
    family in the UK to go back to Zimbabwe with the Appellant.   It  would
    be unduly harsh to remove [R] from her mother and indeed  the  rest  of
    her family in the UK.  As Ms Everett also pointed out, that is the more
    so given [R]'s age and her British citizenship.

59. I turn then to the issue whether it would be unduly harsh to expect [R]
    to remain in the UK with her mother while the Appellant is deported  to
    Zimbabwe.

60. I begin with what is in  [R]'s  best  interests.   Notwithstanding  the
    separation of her parents, [R] has a close relationship with  both  her
    parents.  I note that she told the independent social worker  that  her
    wish would be for "[her] mum and dad to be together so that [she] could
    live  with  them  together  all  the  time".   The  closeness  of   the
    relationship which [R] has with her father is reflected in Mr Chester's
    report, and the evidence of both the  Appellant  and  Ms  Cooley.   The
    Appellant has very regular contact with [R] and she is  very  evidently
    upset by any separation from her  father.   I  have  no  hesitation  in
    finding that it is in [R]'s best interests for her father to remain  in
    the UK and to continue the contact as at present.

61. That is however not the end of the matter.  The issue for me is whether
    the impact on [R] of separation from her father would be unduly  harsh.
    I have set out at [9] and [10] above what I understand to be  meant  by
    that test.

62. Based on the impact which the Appellant's imprisonment had on [R] I  am
    quite prepared to accept that [R] will be very distressed by separation
    from the Appellant.  [R] was only aged about three years  at  the  time
    but the passage of time is likely  to  have  strengthened  rather  than
    weakened her relationship with her father.  As an older child,  she  is
    also likely to be more aware of  what  is  happening  around  her.    I
    appreciate that [R] does not live with the Appellant  permanently.   In
    spite of [R]'s wish that her parents could live together, there  is  no
    suggestion of any reconciliation.

63. However, Ms Cooley's evidence is  that  [R]  constantly  asks  for  her
    father.  [R] is clearly very close to him.  They have  regular  contact
    for at least two full days each week.  I accept that [R] would be  very
    upset if she were again separated from him on a permanent basis.

64. The Appellant has explained that, if he were  deported,  he  would  sit
    down with [R] to tell her that he had to leave and would do his best to
    maintain contact as closely as possible via letters, phone and internet
    calls.  I accept Ms Cooley's evidence that this would be no  substitute
    for physical contact and that the  disruption  caused  by  such  remote
    contact might almost be worse for [R] emotionally as it  was  when  the
    Appellant was in prison (although she says that she would  not  prevent
    such contact for that reason).

65. I also accept that visits, at least frequent visits, are unlikely to be
    possible for financial reasons.  [R] is only aged six years at  present
    in any  event  and  would  need  to  be  accompanied  probably  by  the
    Appellant's mother.

66. I accept therefore that there would be substantial disruption to  [R]'s
    relationship with her father caused by his deportation.

67. I take into account the impact on [R] when the Appellant was in prison.
    I accept that [R] was told that her father was only away from her on  a
    temporary basis.  I also accept the evidence that she was  very  upset,
    although Ms Cooley said that on  the  second  occasion  (ie  after  the
    conviction), [R]  dealt  with  the  separation  rather  better.   I  am
    prepared to accept that  this  was  because  [R]  had  encountered  one
    separation when her father had returned and therefore expected  him  to
    do so the second time. The position may well be  different  if  she  is
    told that the separation is permanent.

68. There is however no evidence that [R]'s well-being was impacted in  the
    longer term by either of  those  separations.   In  spite  of  what  is
    recorded in Mr Chester's  report,  there  is  no  evidence  that  [R]'s
    attendance at school was affected by her father's absence or  that  she
    developed any mental health problems.  There is no suggestion that  her
    emotional development was impacted.   She  is  described  as  a  happy,
    confident child who is popular at school and has a number  of  friends.
    There is in short no evidence that  the  earlier  separations  had  any
    longer-term impacts on [R]'s emotional stability and  well-being.   She
    has a close and loving family unit around her who  could  help  her  to
    adjust.   That  unit  includes  Ms  Cooley's  family  as  well  as  the
    Appellant's family members.  The Appellant has made clear that he  will
    do whatever it takes to maintain the relationship with [R]  as  closely
    as possible.

69. I have already made a finding that [R]'s best  interests  are  for  her
    father to remain with her in the UK.  That  is,  I  accept,  a  primary
    consideration.  In context of what is said in MK (Sierra Leone) (as set
    out in KO (Nigeria) above), if the issue were whether separation of [R]
    from her father is  difficult  or  even  harsh,  I  would  answer  that
    question in the affirmative.  However, as the Tribunal there  explained
    (and as endorsed by the Supreme Court and the Court  of  Appeal  in  HA
    (Iraq)) the use of the word "unduly" "raises an elevated standard still
    higher".  Since, at this stage, I am not  required  (or  permitted)  to
    take into account the seriousness of  the  Appellant's  offending,  the
    issue is simply whether the evidence shows that  the  necessarily  high
    threshold is met.  I have reached the conclusion that it is not.

    Section 117C(6) - very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    exceptions

70.  Although Section 117C(6) refers to the need to  show  that  there  are
    very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions, that  does
    not exclude the consideration of the factors which are relevant to  the
    case within those exceptions.

71. In this case, I therefore take into account all that I have said  about
    the Appellant's family life with [R] and  the  likely  impact  on  her.
    Whilst not reaching the threshold of undue harshness, I have recognised
    that the impact is likely to be very difficult and even harsh. I accept
    that  separation  will  be  very  distressing.   Unlike  the   previous
    separation  where  [R]  expected  the  Appellant  to  return,  on  this
    occasion, her parents would not be able to give her  that  reassurance.
    [R] is now older and is likely to understand and  therefore  experience
    the impact of separation more acutely.  The evidence shows clearly that
    [R] is extremely attached to her father.   Her  relationship  with  him
    will only have strengthened since his release from prison.   For  those
    reasons, although I am unable to conclude that the  impact  on  [R]  is
    such as to reach the high threshold of undue harshness, I  accept  that
    the impact on her will be significant.

72. The impact of separation will be felt by not  only  [R]  but  also  her
    mother and the Appellant himself.  They will not be  able  to  maintain
    the close relationship they have now as a family unit  (notwithstanding
    the separation of the parents).

73. I  take  into  account  the  practical  effect  which  the  Appellant's
    deportation will have on Ms Cooley who relies on the Appellant  to  co-
    parent [R] and to take responsibility for [R] on a  regular  basis  and
    also when Ms Cooley needs help.  I have regard to the evidence that  Ms
    Cooley struggled when the Appellant was in prison.  She was put on anti-
    depressants which she no longer takes therefore showing  the  causative
    effect of the Appellant's  absence.   I  accept  that  she  has  family
    members who can assist her and will also be able to rely on  help  from
    the Appellant's family.  It could not be said that deportation  of  the
    Appellant would have an unduly harsh impact on her (and that could  not
    meet  the  exception  under  Section  117C(5)  in  any  event  as   the
    Appellant's relationship with her is no longer subsisting).  However, I
    do not underestimate the impact which the Appellant's deportation would
    have.

74. The Appellant's closest family members are in the UK.   Those  are  his
    mother, stepfather and sister.   I  did  not  have  evidence  from  his
    sister.  It is clear  from  the  statements  of  Mrs  Malunga  and  the
    Appellant's stepfather that they are a close family.  I accept that Mrs
    Malunga would be very worried for her  son's  welfare  were  he  to  be
    deported, particularly in light  of  his  recent  medical  history.   I
    accept that whilst the Appellant has extended family in Zimbabwe,  they
    are unlikely to be able to give the Appellant the same  level  of  care
    that his mother does.

75. On the other hand, the evidence is that Mrs Malunga visits Zimbabwe  on
    a regular basis.  As I understood her evidence, she is employed in  the
    UK.  However, I did not have evidence to show that she could not return
    with the Appellant in the short term to help him  settle  in  Zimbabwe,
    were she minded to do so.  She readily admitted that she would be  able
    to visit the Appellant there.  I accept though that this could only  be
    a temporary arrangement as she is a carer (from which I understood that
    she works as such).

76. I do not accept that the relationship which the Appellant has with  his
    family amounts to family life as that is understood  in  Article  8(1).
    There is not the evidence of dependency of the Appellant on his  family
    members (other than when he was recently ill as to  which  see  below).
    Prior to his incarceration and the breakdown of his  relationship,  the
    Appellant had moved away from the family home and formed his own family
    unit.  Although I accept that the Appellant has now moved back  to  his
    parents' home,  the  evidence  suggests  that  he  still  has  his  own
    independent life.

77. Those relationships do however form part  of  the  Appellant's  private
    life which I now go on to consider.  I accept  that  the  relationships
    which the Appellant has with his family members and Ms Cooley are close
    ones and that  the  separation  caused  by  deportation  would  have  a
    significant impact not only on the Appellant but  also  on  his  family
    members.

78. I have not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's integration in Zimbabwe.  He grew up  there  and  lived
    there until he was sixteen years old.  Nonetheless, he has never worked
    there.  He previously had a  supportive  environment  in  the  form  of
    boarding school and his grandmother who looked  after  him  during  the
    school holidays.  I accept that she is not in a  position  to  do  that
    now.

79. There is no evidence before me that the Appellant would not be able  to
    work in Zimbabwe.  He has  some  qualifications  which  are  likely  to
    assist him to find work.  Nevertheless, I am aware that Zimbabwe  is  a
    country which has in recent years experienced economic turmoil and I do
    not underestimate the difficulties which the  Appellant  will  have  in
    finding work.  However, Mrs Malunga said that she and  the  Appellant's
    stepfather would find money to pay if the Appellant  needed  healthcare
    and could presumably  do  so  if  he  needed  short-term  support  with
    financial maintenance.  The Appellant's grandmother lives in the family
    home in Zimbabwe and the Appellant would therefore have accommodation.

80. I take into account in the consideration  of  the  Appellant's  private
    life his medical condition.  I accept that he is  HIV  positive.   That
    condition is controlled by medication.  I have no  evidence  that  such
    medication would not be available in Zimbabwe - indeed, to the contrary
    the Respondent has provided evidence that it is.

81. Fortunately,  although  the  Appellant's  immune  system  is  doubtless
    affected by his condition, he does not appear to have experienced acute
    ill health until recently.  Although the Appellant has been  discharged
    from hospital, the recent episode of ill health appears  to  have  been
    very serious.  I accept Mrs Malunga's  evidence  that  she  had  to  do
    everything for the Appellant when he came out of  hospital.   Although,
    fortunately, the Appellant appears to have recovered well, that episode
    is an indicator of what might occur if he is taken ill again.  That may
    be somewhat speculative, but his  condition  does  leave  him  open  to
    serious infections of this nature.  I have regard to what  is  said  by
    the  Appellant's  consultant  physician  who  "strongly  supports"  the
    Appellant's application to remain in the UK on the basis that  "without
    access to both medical and surgical intervention, [the Appellant] is at
    risk of becoming incredibly unwell".

82.  Although  I  have  not  accepted  Mrs  Malunga's  evidence  about  her
    experience of the health system in Zimbabwe as reflecting the  position
    generally, I doubt that the system there is on a par with the  UK.   It
    is not (nor could it realistically be) submitted  that  the  impact  of
    deportation on  the  Appellant's  health  would  reach  the  Article  3
    threshold.  However, if he were to fall ill again,  I  accept  that  he
    would not have the personal care available to him as provided  recently
    by his mother (unless she were able to travel to Zimbabwe  to  assist).
    The possibility that he may once again fall  seriously  ill  is  not  a
    remote one.  It is a factor which I weigh in the balance.

83. Whilst not  reaching  the  threshold  of  very  significant  obstacles,
    therefore, the difficulties which the Appellant will face  in  Zimbabwe
    are real and I do not underestimate the problems  which  the  Appellant
    would face given that he has not lived or  even  visited  that  country
    since he left as a child.

84. I accept the Appellant's evidence that he sees  the  UK  as  his  home.
    Notwithstanding the crime of which the Appellant was committed, I  have
    accepted that the Appellant is socially and  culturally  integrated  in
    the UK.  He has lived here for over thirteen years and, as I  say,  has
    never returned to Zimbabwe in that time.  His immediate family are  all
    here as is his ex-partner and child.  I accept that he has  no  friends
    in Zimbabwe due to the age at which he left.   I  accept  however  that
    there is no evidence of strong friendships in the UK, possibly  because
    the Appellant has taken steps to disassociate himself from  those  with
    whom he socialised prior to  his  imprisonment  as  his  lifestyle  and
    associates were part of the reason behind his offending.

85. Having set out the  factors  which  are  relevant  to  the  Appellant's
    private and family life and which fall on  his  side  of  the  balance,
    therefore, I now move on to the public  interest  which  falls  on  the
    other.

86. I accept that there is strong public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    those foreign nationals who commit crime.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant has been  convicted  on  one  occasion  only  as  part  of  a
    conspiracy which took place only over a few months,  his  crime  was  a
    serious one involving the supply of Class A drugs.  The supply of drugs
    is I accept a scourge on our society, and I do not seek to minimise the
    level of the public interest which applies in this case.

87. The level of the public interest is not diminished in any  way  by  the
    length of the sentence which was passed in  the  Appellant's  case.   I
    accept that this was at the bottom end of the threshold  which  applies
    in deportation cases.  However, it is still the case that, due  to  the
    length of the sentence, there is a Parliamentary presumption in  favour
    of deportation of those in the Appellant's position who are  classified
    as medium offenders (see section 32 UK Borders Act 2007).    The  level
    of the sentence also takes into account any mitigating factors  in  the
    Appellant's case and to reduce the public interest  in  recognition  of
    those factors would be to double count in the Appellant's favour.

88. It is however appropriate to consider the nature of the offending,  the
    reasons for it and the risk which the Appellant is likely  to  pose  in
    the future when considering the strength of the public interest in this
    individual case.  Those are factors relevant to  the  public  interest.
    The public interest  requires  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals
    precisely to protect the public, although I accept that  other  factors
    are relevant (as I come to below).

89. I take into account in this regard the remarks of the sentencing Judge.
     Although the conspiracy in which the Appellant was involved took place
    over the course of a few months, the evidence against the Appellant  as
    accepted was that he was involved in that conspiracy for only one  day.
    It was not evidently accepted  as  the  Appellant  says  in  his  first
    statement that he was not really involved  and  was  just  opening  the
    door.  It appears that he was convicted  for  having  assisted  in  the
    cutting and wrapping of Class A drugs for supply.  As  I  say,  though,
    the conviction was based on  him  doing  this  on  one  day  only.  The
    sentencing Judge described the Appellant's involvement as "transient".

90. Further, his reasons for so doing were said to be  linked  to  his  own
    drug use.  Although there is some inconsistency within the OASys report
    about continuing drug use, I accept  that  the  narrative  within  that
    report is to the effect that the Appellant has not used  drugs  of  any
    form since he left prison in December 2019.  That  is  consistent  with
    what the Appellant told Mr Chester, the social worker.

91. As I have already mentioned,  another  factor  behind  the  Appellant's
    offending was his lifestyle and associates.  There is evidence that the
    Appellant has taken concrete steps to distance himself from those  with
    whom he previously associated.  Ms Cooley says in  her  statement  that
    the Appellant did not even have a mobile phone  when  he  came  out  of
    prison so that he can "stay as distanced as he can from any of the  old
    bad influences he had".

92. Both Ms Cooley and the  Appellant's  parents  have  commented  in  some
    detail in their statement about the change in the Appellant  since  his
    imprisonment.  He is willing to discuss his problems  with  his  family
    which he did not do previously.  His family  are  clearly  shocked  and
    disappointed in the  Appellant's  behaviour.   It  is  clear  from  the
    Appellant's statements that he is acutely aware of  this  and  ashamed.
    His remorse and desire to change is I  accept  entirely  genuine.   The
    very low level of risk  which  the  Appellant  poses  as  a  result  is
    consistent with what is said in the OASys report.

93. I accept that rehabilitation is unlikely to be a significant factor  in
    the balance.  Society is entitled to expect that  members  respect  and
    uphold the law.  That the Appellant is now likely to do so is only what
    society expects and therefore the change in his behaviour cannot  be  a
    significant factor in the reduction of the public  interest.   It  does
    however reduce the risk of reoffending and to that extent is  relevant.



94. I also accept that there are factors  which  weigh  in  favour  of  the
    public interest, aside the protection of  the  public  from  offenders.
    Deterrence of others from committing crimes and  maintaining  integrity
    in the criminal justice and immigration systems are also of importance.



95. Nonetheless, I do regard the nature of the Appellant's offending  as  a
    significant factor to be weighed in the balance.   In  the  Appellant's
    case this was a one-off offence.  The conviction relates to an  offence
    committed on one day.  The Appellant has shown genuine remorse for  his
    crime and, I accept, has changed his behaviour so that he now  poses  a
    very low - almost minimal risk - to the public.   Although  as  I  have
    already pointed out, it would be wrong to weigh  in  the  equation  the
    mitigating factors already taken into account in the sentence,  I  note
    that the sentencing Judge went so far as  not to follow the  sentencing
    guidelines as he considered that to do so would not justly  reflect  on
    the extent of the Appellant's conduct and part (in other words, that to
    follow the guidelines would have resulted in too severe a sentence).

96. I recognise that in order to succeed in a case where  I  have  accepted
    that  neither  exception  applies,  there  must  be   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those exceptions before an appeal  can  be
    allowed.

97. Based on the individual factors, I have explained  why  the  exceptions
    are not met in  this  case.  The  position  is,  however,  I  conclude,
    different when the cumulative effect of deportation on the  Appellant's
    private and family life is considered.  I do not  repeat  what  I  have
    said above.  In summary, I accept that the Appellant's deportation will
    be very distressing for [R] and is likely to have a significant  impact
    on her.  I accept that the impact  on  the  Appellant  and  his  family
    members is also likely to be significant.  The Appellant will no  doubt
    encounter serious difficulties on return to Zimbabwe, a country he  has
    lived in only as a child and does not now know.  Those difficulties may
    well be exacerbated if the Appellant were to fall seriously ill  again.



98. I recognise the weight which  I  am  bound  to  afford  to  the  public
    interest.  I have set out the various facets of  the  public  interest.
    However, proportionality involves a balance between impact  and  public
    interest.  Having carried out  that  balancing  assessment,  I  do  not
    consider that the  public  interest  in  this  case  is  sufficient  to
    outweigh the impact on the Appellant's private and family life when all
    the factors are taken together.  I so conclude  having  regard  to  the
    significance of the public interest in deportation cases and  the  high
    threshold which applies.

99. For those reasons, the appeal is allowed.  The decision to  deport  the
    Appellant is a disproportionate interference with his  Article  8  ECHR
    rights.  It is therefore a breach of section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.




    DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    The appeal is allowed on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  27 May 2021


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                            Appeal Number: HU/10396/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Business                               |                                    |
|On Wednesday 6 January 2021            | 22 January 2021                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                             MR ROBERT CHOOMOLA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Signature Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  I refer  to  the  parties
    hereafter as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    reference.  The Respondent appeals against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge L Nolan promulgated on 8 April 2020 ("the Decision"). By
    the Decision, the Judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 30  May  2019  refusing  his  human  rights
    claims in the  context  of  a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  to
    Zimbabwe.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK, in  January  2008,  then  aged  seventeen
    years, with indefinite leave to enter to join his mother who is settled
    in the UK.   He  was  convicted  in  October  2018  of  an  offence  of
    conspiring to possess a Class A drug with  intent  to  supply  and  was
    sentenced to a term of twelve months in prison.   A  deportation  order
    was made on 29 May 2019 and was followed by the refusal  of  the  human
    rights claim under appeal.

 3. The Appellant's human  rights  claims  are  founded  on  Article  3  in
    relation to his medical condition (he is HIV positive) and Article 8 in
    relation to his family and private life, in particular his relationship
    with his daughter, [R].  The Appellant is estranged  from  the  child's
    mother. The Appellant also has family members in the  UK,  notably  his
    mother, stepfather and siblings.

 4. The Judge found that the Appellant could not meet paragraph 399A of the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in relation to his private life  as  he
    had not been in the UK lawfully for more than half of  his  life.   She
    also accepted that he  could  not  meet  paragraph  399  based  on  his
    relationship with his former partner as that relationship had ended and
    that the separation of the Appellant from his  daughter  would  not  be
    "unduly harsh" as the impact "would be the  distress  suffered  by  any
    child whose parent is to be deported" ([37] of the Decision).  However,
    the Judge went on to consider whether there were "any other  compelling
    circumstances" not considered within those  paragraphs.   She  accepted
    that the Appellant  "prior  to  this  offence  was  a  person  of  good
    character" and that he was "a low risk to the public and at a low  risk
    of reoffending" ([39] and [40] of the Decision).  Having found that the
    public interest was reduced by those matters and by the sentence  being
    the "minimum possible  custodial  sentence",  she  concluded  that  the
    interference based in particular on the Appellant's  relationship  with
    his daughter outweighed that public interest. She therefore allowed the
    appeal.

 5. The Respondent appeals on four grounds which are broadly summarised  as
    follows:

    Ground One: The Judge, having found that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the Rules in relation to the exceptions to automatic deportation,  used
    Article 8 as a "general dispensing power in  that  he  [sic]  fails  to
    identify anything exceptional that would warrant  such  a  conclusion".
    It is said that this amounts to a material misdirection in law.

    Ground  Two:  The  Judge  failed  to  apply  Section  117  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("Section  117");  in  particular  the
    Respondent points out that the Judge, having found that neither of  the
    two exceptions in Section  117C  was  met,  was  required  to  consider
    whether there were "very compelling circumstances" going  beyond  those
    exceptions (under Section 117C(6)).  It is said that this amounts to  a
    material misdirection in law.

    Ground Three: The Judge appears to have thought that the conferring  of
    the lowest possible sentence for the offence was reason  to  lower  the
    public interest even though twelve months is the threshold trigger  for
    automatic deportation.  The  Judge's  conclusion  fails  to  take  into
    account that the sentencing Judge had  already  taken  account  of  the
    Appellant's level of participation in reaching that sentence  and  also
    fails to consider such factors as deterrence which are also relevant to
    the public  interest.   As  a  result  it  is  said  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion is perverse.

    Ground Four: The Judge fails to give adequate reasons for finding that,
    prior to the offence, the Appellant was of  good  character  given  her
    finding that it was as a result of his drug use that he had been driven
    to commit the offence.

 6. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  SPJ
    Buchanan in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 4.  As contended in GOA(1) and (2): it  is  arguable  that  in
         assessing proportionality of the decision to deport, the  FTTJ  has
         failed to identify very strong features of the appellant's  article
         8 claim which might constitute very compelling circumstances so  as
         to defeat the public interest.

         5.   It is arguable by reference to  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that
         there may have been error of law in the Decision as  identified  in
         the application.  I grant permission to appeal."

 7. On 29  July  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  reached  the
    provisional view that there should be a remote hearing to determine the
    error of law issue. The  parties  were  directed  to  file  a  skeleton
    argument and rule 24 response  respectively.   Neither  party  complied
    with those directions.  However, since there was no objection raised to
    the forum of the hearing, on 5 October 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
    ordered a remote hearing and gave permission to  the  parties  to  file
    skeleton arguments.  Again, no skeleton arguments were filed.

 8. So it is that the matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
    Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either  re-
    make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  do
    so.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both  parties  and
    by the Appellant himself.  There were no technical issues affecting the
    conduct of the hearing and all those present indicated that  they  were
    able to follow  the  hearing  at  all  times.   I  had  before  me  the
    Appellant's documents as  they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing including the skeleton argument provided for that hearing.   Mr
    Clarke also provided me with  a  bundle  of  authorities  on  which  he
    relied.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing, I indicated that I found there to  be
    an error of law in the Decision and I  gave  directions  orally  for  a
    resumed hearing before me.  I indicated that I would provide my reasons
    for finding an error of law in writing and confirm those directions.  I
    therefore turn to do so.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10. Since the focus of the oral submissions and my reasons for  finding  an
    error of law are based largely on the Respondent's grounds one and  two
    which, as Ms Reid submitted, overlap to a large extent,  I  begin  with
    those grounds.

11. Before turning to the Decision itself, it is appropriate to set out the
    legal background against which the appeal had to be  determined.   Both
    the Rules and Section 117C contain two exceptions  which  would  render
    disproportionate a decision to deport an individual.  Those are  to  be
    found  at  paragraph  399A  and  Section  117C(4)  in  relation  to  an
    individual's private life and paragraph  399  and  Section  117C(5)  in
    relation to an individual's family life.  Although there are some minor
    differences in wording, the overall position is the same.  In  relation
    to private life, an individual must be lawfully resident for more  than
    half of his life, be socially and culturally integrated in the  UK  and
    face very significant obstacles to his integration in his home country.
     In relation to family life, an individual must be  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with either or both of a partner and child  and
    the impact of the individual's deportation on that partner and/or child
    must be unduly harsh.

12. Both under paragraph 398 of  the  Rules  and  Section  117C(6),  if  an
    individual is unable to satisfy the exceptions, then  deportation  will
    be disproportionate only if there are  "very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above" those exceptions.  Although Section  117C(6)  expressly
    applies that provision only to cases of  sentences  of  four  years  or
    more, as the Court of Appeal concluded in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 ("NA (Pakistan)")  at
    [25] of  its  judgment,  that  provision  applies  equally  to  "medium
    offenders" (ie those sentenced to between twelve months and four years)
    if they do not satisfy the two exceptions.

13. As Mr Clarke pointed out by reference  to  NA  (Pakistan)  and  to  the
    recent judgment of the Court of Appeal in  HA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 ("HA  (Iraq)"),  the
    threshold to succeed under that latter provision is a high one.   Given
    the importance of this issue to my reasons for finding an error of  law
    in the Decision, it is appropriate to set  out  the  paragraphs  of  HA
    (Iraq) on  which  Mr  Clarke  placed  reliance  which  paragraphs  also
    incorporate extracts from the judgment in NA (Pakistan):

         "30.  Logically  it  follows  that  the   correct   decision-making
         structure in the case of a medium offender is, as  the  Court  said
         in NA (Pakistan), at para. 36:

             'In relation to a medium offender, first see whether he  falls
             within Exception 1 or  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  'sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'. If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails.

         It will be convenient to refer to the second stage as the  exercise
         'required by section 117C (6)' or  similar  phrases,  but  that  is
         arguably slightly misleading. The second  stage  is  necessary  not
         because of section 117C (6) but because the effect of article 8  is
         that a proportionality assessment is required  in  every  case  (at
         least where the issue is raised): what section 117C (6) does is  to
         prescribe the weight that has to be given to the public interest in
         deportation when carrying out that  assessment  (in  a  case  where
         neither Exception applies).

         31.  The effect of the phrase 'very compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2', and the nature of
         the exercise required by section 117C (6) as  it  applies  both  to
         medium offenders and to serious offenders, are carefully  discussed
         at paras. 28-34 of NA (Pakistan). It is unnecessary that I  quote
         that discussion in  full  here,  but  I  should  note  four  points
         applicable to the case of a medium offender.

         32.  First, the discussion is underpinned by the fundamental  point
         of principle  which  the  Court  identifies  at  para.  22  of  its
         judgment, as follows:

             'Section 117C (1) of the 2002 Act, as  inserted  by  the  2014
             Act, re-states that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
             the public  interest.  The  observations  of  Laws  LJ  in SS
             (Nigeria) [[2013] EWCA Civ 550, [2014] 1 WLR 998], concerning
             the significance of the 2007 Act,  as  a  particularly  strong
             statement of public policy, are equally applicable to the  new
             provisions inserted into the 2002 Act by the  2014  Act.  Both
             the courts and the tribunals are obliged to respect  the  high
             level of importance which  the  legislature  attaches  to  the
             deportation of foreign criminals."

         It  is  because  of  the  high  level  of  importance  attached  by
         Parliament to the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  that,  where
         neither Exception 1 nor Exception 2 applies, the public interest in
         deportation   can   only   be   outweighed   by   very   compelling
         circumstances.

         33.  Secondly, the Court's explanation of the effect of the  phrase
         "over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and  2",  at  para.
         29, reads as follows:

         'The phrase used  in  section  117C  (6),  in  para.  398  of  [the
         Immigration Rules] and which we  have  held  is  to  be  read  into
         section 117C (3) does not  mean  that  a  foreign  criminal  facing
         deportation is altogether  disentitled  from  seeking  to  rely  on
         matters falling within the scope of the circumstances described  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend  that  'there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2'. ... [A] foreign criminal is entitled  to  rely
         upon such matters, but he  would  need  to  be  able  to  point  to
         features of his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and
         in paras. 399 or 399A of [the Rules]), or features falling  outside
         the  circumstances  described  in  those   Exceptions   and   those
         paragraphs, which made his claim  based  on  Article  8  especially
         strong.'

         That passage is expressed to cover the case  of  both  serious  and
         medium offenders. At para. 32 the Court specifically addresses  the
         case of medium offenders, as follows:

             '... [I]n the case of a medium offender, if all [the potential
             deportee] could advance in support of his Article 8 claim  was
             a 'near miss' case in which he fell short of bringing  himself
             within either Exception 1 or Exception  2,  it  would  not  be
             possible to say that  he  had  shown  that  there  were  'very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would need to have a far stronger case
             than that by reference to the interests protected by Article 8
             to bring himself within that fall back protection. But  again,
             in principle there may be cases in which such an offender  can
             say  that  features  of  his  case  of  a  kind  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and  2  have  such  great  force  for  Article  8
             purposes  that  they  do  constitute  such   very   compelling
             circumstances, whether taken by themselves or  in  conjunction
             with other factors relevant  to  Article  8  but  not  falling
             within the factors  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2.  The
             decision maker, be it the Secretary of State  or  a  tribunal,
             must look at all the  matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in
             order to determine whether they are sufficiently compelling to
             outweigh the high public interest in deportation.'

         Those two passages make  clear  that,  in  carrying  out  the  full
         proportionality assessment which is necessary where the  Exceptions
         do  not  apply,  facts  and  matters  that  were  relevant  to  the
         assessment of whether either Exception applied are not  'exhausted'
         if the conclusion is that they do not. They remain relevant to  the
         overall assessment, and could be sufficient to outweigh the  public
         interest  in  deportation   either,   if   specially   strong,   by
         themselves or in combination with other factors.

         34.  Thirdly, at para. 33 the Court says:

             'Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.'

         This passage makes a point which appears often in the case-law. But
         it is important to bear in mind that it is directed at the exercise
         under section 117C (6). The Court was not saying that it  would  be
         rare for cases to fall within section 117C (5).

         35.  Fourthly, at para. 34 the Court addresses the relevance of the
         best interests of any children affected by  the  deportation  of  a
         foreign criminal. It says:

             'The best interests of children certainly carry great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in H (H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the
             Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1 AC 338 at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. ...'

         Again, this is a point frequently made in the case-law; but, again,
         it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that,  as  the  reference   to   a
         "sufficiently compelling circumstance" shows,  the  final  sentence
         relates only to the exercise under section 117C (6)."

30.  Bearing in mind the Court of  Appeal's  observations,  I  turn  to  the
    exercise conducted by the Judge in this case.  As I have already noted,
    the Judge found that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  either  of  the
    exceptions in relation to his private and family life.  I deal at  this
    point with an issue which I raised concerning the Judge's finding about
    the family life exception at [37] of the Decision.  That  is  based  in
    large part on the Judge's finding that the impact  of  the  Appellant's
    deportation on [R] would be much the same as for any  child.   That  is
    based on what was said by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)").
    Although the Decision pre-dates the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  HA
    (Iraq), as I pointed out to the parties, it might be  said  that  there
    was an error adverse to the Appellant based on the Judge's reasoning in
    this regard.  As the Court of Appeal held at [34] of its judgment in HA
    (Iraq) the reference to "commonplace incidents of  family  life"  which
    are not sufficient relates to the assessment under Section 117C(6)  and
    not Section 117C(5) which is what the Judge was considering at [37]  of
    the Decision.  However, as Ms Reid recognised, since  this  was  not  a
    point taken by the Appellant in either a Rule 24 Reply or cross appeal,
    she could not rely  on  it.   It  might  be  relevant  to  materiality,
    however,  depending  on  my  view  of  the  remainder  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning.

31.  Having found that the Appellant could not meet  either  exception,  the
    Judge continued her analysis as follows:

         "38. I go  on  to  consider  if  there  are  any  other  compelling
         circumstances which have not already  been  considered  above.   Ms
         Reid submitted that the appellant had always been lawfully  present
         in the UK from a young  age,  and  that  prior  to  the  conviction
         leading  to  the  deport  order,  the  appellant   had   no   prior
         convictions.   Ms  Reid  sought  particularly  to  rely  upon   the
         sentencing remarks of the trial  Judge,  which  in  her  submission
         showed limited involvement in the offence, and upon the  subsequent
         assessments which were said to show a low risk of reoffending.

         39.  The appellant was unable to meet the requirements of exception
         1 (private life), and I have found above that exception  2  (family
         life with [R]) is not satisfied.  The appellant no longer claims to
         have a family life with Ms [C] as their relationship has now ended.
          I fully accept that the  appellant  has  always  been  in  the  UK
         lawfully with ILE having entered as a child to join his mother, and
         that he has not since returned to Zimbabwe.   I  also  accept  that
         prior to this offence he was a person  of  good  character,  and  I
         accept that he has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with [R]; that he provides at least some parental care for [R]  and
         that he is involved in her life, and I accept that virtually all of
         the appellant's immediate family are now present and settled in the
         UK.  The sentencing remarks say that the appellant took part in the
         offence of cutting and wrapping Class A drugs because he was a drug
         user in the hope of getting some free drugs; that the appellant had
         never been in trouble before and this offence was 'entirely out  of
         character' going on to say that 'so transient was your  involvement
         in this conspiracy, and on such a limited basis, that it  seems  to
         me that to  follow  sentencing  guidelines  would  end  up  with  a
         sentence that was not a just one in terms of it reflecting what you
         actually did and so  I  do  not  follow  the  guidelines  for  that
         reason', and that a prison sentence was imposed  only  because  'if
         the courts do not react in any other way people are  encouraged  to
         become involved with this trade which causes a good deal of  misery
         and  unhappiness.'  The  OASys  report  and  the  letter  from  the
         appellant's Probation Officer  state  that  in  every  respect  the
         appellant is a low risk  to  the  public  and  at  a  low  risk  of
         reoffending, and since his release in May 2019  he  has  been  100%
         compliant with probation visits.

         40.  The sentencing remarks strongly  indicate  that  although  the
         offence for which  the  appellant  was  convicted  is  prima  facie
         serious, the appellant's involvement in that offence  was  minimal,
         and he was previously of otherwise good  character.   He  has  been
         assessed by the Probation Service as being a low risk to the public
         and at a low risk of reoffending.  His custodial sentence of twelve
         months was at the very lowest limit required to engage an automatic
         deportation decision, and it appears from  the  sentencing  remarks
         that  the  trial  Judge  imposed  the  minimum  possible  custodial
         sentence bearing in mind all the circumstances in  the  appellant's
         case.  These factors reduce the public interest in the  appellant's
         deportation.  It is accepted that the appellant has a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his British citizen daughter, and that
         although I have found above that the effects on [R] of her father's
         deportation cannot be said to be 'unduly harsh' so  as  to  satisfy
         exception 2, the expert ISW report concludes that  the  appellant's
         deportation  would  cause  his  daughter   'significant   emotional
         distress', and I find that it would be in [R]'s interests  for  her
         father to remain a present and active part of her  life  in  person
         and to continue to provide care and support for her as he presently
         does, and as discussed above it would not be reasonable for [R]  to
         leave her mother and go to Zimbabwe to live with her  father.   The
         appellant has been in the UK since entering as a child in 2008  and
         he has fully integrated here. The appellant has established both  a
         private and a family life in the UK during a time  when  he  had  a
         legitimate expectation that he would be entitled to remain  in  the
         UK indefinitely, and his deportation  would  necessarily  interfere
         with his current  private  and  family  life   I  accept  that  the
         appellant deeply regrets the offence for which  he  was  convicted,
         and I accept that he has been successfully rehabilitated and is  at
         low risk of reoffending, and that he presents a low risk of harm to
         the public.  When considering all the factors as set out  above,  I
         conclude that the public interest in  deporting  the  appellant  is
         outweighed by his Article 8 private and family  life  rights.   For
         all those reasons as given above, I conclude that the  decision  to
         deport   the   appellant   is,   in    all    the    circumstances,
         disproportionate."

32.  It cannot sensibly be argued that [38]  of  the  Decision  contains  an
    appropriate self-direction as to the law which applies to an assessment
    outside of the two exceptions to deportation.  There is no reference to
    the high threshold which applies; the Judge refers only to "compelling"
    and not "very compelling" and does not refer  to  those  other  factors
    being  "over  and  above"  the  two  exceptions.   I  accept  that  the
    requirement is not necessarily one of factors which are of a  different
    nature to the exceptions and the reference  by  the  Judge  to  "other"
    circumstances not considered under those exceptions might  be  said  to
    rescue the self-direction in that regard.  However, as a result of  the
    inaccurate self-direction, the Judge has failed to remind herself that,
    although factors falling within the exceptions may still be part of the
    cumulative assessment, the factors which apply must  be  sufficient  to
    outweigh the high public interest in deportation or, put  another  way,
    to overcome the high threshold which applies where the  exceptions  are
    not satisfied.

33.  Ms Reid valiantly sought  to  persuade  me  that,  notwithstanding  the
    wrong self-direction, the Judge had in fact recognised the  test  which
    she had to apply.  Ms Reid was constrained to accept that there  is  no
    mention in the Decision of Section 117C (6) or  paragraph  398  of  the
    Rules in this regard.  Ms  Reid  drew  my  attention  to  [36]  of  the
    Decision where the  Judge  states  that  "the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is stated to be in the public interest, and the more  serious
    the offence, the greater the public  interest  in  deportation".   That
    reflects, as Ms Reid submitted, Sections 117C (1) and (2).   The  Judge
    was obviously also aware of the exceptions in Sections 117C (4) and (5)
    which mirror the paragraphs of the Rules relied upon and to  which  she
    refers at [34] and [35] of the Decision.

34.  I accept that the Judge was aware of Section 117C generally.   However,
    I am unable to read her self-direction at [38] of the Decision  as  one
    which reflects Section 117C (6).  It  might  be  argued  that,  in  her
    assessment at [39] and [40] of the Decision, the Judge recognised  that
    elements of the exceptions, even  if  they  were  not  satisfied,  were
    relevant to the assessment outside the exceptions.  It  might  be  said
    that this shows that the Judge was undertaking  the  correct  exercise.
    However, having concluded that neither of  the  exceptions  in  Section
    117C(4) or (5) are met, she fails to remind herself that it is only  in
    a case where the  relevant  factors  (whether  within  the  compass  of
    exception 1 and 2 or otherwise) are (in  the  words  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal) "specially strong" that an appellant should succeed.

35.  The second reason why I am persuaded that  the  Judge's  assessment  at
    paragraphs [38] to [40] of the Decision contains errors of law, relates
    to the Judge's analysis of the public  interest.  That  aspect  of  the
    Decision is the subject of the Respondent's ground three.

36.  The Respondent argues that, by discounting the  public  interest  based
    on the sentencing Judge's remarks, the Judge has impermissibly  ignored
    the fact that this was an automatic deportation case and  is  therefore
    in the public interest and has, furthermore, ignored other  aspects  of
    the public interest in deportation, namely deterrence.

37.  Although I am satisfied that the Judge has erred  in  relation  to  her
    analysis and by reducing the public interest as she has done,  I  would
    formulate the error slightly differently.  Although I accept  that,  at
    [40] of the Decision, the Judge mentions  that  this  is  an  automatic
    deportation case, she does so only to note that the sentence was at the
    bottom end of the scale.  The length of sentence and nature of  offence
    is something which can be factored into the balancing assessment, but a
    Judge cannot ignore that automatic deportation is deemed by statute  to
    be in the public interest.  In her assessment, Judge Nolan  appears  to
    balance the fact of the twelve  months'  sentence  in  the  Appellant's
    favour rather than as reinforcing the public interest; indeed, she goes
    on to say that "[t]hese factors  reduce  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation". That is notwithstanding her self-direction at
    [36] of the Decision that deportation is in the public interest.

38.  Moreover, I can find no  consideration  of  the  deterrence  aspect  of
    deportation.  The mere fact that this is part of the reasoning  of  the
    sentencing Judge does not save the Decision in that regard.  Indeed, to
    rely upon those remarks is to double count the leniency of the sentence
    in the Appellant's favour.  The remarks of the  sentencing  Judge  were
    also made in the context of criminal offending and not in the different
    context of the public interest in deportation.

39.   Whilst I accept therefore that the length of sentence and  indeed  the
    risk which an appellant now poses are  factors  to  which  a  Judge  is
    undoubtedly entitled to have regard when balancing interference with an
    appellant's rights against the public interest, I am satisfied that the
    Judge has erred  in  this  case  by  ignoring  aspects  of  the  public
    interest, and weighing factors in the reduction of the public  interest
    in an impermissible way.

40.  I  am  unpersuaded  by  the  Respondent's  ground  four.   As  Ms  Reid
    submitted and I accept, whether an individual is of good  character  in
    this context is concerned with a person's criminal record and not  with
    his other behaviour (here as a drug user).  That is the  way  in  which
    the Judge used the term at [39] of the Decision and I am satisfied that
    she was entitled to make that observation and to  factor  it  into  the
    assessment.

41.  For  the  above  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  has
    demonstrated that the Judge fell into error in  the  ways  set  out  in
    grounds one to three but not ground four.

42.  As I have noted above, I am not satisfied that it can be said that  the
    Judge applied the right test notwithstanding the lack of  proper  self-
    direction.  Whilst it is quite possible that another Judge  could  come
    to the same conclusion, I cannot say that  this  will  be  or  is  even
    highly likely to be the case.  I therefore consider it necessary to set
    aside the Decision for re-making.

43.  I do not preserve any of Judge Nolan's findings.  As I explored in  the
    course of submissions, it is likely  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  in
    relation to exception 2 (in relation to the impact  of  deportation  on
    the Appellant's child) will need to be revisited  following  HA  (Iraq)
    and in any event, the Appellant wishes to put forward updating evidence
    in that regard so that finding will need to be reconsidered.

44.  Although the Appellant cannot succeed under exception 1 in relation  to
    his private life as  he  has  not  lived  in  the  UK  lawfully  for  a
    sufficient period, it is necessary to consider the extent to  which  he
    meets either of the other two criteria within that exception  in  order
    properly to conduct the  balancing  exercise  in  the  event  that  the
    finding remains that the Appellant does not meet exception 2.

45.  It was agreed that the appeal could be retained in the  Upper  Tribunal
    for re-making.  I have given directions below for that to happen.




    DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  L  Nolan  promulgated  on  8
    April 2020 involves the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   I
    therefore set aside the Decision.

    I make the following directions for the resumed hearing:

      1. By 4pm on Friday 30 April 2021, the Appellant shall file  with  the
         Tribunal and serve on the Respondent any further evidence on  which
         he relies.

      2. The resumed hearing is to be listed with a time estimate of    day
         on the first available date after Monday 17 May 2021.  That hearing
         is to be listed  via  Skype  for  Business  (or  other  appropriate
         platform).  The parties have liberty to apply for a different  form
         of hearing no later than 28 days after this decision is sent but it
         is noted that the Appellant's mother who is likely to give evidence
         is shielding and could not be expected attend  a  hearing  at  this
         time. The parties are required to provide joining details for  that
         hearing within 28 days from the date when this decision is sent for
         those  who  are  to  attend  the  hearing  which  may  include  the
         Appellant,  his  witnesses  and  legal  representatives  for   both
         parties.

      3. If an interpreter is required for the hearing, the Appellant  shall
         notify the Tribunal accordingly within 28 days from the  date  when
         this decision is sent.

      4. Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may
         be    sent    by,    or    attached     to,     an     email     to
         FieldHouseCorrespondence@Justice.gov.uk   using   the    Tribunal's
         reference number (found at the top  of  these  directions)  as  the
         subject line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  This address  is
         not generally available for the filing of  documents  which  should
         continue to be sent by post.

      5.   Service   on   the    Secretary    of    State    may    be    to
         UTdirections@homeoffice.gov.uk and on the Appellant, in the absence
         of any contrary instruction, by use of any  address  apparent  from
         the service of these directions.

      6. The parties have liberty to  apply  to  the  Tribunal  for  further
         directions or variation of the above directions, giving reasons  if
         they face significant difficulties in complying.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  19 January 2021
