
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10597/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Teams               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 July 2021                             |On 3 September 2021             |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 mozir uddin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Winter, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on 4 June 2019 refusing
    him leave to remain on the basis  of  family  life  with  his  partner.
    Judge  Debra  Clapham  dismissed  his  appeal.   The  appellant  sought
    permission to appeal against that decision, but was refused both by the
    First-tier Tribunal and this Tribunal.  He now has permission to appeal
    granted solely on the basis of the position taken by the  Secretary  of
    State in an Eba judicial review of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
    permission.

 2. The basis of the appellant's case is that he and  his  partner  have  a
    genuine relationship and that either he meets the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules  or,  if  he  does  not  meet  the  Rules,  it  would
    nevertheless be so disproportionate to remove him that he has  a  right
    to remain despite not meeting the requirements of the Rules.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2001.  He appears
    to have made no attempt to regularise his  position  until  21  January
    2010; he then made an application which was, in  due  course,  refused.
    His presence in the United Kingdom has never been lawful.

 4. The appellant and his partner have been together for some time.  She is
    a British citizen aged 69 or thereabouts.  She has a number of  health-
    related difficulties.  It is now not said that  their  relationship  is
    other than a genuine one.

 5.  Judge  Clapham  had  before  her  the  determination  of  a   previous
    unsuccessful appeal  by  the  appellant,  and  various  other  evidence
    including some medical evidence relating to  the  appellant's  partner.
    Her conclusion was that the appellant's own medical  difficulties  were
    no obstacle to his living in Bangladesh, that he exaggerated his wife's
    dependence on him, and that, in general, there was no basis for  saying
    either that the appellant met the requirements of the  relevant  rules,
    or that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  him  to  live  in
    Bangladesh, accompanied by his partner if that  was  what  they  chose.
    She wrote as follows:

         "40.  The respondent in the said reasons for refusal letter  whilst
         conceding that the relationship is genuine and  subsisting  submits
         that she  has  seen  no  evidence  that  there  are  insurmountable
         obstacles in accordance with Appendix FM and paragraph EX2  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Insurmountable obstacles in terms of the  Rules
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         appellant or his partner in continuing family life together outside
         the UK in Bangladesh.  It is worth pointing out that in  line  with
         Agyarko and Jeunesse the test of insurmountable  obstacles  in  the
         Rules is "stringent" though Sales LJ did acknowledge that the Rules
         and the case law obviously intend for it to be interpreted sensibly
         and practically rather that in a purely literal  manner.   Further,
         as explained in MM (Lebanon) in article 8 (outside the Rules) cases
         the key principle concerns striking  a  fair  balance  between  the
         competing public  and  individual  interests  in  the  light  of  a
         proportionality test to which I  have  referred  to  above  in  the
         context of Razgar.

         41. Turning  to  the  question  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  the
         appellant argues that the appellant and his  partner  have  medical
         issues which prevent them enjoying family life in Bangladesh.   But
         as I stated above most of that evidence  was  before  the  previous
         Immigration Judge.  Even leaving that fact aside though turning  to
         the medical report of the appellant, his GP states that "Mr Uddin's
         long and short-term prognosis is quite good particularly if he pays
         attention to life  style  issues  particularly  smoking,  diet  and
         weight.  He is currently fit to travel  from  a  medical  point  of
         view.  "Whilst I accept that he is on medication the appellant  has
         produced mothing to  show  that  medication  is  not  available  in
         Bangladesh.

         42.  Turning to his wife's medical condition, I consider  that  the
         appellant has sought to exaggerate her  dependence  upon  him.   He
         stated in his oral evidence that he is to all intents and  purposes
         her carer but he admitted that he is not registered  as  such.   He
         stated that she has a broken arm, has had three heart  attacks  and
         she is unable to shower or even toilet herself.  In  contrast,  her
         medical report dated 15th July, 2019 mentions nothi8ng about  heart
         attacks and states that "Edwina is fit to travel but I  think  that
         it is unlikely she would be able to  do  so  independently  as  she
         would require support to navigate anything  more  complicated  than
         local buses."  The report does state that she is  provided  support
         from her husband and if he were to be deported this would cause her
         significantly increased anxiety and needs which would  have  to  be
         met by for example social services, but the fact is that she  would
         not be going to Bangladesh on her own and if  she  were  to  remain
         whilst her husband made the appropriate application  as  a  British
         citizen she would be eligible for social care as  suggested.   Even
         if she were to travel with her husband, I have seen no evidence  to
         show that the medication which she currently takes is not available
         in Bangladesh and  the  GP  has  certainly  not  held  himself  out
         anywhere as an expert on medical provisions in Bangladesh.

         43.  The appellant's representative made much of the fact that  the
         appellant's wife has a sister who is reliant upon her and that  the
         appellant's  wife  despite  her  own  medical   conditions   offers
         assistance to her when she can.  It is difficult  to  imagine  what
         help can be given the appellant's evidence.   If  it  is  emotional
         support then that can continue from abroad.  I heard  nothing  from
         the sister in relation to her dependence upon either the  appellant
         or his wife or both  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  their
         relationship is other than the normal sibling relationship.
         44. The appellant's representative also made much of the fact  that
         the appellant has never left the  United  Kingdom.   But  that  can
         hardly be a point in his favour given that he came  to  the  United
         Kingdom illegally and that the appellant's health and that  of  his
         wife's have deteriorated over the period.  But it has  always  been
         open to the appellant to return and make the necessary application.
         ...


         47.  In terms of the appellant's private life,  it  was  argued  on
         this  behalf  that  there  are   significant   obstacles   to   his
         reintegration to Bangladesh.  It was argued that he has been out of
         the country for many years and it will  be  difficult  for  him  to
         obtain employment, accommodation etc  there.   But  he  speaks  the
         language.  He lived there for a significant proportion of his life.
          He has made no attempt to research the employment situation  there
         and whilst he says that he  has  had  no  contact  with  his  seven
         children he has given no real reason  why  he  cannot  re-establish
         contact with them now.  He mentioned in his evidence  that  he  had
         problems in Bangladesh and a warrant but has produced  no  evidence
         of either.  Any private life which he has in the United Kingdom can
         continue by such modern means of communication open to him."

 6. The present challenge to the judge's decision is on the basis that  the
    judge's analysis was insufficient.

 7. There is a lengthy skeleton argument, not prepared by Mr Winter,  which
    sets out clearly the points upon which it is said that the appellant is
    in truth entitled to succeed. They are as follows.

 8. First, it is said that the appellant meets the requirement of  Appendix
    FM of the Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
    amended), because the only requirement in doubt is EX.1-EX.2:



         "This paragraph applies if
         ...
         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen ... and there are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes  of  EX.1.  (b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

    It is argued that the appellant can satisfy that requirement.

 9. Secondly, the skeleton argument asserts that the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of  paragraph  276  ADE,  because  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles to [his] integration into" Bangladesh.

10. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove him, because, to cite from the skeleton argument:

         "In summary of the factors to be weighed in the appellant's favour:
         he has been in the UK for over 18 years now; he lives with his wife
         of over 5 years; his home is  here;  he  can  speak  English  to  a
         degree; he has established many close friendships in the UK; he has
         shown respect for the laws of the UK, avoiding any  convictions  or
         trouble with the authorities; he  has  little  meaningful  ties  to
         Bangladesh remaining."

11. As  Mr  Winter  readily  acknowledged  at  the  hearing,  however,  the
    difficulty is that there is very little relevant evidence  underpinning
    the assertions made in the skeleton  argument.   There  is  no  medical
    evidence beyond that which was available to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appellant's partner has a mild learning  disability  and  epilepsy.
    The latter is controlled by drugs; the  former  is  not  said  to  have
    caused any difficulties since her  discharge  from  an  institution  in
    1977.  She is said to suffer  from  anxiety  and  panic  attacks,  also
    controlled by drugs.  She has other conditions,  controlled  by  drugs.
    The doctor writes as follows:

         "[Her]  wellbeing  does  rely  on  her  receiving  support  in  the
         community.  Her husband Mozir Uddin  does  provide  her  with  such
         support and if  he  were  to  be  deported  this  would  cause  her
         significant increased anxiety and needs which will need to  be  met
         by other means, for example social services.

         [She] is currently fit to travel but I think  it  is  unlikely  she
         would be able to do independently as she would require  support  to
         navigate anything more complicated than local buses."

12. The appellant's own medical conditions are also treated by  drugs.   He
    has type 2 diabetes,  but,  according  to  his  doctor,  "there  is  no
    evidence of diabetic complications", although he increases the risk  of
    complications by smoking.  There  is  no  evidence  of  diabetic  renal
    disease.  The letter in his case concludes as follows:

         "Mr  Uddin's  long  and  short  term  prognosis   is   quite   good
         particularly if he pays attention to life style issues particularly
         smoking, diet and weight.  He is currently fit  to  travel  from  a
         medical point of view."

13. There are witness statements from the appellant and his partner.   They
    have, in my judgment, the difficulties identified by Judge Clapham.  It
    is clear that the appellant is  not  his  partner's  registered  carer.
    There is no assessment of what, if  any,  specific  care  she  actually
    needs, and whether (apart from the supply of drugs)  that  goes  beyond
    what is provided by a loving husband.  The appellant  asserts,  without
    citing any authority, that medication is not available  in  Bangladesh.
    But it is part of  his  case  that  he  knows  nothing  about  life  in
    Bangladesh now, and it is clear that, as has been pointed out, there is
    no evidence of the  unavailability  in  Bangladesh  of  the  relatively
    routine medication  currently  prescribed  to  the  appellant  and  his
    partner.

14. The relationship between the appellant and his partner  has  presumably
    always been on the basis that if it were to continue, it might have  to
    do so in Bangladesh.  It may well be understood  that  the  appellant's
    partner would not choose to go to Bangladesh if she did  not  have  to.
    But there is nothing in the evidence that suggests that there would  be
    any particular difficulties in their continuing their married  life  in
    Bangladesh (where the appellant is a national and his partner  is  not)
    more than in the United Kingdom (where his partner is a  national,  but
    the appellant is not).  The appellant's bare assertions that he has  no
    links with Bangladesh have to be set beside the fact that he has an ex-
    wife and seven  children  there.   He  speaks  the  language  (although
    English is also understood in major cities) and would  be  entitled  to
    work there.  His partner would be living, very much as she does now, as
    a relatively solitary married woman.  There is  no  reason  to  suppose
    that any travel needs would be more than  the  local  buses  which  her
    doctor clearly implies that she would be able to manage.  There is,  as
    I have indicated, no evidence of any specific medical,  pharmaceutical,
    psychiatric or care needs that could not be met either by obtaining the
    relevant medication in Bangladesh or by  the  appellant  continuing  to
    provide the care that he does.

15. For these reasons, the evidence  does  not  establish  that  there  are
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing outside the United
    Kingdom, as defined in EX.2.

16. So far as concerns paragraph 276 ADE,  the  skeleton  argument  asserts
    various matters relating to Bangladeshi society and to the  appellant's
    own contact  and  availability  of  contacts  there.   None  of  it  is
    supported by evidence.  The appellant has been out of Bangladesh for  a
    considerable period of time, during which time he has obtained  greater
    experience of western society and has begun to learn English.  He lived
    in Bangladesh for a considerable part of his life.  Even if he chose to
    have no contact with  his  family,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  any
    noticeable obstacles which he would meet in re-establishing himself  as
    part of Bangladeshi society.  There is no evidence to suggest  that  he
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.

17. The remaining question then is whether the evidence  demonstrates  that
    it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom  because  his  particular  circumstances  outweigh  the  public
    interest as  expressed  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  law,  in
    particular sections 117A-117B of the 2002 Act.  He does not claim to be
    financially self-supporting.  His relationship  with  his  partner  has
    been entirely during the time that he has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.  The evidence does not suggest that there is any inhibition
    to this couple's living in Bangladesh other than their unwillingness to
    go there.  As Mr Winter accepted, the professionally  drafted  skeleton
    argument supporting this appeal does not really make any case that  the
    appellant's removal (as a person who does not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules) would be disproportionate.  Other than the  summary  passage
    which I have set out above, it  is,  as  I  have  indicated,  curiously
    unspecific: it argues, for example, as follows:

         "In  the  present  case  it  is  submitted  that  refusal  of   the
         appellant's claim would have  a  severely  adverse  effect  on  the
         private and family life enjoyed by the appellant and his partner in
         the UK.  It is submitted that it is not in the  best  interest  for
         the appellant to leave the UK.  It is submitted that a  desire  for
         immigration control is a less powerful reason in the best  interest
         of the appellant  or  the  relevant  children  in  this  particular
         instance."

18. It seems to me that the case  put  on  appeal  depends  in  essence  on
    speculation that  would  go  well  beyond  the  evidence,  particularly
    medical evidence, that has actually been adduced.  In my judgment Judge
    Clapham's approach to the evidence was perfectly lawful.   If  she  did
    not work in  detail  through  the  various  schemata  proposed  on  the
    appellant's behalf, it is because  the  evidence  before  her  did  not
    justify that approach.  The truth of the matter was that  the  evidence
    was wholly insufficient to support any  of  the  appellant's  arguments
    against the respondent's decision.  For that reason the  conclusion  on
    the appeal was virtually inevitable.

19. For these reasons I conclude that there is no basis at all  for  saying
    that Judge Clapham's decision contained any error of law.  I affirm it,
    and dismiss the appellant's appeal.




                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 23 August 2021

