
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10580/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 09 September 2019                 |On 27 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               AYESHA SIDDIKA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

           THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (Post Reference SHE515886)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones   (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 22 August 2017  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  to  grant  the
   claimant entry clearance which would have enabled her to come to the  UK,
   for the purposes of settlement, as a child. The claimant appealed (out of
   country) but on 15 February 2019 the First-tier Tribunal (the  tribunal),
   following a hearing of 21 January 2019, dismissed her appeal. But  on  28
   May 2019 following a hearing of 08 May 2019 I set  aside  the  tribunal's
   decision and I directed that the decision under appeal be re-made by  the
   Upper Tribunal after a further hearing. My reasons for setting aside  the
   tribunal's decision may be found in my written reasons of 28 May 2019. It
   is not necessary for me to go into that in any detail but, essentially, I
   had concluded that the tribunal had conflated the concepts of day to  day
   care and sole responsibility. I did not preserve any of the findings  and
   conclusions made by the tribunal. When the matter again came  before  me,
   on 9 September 2019, that was for the purpose of remaking.

2.  Each  party  was  represented  before  me.  I  am   grateful   to   both
   representatives for their helpful submissions. I heard oral evidence from
   the claimant's mother and sponsor  Shamina  Rahman  to  whom  I  am  also
   grateful. In addition to  the  oral  evidence  and  submissions  which  I
   received, I had before me the documentation which  had  been  before  the
   tribunal when it heard the appeal together with  a  supplementary  bundle
   filed on behalf of the  claimant  by  her  representatives.  That  bundle
   included, amongst other items, an affidavit of one Sahera Begum; a letter
   written by (I think) a teacher at  a  college  the  claimant  attends  in
   Bangladesh and some evidence of monies being sent by the sponsor from the
   United  Kingdom  to  Bangladesh.  I  confirm   I   have   given   careful
   consideration to all of the above evidence and submissions.

3. As to the relevant background, the claimant was born  on  07  June  1999.
   She is, therefore, now an adult but was a minor at the time she made  the
   application for entry clearance which has ultimately led to this  appeal.
   She is the eldest of four siblings and has  lived  all  of  her  life  in
   Bangladesh. There was a time when she and her siblings resided  with  the
   sponsor and the sponsor's  former  husband  (the  claimant's  father)  in
   Bangladesh. However, that marriage obviously ran into  difficulties.  The
   sponsor entered the United Kingdom on 7 October 2013.  She  divorced  her
   former husband on 19 March 2017. She says that a court in Bangladesh  has
   appointed her as guardian for all four of the  children.  It  is  claimed
   that the claimant's  father  no  longer  has  any  involvement  with  the
   claimant's upbringing although he did look after her and at least some of
   her siblings immediately after  the  claimant  had  gone  to  the  United
   Kingdom. It is now said, though, that the claimant is looked after by her
   grandmother (the sponsor's mother) on a sort  of  supervisory  basis  but
   that the sponsor herself retains parental responsibility for her.

4. Although there was initially dispute about a range  of  matters,  by  the
   time the appeal was put before the  tribunal,  the  issues  had  narrowed
   considerably and it had been agreed that the sole issue for it to  decide
   was whether the claimant was able to bring herself within  paragraph  297
   (i)(e) of the Immigration Rules. That paragraph relevantly provides:

       297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave
       to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents  or  a
       relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement in the
       United Kingdom are that he:

       (I) Is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent, parents
       or a relative in one of the following circumstances ...

       (e) One parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or being
       admitted on the same  occasion  for  settlement  and  has  had  sole
       responsibility for the child's upbringing; ...

5.  I checked with the appellant's representatives concerning what the  live
   issues  were.  It  was  initially  agreed  that,  with  respect  to   the
   Immigration Rules, the only issue  was  that  of  'sole  responsibility'.
   However, it subsequently transpired the  claimant  was  also  seeking  to
   rely, in the alternative, upon paragraph  297  (i)(f).  But  those  were,
   indeed, the only issues.

6. The claimant, in this appeal, has the burden of proof.  The  standard  of
   proof is that of a balance of probabilities.

7. As to circumstances in which 'sole responsibility' might be  established,
   I have taken guidance from the decision of a Deputy Presidential Panel of
   the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in TD (Paragraph 297 (i)  (e):  'sole
   responsibility') Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. So, in particular, I have  not
   approached the issue of sole responsibility on the basis that the  phrase
   should not be taken entirely literally. The assessment is  a  fact  based
   one and a central consideration will be the role of the  person  said  to
   have sole responsibility with respect to matters concerning the making of
   or  approving  of  important  decisions  about   the   relevant   child's
   upbringing.

8. There is documentary evidence demonstrating that the sponsor sends  money
   to Bangladesh for the benefit of the  claimant  and  the  claimant's  two
   siblings who are still in Bangladesh (one is in the UK with the sponsor).
   It was not disputed by Ms Jones that money was sent. The documentation in
   the claimant's supplementary bundle evidences  remittances  in  2018  and
   2019 only. But there is other documentation relating  to  remittances  in
   the bundle which was before the tribunal. I accept that the  sponsor  has
   been sending money, on a regular basis, to Bangladesh for the benefit  of
   her children who have continued to reside there, including the  claimant,
   effectively since she came to the United Kingdom and became settled here.
   The sending of money does not, of itself,  evidence  sole  responsibility
   but it does constitute concrete evidence of a  continuing  commitment  to
   the welfare of the children including the claimant.

9. There is  some  evidence  before  me  to  the  effect  that  the  sponsor
   maintains an interest in and an involvement with the claimant's education
   in Bangladesh. That evidence is really quite limited, it's not  amounting
   to very much more than a brief letter of 19 May  2019  to  which  I  have
   already referred and which appears to have been prepared and  sent  by  a
   teacher at the college the claimant attends. It  does,  though,  confirm,
   and I accept the truth of it, that the sponsor has been  paying  for  the
   claimant's education. Again, that is not of itself decisive evidence with
   respect to sole responsibility, but it is evidence of an ongoing interest
   and concern.

10. The father of the claimant, it seems to be accepted by all parties,  has
   remained in Bangladesh. The question of any continued involvement on  the
   part of the father with the claimant's upbringing was explored,  in  some
   detail, in cross examination before me. Clearly, if a parent is  involved
   with a child's upbringing it is very unlikely  indeed  that  a  different
   parent will be able to establish sole responsibility. So, the question of
   the father's involvement or otherwise is one of significance. The sponsor
   has been steadfast in saying that the father has had no involvement. But,
   of course, since she wishes the claimant to come to  the  UK  she  has  a
   motive for saying so even if it is not true. But she has produced what is
   said to be a court order (and translation) vesting  guardianship  of  the
   claimant in her on a sole basis. She has also produced evidence that  she
   has secured a divorce from her former husband.  That  documentation  goes
   some way to demonstrating that the former husband does  not  now  have  a
   responsibility for or involvement in the claimant's  upbringing  and  did
   not have as at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  under
   appeal.

11. There are, nevertheless some difficulties with respect to the  sponsor's
   evidence about the involvement  of  the  father.  I  do  not  regard  her
   evidence as having been entirely consistent as to when  it  was  that  he
   ceased to have any  involvement.  Further,  there  is  the  problem  that
   according to the visa  application  form,  the  father  and  the  sponsor
   herself were sharing the same address.  If  that  is  right  then  it  is
   obviously very damaging to the claimant  and  sponsor's  case.  Her  oral
   evidence to me, on the point, as I understand it, was that when the entry
   clearance application was made the sponsor did not  have  an  address  in
   Bangladesh so she 'used'  the  address  where  her  ex-husband  had  been
   living. I have hesitated over that but have concluded  I  am  just  about
   able to accept the explanation to a balance of probabilities.

12.  As  to  other  candidates  in  Bangladesh  who  might  have  sufficient
   responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing  to  preclude  the  sponsor
   having sole responsibility, there is really only the sponsor's own mother
   (the claimant's grandmother). The sponsor told me that the children  live
   at an address in Bangladesh where they are  cared  for  on  a  day-to-day
   basis by a 'maid servant' and that the sponsor's mother visits from time-
   to-time. That oral evidence is, in fact, consistent with what is said  by
   the sponsor's mother in an affidavit  which  appears  in  the  claimant's
   supplementary bundle.

13. There is a letter from one Dr Md Jawed which indicates that the  sponsor
   pays medical fees in relation to the claimant. The letter  also  suggests
   that there are occasions where  the  sponsor  contacts  the  doctor.  The
   sponsor gave evidence to the effect that there were  certain  things  the
   claimant felt unable to discuss directly with the  doctor  and  that  she
   intercedes. I find that to be plausible.

14. Putting everything together, whilst this is a case  where  the  evidence
   does not point all one way, I am  satisfied  that  the  totality  of  the
   evidence supports the proposition that the sponsor does indeed have  sole
   responsibility  for  the  claimant's  upbringing  and   did   have   such
   responsibility at all material times. Of  course,  the  appeal  has  been
   brought on human rights grounds as it must be, mere satisfaction  of  the
   Immigration Rules no longer being an available ground of appeal. It  does
   not necessarily follow that because a claimant succeeds in  demonstrating
   that the Immigration Rules are satisfied, that the appeal should  succeed
   on human rights grounds. But it is a strong indication. Further,  it  has
   not been argued at any point in this case that if the claimant is able to
   bring herself within the Immigration Rules, and I have  decided  she  is,
   she should  not  succeed  on  human  rights  grounds.  So,  I  allow  the
   claimant's appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

In re-making the decision I allow, on human rights grounds,  the  claimant's
appeal from the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 22 August 2017.

Anonymity is not directed.


       Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                    Dated                                   12 September
2019



To the respondent

Fee award

I make no fee award. I was not urged to do so.


        Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                     Dated                                  12 September
2019
