
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10552/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 17 March 2021                     |On 29 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    G K P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J Akhter, Legal Representative, Hudson Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hoffman ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 23 September 2019
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the  respondent
    to refuse to grant him leave to remain  on  human  rights  (articles  3
    and/or 8 ECHR) grounds under, or alternatively, outside the Immigration
    Rules ('the Rules').

 2. Paragraph 4 of the grounds of appeal confirms that the appellant solely
    challenges the decision of the Judge in respect of his article 3 appeal
    alone. There is no challenge to the Judge's decision made in respect of
    the article 8 appeal.

 3. By a decision dated 6 July 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on all grounds, though her primary focus
    was directed towards ground 1.

 4. From the outset I observe that  this  matter  is  an  example  of  that
    fortunately rare creature, an appeal weighed  down  by  the  chains  of
    several unfortunate failures  by  legal  representatives.  Having  been
    required to consider the matter in detail, it has become apparent  that
    several other failures lie beneath the surface.

 5. Legal representatives have been made aware as to my concerns in respect
    of several failings which arise in this matter. I addressed my concerns
    with  clarity  at  the  hearing.  The  representatives  have   accepted
    responsibility for their failures. I am satisfied  each  failure  by  a
    legal representative was inadvertent  rather  than  negligent,  and  on
    their own would not have given rise to the primary ground of appeal now
    advanced in this matter, namely procedural fairness. It is  unfortunate
    that circumstances conspired to ensure that the combination of  several
    inadvertent failures resulted in the appellant  appearing  before  this
    Tribunal.

 6. An additional concern arising in this matter is the  insufficient  care
    given to the drafting of the grounds of appeal  that  were  filed  with
    this Tribunal.

 7. It is also appropriate that I detail in this decision my concerns as to
    the approach adopted by the respondent in respect of her  consideration
    of the initial application for leave to remain.

 8. I take this opportunity to  thank  Mr.  Lindsay  for  his  concise  and
    careful submissions, which proved helpful.

Remote hearing

 9. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

10. The appellant did not attend the hearing.

11. By directions sent to the parties on 2 December 2020, UTJ Gill directed
    that Mr. A Rajagopal, Solicitor, G Singh Solicitors, and Mr. S Harding,
    Counsel, make themselves available to be cross-examined. They  attended
    the hearing  remotely,  having  on  24  September  2020  filed  witness
    statements dated 10 September 2020 and 21 September 2020 respectively.

Anonymity

12. The Judge issued an anonymity direction in this matter, and no  request
    was made by either party before me for the direction to be set aside.

13. In respect of anonymity and tribunals,  the  requirement  that  justice
    should be administered openly and in public is a fundamental  tenet  of
    the domestic justice system. It is inextricably linked  to  freedom  of
    the press and so any direction as to anonymity must  be  necessary  and
    reasoned: R. (Yalland) v. Secretary of State for Exiting  the  European
    Union [2017] EWHC 630 (Admin).

14. The public enjoys a common law right to know  about  court  proceedings
    and such right is also protected by article 10 ECHR.

15. The Judge failed to indicate within  his  decision  as  to  whether  an
    anonymity direction had been sought by  one  or  both  of  the  parties
    before him and the reasons for  the  request,  if  made.  All  that  is
    detailed is the direction itself at the conclusion of the decision,  in
    a section imprecisely entitled 'anonymity directions'. Upon reading the
    record of  proceedings  it  is  apparent  that  Mr.  Harding  sought  a
    direction 'in light of' the appellant's vulnerabilities. The record  of
    proceedings further details that the presenting officer,  Ms.  Burrell,
    presented no objections to a direction being granted.

16. It is unfortunate that the Judge decided to provide no  reasons  as  to
    why relevant article 10 protections  were  to  be  set  aside  in  this
    matter. As observed by the Supreme Court In re Guardian News and  Media
    Ltd and Others [2010] UKSC 1, [2010] 2 A.C. 697 where both  articles  8
    and 10 of the ECHR are in play, it is for the  Tribunal  to  weigh  the
    competing claims under each article. Since both article 8  and  article
    10 are qualified rights, the weight to be attached  to  the  respective
    interests of the parties and family members will depend on  the  facts.
    The Judge was therefore obliged to provide reasons as to why article 10
    rights were given lesser weight than those  given  to  the  appellant's
    article 8 rights. Such reasons may permissibly be short, with reference
    to the relevant Guidance Note, but they are required.

17. I am mindful that  considerations  arise  in  this  matter  as  to  the
    appellant's mental health concerns. I observe Guidance Note 2013, No. 1
    which is concerned with  anonymity  directions  and  I  note  that  the
    starting point for consideration of such directions in this chamber  of
    the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and tribunals, is open justice.

18. Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  ('the
    2008 Rules')  contains  a  power  to  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    publication of information relating to the proceedings or of any matter
    likely to lead members of the public to identify any  person  whom  the
    Upper Tribunal considers should not be identified.

19. Rule 14(7) of the 2008 Rules contains a  presumption  that  information
    about mental health cases and the names of the people concerned in such
    will not be disclosed in the absence of good  reason.  I  am  satisfied
    that in the circumstances which arise to be considered in this  matter,
    and in particular the issue  of  suicide  ideation,  the  interests  of
    justice require that the appellant is not named in these proceedings. I
    therefore issue the anonymity direction detailed at the  conclusion  of
    this decision.

Background

20. The appellant is a national of India and presently aged 31. He  entered
    the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a student on  9  April  2008
    and was granted leave to enter until 31 August 2009. He made subsequent
    variation applications for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student,  with  the  last  grant  of  leave  expiring   consequent   to
    curtailment on 3 April 2015.

21. On two occasions, in 2015 and 2016, the appellant applied  for  an  EEA
    Residence card. The second application was refused by a decision  dated
    14 April 2017. I understand  that  the  refusal  was  on  'marriage  of
    convenience' grounds and the  appellant  withdrew  his  appeal  pending
    before the First-tier Tribunal in June 2018.

22. The appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds by an
    application dated 18 December  2018.  The  application  form  expressly
    detailed that he sought leave to remain in this country on private life
    grounds. This  does  not  preclude  an  applicant  relying  upon  other
    relevant articles of the ECHR, but such reliance  is  to  be  expressly
    identified elsewhere in the application.

23.  Accompanying  the  application  were  various  documents  including  a
    'psychiatry' report ('the report') authored by Dr  Mala  Singh,  MBChB,
    MSC, MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated  26  November  2018.  The
    report provides no detail as to whether this was the first occasion  Dr
    Singh had met the appellant, and no time is detailed in respect of  the
    length  of  the  consultation.  Reference  is  made  to  a  letter   of
    instruction, which is not to be found in the bundles  of  either  party
    filed with the Tribunal. Dr Singh was provided with two documents.  The
    first is a short letter from the appellant's GP, dated 11 October 2018,
    detailing that the appellant suffered from 'moderate  depression',  was
    taking antidepressants in the form of  Mirtazapine,  at  the  mid-level
    maintenance dose of 30mgs, and the risk of self-harm was identified  as
    'low'. The second document is a letter from West London Mental  Health,
    dated 5 November 2018.

24. Dr Singh  stated  as  her  clinical  opinion  that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from a 'major depressive episode ICD 10 F32.2 severe  without
    psychotic symptoms'. For the sake of precision, I note at this juncture
    that ICD-10 code  F32.2  is  a  medical  classification  for  a  'major
    depressive  disorder,  single   episode,   severe   without   psychotic
    features'. The depressive  disorder  was  therefore  not  recurrent  in
    nature at the time of the report.

25. I observe within the  appellant's  bundle  that  an  identification  of
    worsening suicide ideation and depressive symptoms is noted in  a  care
    plan authored by North West London Specialist  Mental  Health  Services
    after an outpatient assessment attended by the appellant on 14 November
    2018, three days before his consultation with Dr Singh.

26. In her report Dr Singh opined that the appellant's depression is in the
    severe range with marked anxiety and panic disorder. She further opined
    that the appellant has a moderate degree of PTSD.

27. The respondent refused the application by means of  a  decision  letter
    dated 5 June 2019. The application was considered under article 8.  The
    respondent concluded that the appellant could not meet the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Further,  exceptional  circumstances
    did not arise as the appellant could secure medical treatment in India.
    Whilst considering exceptional circumstances, the respondent  addressed
    article 3:

         '35. Consideration  has  been  given  to  the  differences  in  the
            standard of medical  facilities  in  India  compared  with  that
            available here. Whereas it is  accepted  that  the  health  care
            systems in the UK and in India are unlikely  to  be  equivalent,
            this does not entitle you to remain here.  The  fact  that  your
            circumstances would be less favourable  in  country  [sic]  than
            they are in the UK,  is  not  decisive  from  the  viewpoint  of
            Article 3.


         36. Consequently, it is not accepted that your removal from the  UK
            reaches the high threshold of severity to breach Articles  [sic]
            3 of the ECHR on the basis of your medical claim and condition.'

28. I have concluded that the two paragraphs detailed above are generic  in
    nature, and evidence limited, if any, consideration of  article  3  and
    the facts arising in this matter. When considered alongside a paragraph
    that erroneously details the appellant to be  HIV+,  such  approach  as
    adopted strongly suggests a lack of requisite care on the part  of  the
    decision's author.

Hearing Before the FtT

29. The appellant was represented at the hearing before  the  Judge  by  Mr
    Harding. Reliance was placed upon a bundle of documents running to  145
    pages, which included letters dated 26 April 2019  and  7  August  2019
    authored by Syril  Derage,  specialist  practitioner  in  recovery  and
    transitions, NHS West London. The  letter  of  April  2019  was  simply
    confirmation of an appointment having been made for the appellant.  The
    letter of August 2019 confirmed that the appellant had been seen by the
    relevant assessment and recovery team since October 2018 and noted that
    the appellant reported experiencing suicidal ideation at least  once  a
    week.

Dr Singh's letter, dated 10 September 2019

30. An unfortunate aspect of this appeal is that at the hearing  the  Judge
    was unaware of a letter ('the letter') authored by Dr Singh,  dated  10
    September 2019, in which she detailed her  clinical  opinion  that  the
    appellant was not in a fit state to give evidence. The letter details:

         'I have assessed [the appellant] on 9th September 2019, he appeared
         very dejected and withdrawn . [sic] His attention and concentration
         was poor, he was not able to give a coherent account of himself. He
         described getting frequent thoughts of ending his life  by  jumping
         in front of a train .[sic] He said his family do not want  to  know
         him on account of his marriage which ended  badly  .  [sic]  He  is
         extremely traumatised by the violence and abuse he suffered in  the
         marriage. He gets repeated nightmares and  intrusive  recollections
         of the past. In my clinical opinion [the appellant] is not in a fit
         state to give evidence in oral hearing [sic] as this will  lead  to
         deterioration in his mental state and further cause  emotional  and
         mental harm. He will not be able to cope with giving  evidence  and
         the process will increase the risk of suicide.'

31. Mr Rajagopal details by means of his witness statement that a  copy  of
    Dr Singh's letter was sent by post to the respondent  on  11  September
    2019. No corroborative evidence was filed with the Tribunal  confirming
    postage. Mr Rajagopal informed me that he was certain that  the  letter
    had been sent in the manner  detailed  by  his  witness  statement.  In
    answer to my query as to why efforts were not undertaken  to  email  or
    fax the Presenting Officers Unit in circumstances where the hearing was
    so close in time, Mr. Rajagopal informed me that he was  not  aware  of
    the Unit's telephone and fax numbers or its general  email  address  at
    the relevant time.  It  is  unfortunate  that  Mr.  Rajagopal  did  not
    undertake the simple step of conducting an internet search, the general
    telephone number and general email address of  the  Unit  at  Fleetbank
    House having been online since  at  least  2018.  I  confirmed  at  the
    hearing my acceptance that G  Singh  Solicitors  had  not  intended  to
    ambush the respondent with the letter on the morning of the hearing.  I
    further accepted that G Singh Solicitors had sent  the  letter  to  the
    respondent by post in the matter detailed by Mr. Rajagopal. However,  I
    observe that legal representatives should exhibit an  understanding  as
    to how long it may  take  for  a  document  to  reach  the  desk  of  a
    presenting officer, particularly when a document  is  being  posted  so
    close to the hearing, and there is  an  expectation  that  professional
    representatives  will  seek  to  identify  the  most  expeditious   and
    appropriate form of communication with the respondent.

32. Mr. Rajagopal states that he arranged for a copy of the  letter  to  be
    faxed to Taylor House. The fax transmission sheet relied  upon  by  Mr.
    Rajagopal, discussed below,  details  that  the  fax  was  sent  to  an
    identified number at 10.05 on 12 September 2019. I have been unable  to
    locate the fax cover sheet and  accompanying  letter  on  the  Tribunal
    file. However, I note that the destination number recorded on  the  fax
    transmission sheet is the fax number for Taylor House, and so  conclude
    on balance that it was received by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  day
    before the listed hearing.

33. On the day of the hearing, 13 September 2019,  a  copy  of  Dr  Singh's
    letter was received at Taylor House under cover  of  a  letter  from  G
    Singh Solicitor's dated 11 September 2019. The covering  letter  simply
    states:

         'We enclose herewith  letter  dated  10  September  2019  from  the
         Consultant  Psychiatrist  regarding  the  Appellant.  We  will   be
         grateful if you place this for the  attention  of  the  Immigration
         Judge for the hearing on Friday 13 September 2019.


         A copy of this letter and  enclosures  has  been  served  on  those
         acting for  the  Respondent  at  the  address  below.  [Address  of
         Presenting Officers Unit detailed]'

34. The time of receipt has not been recorded by the hearing centre.

35. I asked Mr. Rajagopal as to why the covering letter failed  to  clearly
    detail the importance of Dr Singh's letter and in additional failed  to
    request that it be urgently placed before a judge. Mr. Rajagopal stated
    his understanding that the contents would become clear upon Dr  Singh's
    letter being read consequent to its receipt at the  hearing  centre.  I
    observed to Mr. Rajagopal at the hearing that this approach was  unduly
    optimistic. The hearing centre at Taylor House  is  a  large  building,
    running in the region of 26 hearing rooms at the  relevant  time,  with
    most individual daily lists having between 2 to 4 hearings. In addition
    to  appeal  hearings,  it  also  runs  bail  courts  and  float  lists.
    Consequently, it receives  considerable  correspondence  every  working
    day, generating much paperwork, that  is  required  to  be  distributed
    around  the  building.  Mr.  Rajagopal's  professed  expectation   that
    administrative staff would read the contents of documents  received  by
    post and email, which may be one page or several hundred, and ascertain
    their importance can only be considered entirely misplaced.  There  was
    no indication employed within the covering letter as to the  importance
    of  the  document.  Such  indication  was  particularly   relevant   in
    circumstances where the letter was sent to Taylor House so close to the
    hearing date and there was a real likelihood that it would only  arrive
    on the morning of the hearing.

36. Having posted the letter to the respondent, and additionally posted and
    faxed the letter to the Tribunal, Mr. Rajagopal's  final  step  was  to
    send a copy to Mr. Harding by email. This step was undertaken at  16.02
    on 11 September 2019. The email is brief in terms, and does not  inform
    Mr. Harding  that  the  appellant  had  met  again  with  Dr  Singh  in
    consultation:

         'Attached your copy of the letter from Consultant served on the FTT
         and HOPOU earlier today.'

37. Mr. Harding accepted by means of his witness statement that he received
    the email. He explained that by oversight he did not appreciate that he
    had received  additional  medical  evidence,  being  unaware  that  the
    appellant had recently attended  upon  Dr  Singh,  and  so  erroneously
    understood that he was being sent a report that he had already read. He
    therefore failed to open the attachment. I was informed that if he  had
    opened the attachment, Mr. Harding would have brought additional copies
    to the hearing and sought to secure appropriate instructions.

Hearing

38. The three means adopted by G Singh  Solicitors  to  convey  Dr  Singh's
    letter to the Judge, via fax, post and Mr. Harding  were  unsuccessful.
    Further, consequent to the approach adopted by G  Singh  Solicitors  in
    posting the letter to the respondent, rather than sending it by  email,
    Ms. Burrell was unaware of the letter. The hearing therefore  proceeded
    with the Judge and both  representatives  unaware  that  Dr  Singh  had
    opined  that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to  give  evidence.  In   the
    circumstances, upon the Judge having confirmed that he would treat  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness, the appellant gave evidence and  was
    cross-examined. Consequent  to  submissions,  the  Judge  reserved  his
    decision.

Post-hearing receipt of Dr Singh's letter

39. Having reserved his decision, the Judge  became  aware  of  Dr  Singh's
    letter on 17 September 2019. This was six days  before  he  signed  his
    decision. He addressed the letter at [20] of his decision:

         '20.  I note that despite the contents of Dr Singh's letter,  there
             is no suggestion that the appellant is incapable  of  providing
             instructions  to  those   representing   him.   Moreover,   the
             appellant's solicitors did not state in their  covering  letter
             that their client would not be  giving  oral  evidence  to  the
             tribunal. It is clear that the appellant's solicitors have been
             in possession of Dr Singh's letter from at least  11  September
             2019 and they therefore had time to discuss its  contents  with
             Mr Harding. However, at the hearing, Mr Harding made no mention
             of Dr Singh's letter and, as I said above, he instead  made  an
             application for the appellant to be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
             witness, which I granted. I therefore assume that it was agreed
             between the appellant  and  those  representing  him  in  these
             proceedings that, notwithstanding Dr Singh's  blunt  assessment
             that the appellant was not fit to give oral evidence  and  that
             the process will increase the risk of suicide, he could in fact
             be cross-examined. I would add that the appellant did not  seem
             to be distressed while giving oral evidence, and he was able to
             answer the questions put  to  him  by  Ms  Burrell  and  myself
             without the aid of an interpreter. Furthermore,  there  was  no
             obvious deterioration in his mental state during  the  hearing.
             While I informed the appellant at the outset that he could  ask
             for a break if required, he did  not  seek  one.  Finally,  but
             importantly, Mr Harding did not ask me to find that any of  the
             appellant's answers should be doubted as a result of his mental
             health problems.'


First-tier Tribunal's decision

40. In considering the medical evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  the
    Judge noted at [31] that it was not disputed by the respondent that the
    appellant suffered  from  mental  health  problems.  The  core  of  the
    respondent's position was that the appellant could obtain support  from
    his family in India and access mental health treatment in that country.

41. At [34] the Judge noted that Dr Singh did not detail in her  report  as
    to how she applied the Clinical Outcomes in  Routine  Evaluation  Scale
    and  the  Hamilton  Rating  Scale.  The  Judge  considered  Dr  Singh's
    prognosis at [35]-[37]. He  then  considered  Dr  Singh's  evidence  in
    conjunction with the evidence of Syril Derage and other  NHS  documents
    at [38]-[39], with the Judge proceeding to explain at [40]-[43]  as  to
    why he preferred the evidence of Syril Derage. It is appropriate that I
    detail [42]-[43]:

         '42.  Finally, I return to Dr Singh's  letter  dated  10  September
             2019 referred to earlier in this  determination.  As  mentioned
             above, Dr Singh is not treating the appellant and it is unclear
             from his [sic] letter why the appellant was  sent  to  see  him
             [sic] again on 9 September 2019. No letter of  instruction  has
             been provided from the appellant's solicitors, so it is unclear
             what Dr Singh was asked to provide and in what  terms.  I  find
             that detracts from the weight I can attach to  his  [sic]  11th
             hour letter. If the appellant was sent to Dr Singh to obtain an
             assessment that he was unfit to give oral evidence then,  as  I
             mention above, those representing him appear  to  have  decided
             that, contrary to Dr Singh's opinion, he could in fact  do  so.
             If instead Dr Singh was being asked to  provide  an  up-to-date
             medico-legal  report  for  this  appeal,  then  his  [sic]  one
             paragraph letter addressed  simply  to  'Sir/Madam'  falls  far
             short of what is required for that. I  find  that  rather  than
             providing  a  sober  assessment  of  the  appellant's   current
             condition,  Dr  Singh's  letter  provides  only  a  broad-brush
             sketch. No detail of Dr Singh's  purported  assessment  of  the
             appellant on 9 September 2019 is provided. His [sic] claim that
             the appellant is in no state  to  give  oral  evidence  is  not
             explained in any detail. For example, he [sic] does not provide
             any examples of how the appellant was unable to give a coherent
             account of his claim. He [sic] also fails to  consider  whether
             the  appellant  might  be  exaggerating  or   fabricating   his
             condition. Neither does Dr  Singh  explain  why  the  appellant
             would be in such a poor mental state now given that he has been
             undergoing treatment for some time. That claim is  contrary  to
             what Mr. Derage reports, i.e. that the appellant has  responded
             'somewhat effectively' to the support provided to him.  I  also
             take into account that, importantly,  those  actually  treating
             the appellant on the NHS have not provided evidence to say that
             the appellant is so fragile that he  is  unable  to  give  oral
             evidence to the tribunal, and, as  I  said  above,  Dr  Singh's
             opinion on this point  is  undermined  by  the  fact  that  the
             appellant was so able.


         43.  I therefore find that Dr Singh's letter  displays  a  distinct
             lack of nuance and detail expected of expert  evidence.  Having
             considered Dr Singh's letter of 10 September 2019 in the  round
             with his report and the other medical evidence, I remain of the
             opinion that while Dr Singh and Mr Derage agree on many points,
             where Dr Singh departs from the NHS evidence, the more measured
             evidence of NHS (who have had far greater interaction with  the
             appellant and are responsible  for  his  treatment)  is  to  be
             preferred. I do not therefore accept that, as of  the  date  of
             hearing, the appellant's mental health has deteriorated to  the
             extent that he is unable to give oral  evidence,  as  Dr  Singh
             claims.'

42. The Judge dismissed the appeal on both articles 3 and 8 grounds. As  to
    article 3, the Judge considered the health care,  or  'medical'  claim,
    concerned with the appellant's depression  and  related  mental  health
    concerns at [64]-[65]. Such consideration is rooted  in  an  assessment
    under the test established in N v. Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] UKHL 31, [2005] 2 A.C. 296. The Judge then  proceeded
    to consider article 3 and the risk of suicide separately  at  [66]-[75]
    through the prism of the Court of Appeal judgment in J v. Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  629,  [2005]  Imm.  A.R.
    409.

Grounds of Appeal

43. The appellant's grounds of appeal were filed with the Tribunal  by  his
    present legal representatives, Hudson  Legal.  As  discussed  with  Mr.
    Akhter at the hearing, the grounds do not meet the  basic  requirements
    expected by this Tribunal. Whilst the Tribunal  will  usually  overlook
    spelling mistakes, it does expect the  grounds  advanced  to  correctly
    state the law, to be both internally and externally consistent, and for
    sentences to make sense. There was a consistent failure to  meet  these
    basic requirements in this matter. The  use  of  paragraph  numbers  is
    expected. I observe that the use of paragraph numbering in this matter,
    and  on  occasion  their  replacement  with  letters,  appeared  to  be
    exercised at the whim of the author; sometimes present yet missing  for
    entire pages. Mr. Akhter assured me that such significant  failings  as
    to drafting that arose in this matter were a rarity,  and  my  concerns
    were noted.

44. As it is difficult to provide  an  adequate  summary  of  the  grounds,
    particularly grounds 2 or 3, without engaging  in  a  laborious  battle
    with what is written on the page and with what is ultimately understood
    to be the case advanced[1], it is appropriate that I detail UTJ  Gill's
    reasoning in full when granting permission to appeal:

         'After the hearing before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hoffman
         had concluded on 13 September  2019,  the  judge  received  (on  17
         September  2019)  a  letter  dated  11  September  2019  from   the
         appellant's representatives (G Singh Solicitors)  which  enclose  a
         letter dated 10 September 2019 from Dr  Mala  Singh,  a  consultant
         psychiatrist, who said in  his  [sic]  letter  that  he  [sic]  had
         examined the appellant on 9 September  2019  and  concluded,  inter
         alia, that the appellant was not in a fit state  to  give  evidence
         and that the process of doing so will increase the risk of suicide.


         The judge did not have copies of these letters at the hearing,  nor
         was his attention drawn to them by the appellant's Counsel,  Mr.  S
         Harding. The appellant gave oral evidence and was cross examined.


         At para 20 his decision, the judge said, inter alia, that there was
         no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  was   incapable   of   giving
         instructions and that the appellant did not seem to  be  distressed
         while giving oral evidence.


         Ground 1 contends that the judge erred at para 20, in that, he  was
         not qualified to comment on the  mental  state  of  the  appellant.
         Ground 1 also contends that the judge  should  have  called  for  a
         hearing de  novo  upon  reading  the  letter  from  the  consultant
         psychiatrist.


         Ground 1 raises issues that require to be considered by  the  Upper
         Tribunal, including whether:


          i) the appellant's representatives (G Singh Solicitors)  ought  to
             have brought the letter dated 10 September 2019  from  Dr  Mala
             Singh to the attention of Mr Harding,  Counsel,  prior  to  the
             hearing;


         ii) whether Mr, Harding ought to have brought  the  letter  to  the
             attention of the judge;


        iii)  whether  the  judge  should,  in  any  event,   have   aborted
             determination  of  the  appellant's  appeal  and  instructed  a
             hearing de novo, upon receiving the letter dated  10  September
             2019 from Dr Mala Singh.'

Preliminary matter - (1) Mr. Rajagopal and Mr. Harding

45. Though their attendance was directed by UTJ Gill, I am grateful to both
    Mr. Rajagopal and Mr. Harding for attending the hearing before  me.  It
    permitted me to appreciate their concern as to  unfolding  events.  Mr.
    Harding explained that his error had not previously occurred and  would
    not occur again. I am satisfied that this is the  case.  I  am  further
    satisfied that he understands that in the world of modern communication
    an obligation falls upon him, as  counsel,  to  open  and  check  every
    document sent to him by instructing solicitors,  even  if  he  believes
    that they have been sent on previous occasion(s).

46. I am also satisfied that Mr. Rajagopal is aware that brief  inattention
    to detail can, on occasion, lead to difficulties for his clients and  I
    am satisfied that creating such difficulties  are  not  his  intention.
    However,  as  detailed  within  this  decision,  I  am  concerned  that
    inadvertent errors arose on more than one occasion in  this  matter.  I
    have addressed the lack of helpful detail in the  brief  correspondence
    with Mr. Harding and the Tribunal, and further the  inadequacy  of  Mr.
    Rajagopal's assumption that administrative  staff  at  hearing  centres
    will  sift  documents  on  his  client's  behalf  to  ascertain   their
    importance. The obligation falls upon him, and G Singh  Solicitors,  to
    succinctly and coherently detail the nature of documents  sent  to  the
    Tribunal and to identify any urgency as to their being placed before  a
    judge. I accept that Mr. Rajagopal now has sufficient insight as to the
    difficulties such erroneous action may cause. However, I am required to
    address one further issue of concern. By means of his witness statement
    Mr. Rajagopal confirmed the following:

         'The letter from Dr Singh dated 10 September 2019 was served on the
         First Tier Tribunal [sic] under my cover letter dated 11  September
         2019. The letter was faxed .... to the First Tier Tribunal [sic] at
         10.05 on 11 September 2019 ...'

47. A copy of the fax  covering  sheet  was  appended  to  Mr.  Rajagopal's
    witness statement. It confirms that Dr Singh's letter was sent  to  the
    Tribunal at 10.05 on 12 September 2019 and not on 11 September 2019  as
    asserted in the witness statement. It is unfortunate  in  circumstances
    where there have been repeated failures to act  with  sufficient  care,
    that an inaccurate witness statement was filed with the Tribunal. I  am
    mindful of the High Court confirmation in  Ras  Al  Khaimah  Investment
    Authority v Azima [2020] EWHC 1686 (Ch), at [19], that a  solicitor  in
    giving evidence to a court, or tribunal, is under a duty to be not only
    completely honest but also scrupulously accurate, otherwise there is  a
    particular risk of a judge being misled because of the trust  which  is
    placed in solicitors as officers of the court to  give  their  evidence
    reliably. The High Court observed that misleading a court, or tribunal,
    even inadvertently, is potentially a breach of  paragraph  1.4  of  the
    Solicitors Code of Conduct (2019). However, following  discussion  with
    Mr. Rajagopal, I am satisfied  that  the  error  as  to  the  date  was
    consequent to inadequate attention and am assured that  he  understands
    the care he is to  take  when  filing  a  witness  statement  with  the
    Tribunal in his professional capacity.

Preliminary matter - (2) New matter

48. Before  I  consider  the  primary  issue  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, namely procedural impropriety, I detail the conclusion as to
    my discussion with the representatives at the hearing as to whether the
    human rights (article 3) ground advanced by the appellant under section
    84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')
    is a 'new matter' for the purpose of section 85(5) and (6) of the  2002
    Act.

49. The appeal as presently advanced before this Tribunal expressly details
    that it is only concerned with the appellant's  article  3  appeal.  As
    detailed above, the application form used to apply for leave to remain,
    as prepared by G Singh Solicitors, was solely founded  upon  article  8
    private life rights. Within the form, at page 9, reference is  made  to
    requesting leave to  remain  outside  of  the  Rules  'due  to  medical
    condition'. No more is said.

50. The application form details at page 9 that it  was  accompanied  by  a
    covering letter. As stated above, such letter is not to be found in the
    bundle of either party. This is despite it setting out the substance of
    the application that was before the respondent. In my  experience,  the
    failure to provide all documents accompanying an application for  leave
    to remain is too common on the part of the respondent and it should not
    persist. The Tribunal should properly have before it the  documentation
    relied upon in an application so that it can fully consider the  appeal
    before it. It is not the role of the respondent to  act  as  gatekeeper
    and decide what documents filed by the appellant  it  wishes  to  place
    before the Tribunal.

51. The failure of the  respondent  to  provide  the  covering  letter  was
    compounded by the failure of G Singh Solicitors  to  place  it  in  the
    appellant's bundle. Such  failure  is  surprising  as  it  is  for  the
    appellant to establish what matters he raised before the respondent  by
    means of his application.

52. Consequent to such failure, neither the Judge nor Mr, Harding  and  Ms.
    Burrell were aware as to the extent and substance  of  the  application
    submitted by the appellant to the respondent in  December  2018  beyond
    the application form confirming that reliance was placed upon article 8
    private life rights. It appears, without more, that the Judge  and  the
    representatives relied upon the expansive grounds of appeal authored by
    G Singh Solicitors, which placed article 3 and suicide ideation  firmly
    at the forefront of the appeal, and the reference to article 3  in  the
    respondent's decision, which I have found to be generic in nature.

53. In preparation for the hearing, and  being  concerned  as  to  the  new
    matter issue, I considered the documents filed with care  and  observed
    that accompanying the application was a  letter  authored  by  G  Singh
    Solicitors, dated 25 September 2018, informing the appellant's GP  that
    the appellant had recurring thoughts of suicide. It is not explained as
    to whether the GP was aware of the appellant  having  suicide  ideation
    before this date. In addition,  the  appellant's  suicide  ideation  is
    addressed in one line by Dr Singh in her  report,  within  the  section
    entitled 'long term and short-term prognosis'. I observe that reference
    to 'If he were to be returned, he will kill himself before going as  he
    is estranged from his family due to his marriage, and  soon  after  the
    marriage  his  father  passed  away'  appears  to   constitute   simple
    repetition of the appellant's evidence rather than a medical prognosis.
    The approach adopted  by  Dr  Singh  is  very  unhelpful  and  will  be
    addressed below. Also accompanying the application is a letter from the
    appellant's GP, dated 11 October 2018, identifying the appellant's risk
    of self-harm as low. A care plan letter from NHS West London NHS Trust,
    written consequent to an outpatient assessment on 14 November  2018,  a
    month after the GPs letter, details a history of suicide ideation, with
    such thoughts occurring every 3 to 4 days.

54. On its face, in the absence  of  the  covering  letter,  prior  to  the
    hearing in this Tribunal there was a likelihood that I  would  have  to
    consider the guidance  provided  in  Mahmud  (s.85  NIAA  2002  -  'new
    matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC).  However,  during  the  hearing  Mr.
    Rajagopal  informed  me  that  a  covering  letter  did  accompany  the
    application, and I accept his oral evidence on this issue. He proceeded
    at my request to read out paragraphs of the covering letter  and  I  am
    satisfied that the issue of article 3 and suicide ideation was  clearly
    addressed, as was reliance upon the appellant's mental health concerns.
    Consequently, any concern as to whether a new matter existed fell away.

55. Being now aware as to the contents of the  covering  letter,  a  second
    concern arises. Whilst there is no consideration of suicide ideation by
    the respondent in her decision letter, on  the  same  day  she  sent  a
    second letter to the appellant, care of G Singh Solicitors,  detailing,
    inter alia:

         'I am sorry that the decision to refuse your application  may  have
         caused you harm.


         There is support  available  if  you  have  had  suicidal  thoughts
         recently, or if you are feeling suicidal now. There  are  telephone
         helplines with specially trained volunteers who will listen to you,
         understand what you are going through, and  help  you  through  the
         immediate crisis.'

56. The approach adopted by the respondent is of considerable concern. When
    undertaking her decision on the application, she failed to consider the
    issue of suicide ideation as relied upon by the appellant in respect of
    article 3. Indeed, she made no assessment as to whether  the  appellant
    possessed such ideation. Yet, when sending her decision, she was  aware
    as to her duty of care in respect of conveying a negative decision to a
    person who may possess  suicidal  thoughts.  I  am  satisfied,  to  the
    requisite standard, that the second letter was sent  to  the  appellant
    because the respondent was fully aware that the appellant professed  to
    suffer suicide ideation.

57. The respondent is obliged to consider the  application  before  her  in
    accordance with the law. In this matter she sought and secured a fee of
    �1033 to process the application. The appellant was entitled to  assume
    that the consideration of his application would, at the very least,  be
    adequately undertaken. I am satisfied, having read the contents of  the
    second letter, that the respondent was  aware  as  to  the  appellant's
    reliance upon suicide ideation and there was a  deliberate  failure  to
    consider it within the body of the decision letter. Whilst the exercise
    of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal can usually cure any deficiency
    in the respondent's  consideration  of  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain, the approach adopted in this matter could possibly have led  to
    a vulnerable person  waiting  several  further  months  or  longer  for
    resolution of their application. Such delay could  potentially  trigger
    further adverse stress and accompanying emotional and  mental  concerns
    which may have resulted in significant personal difficulties.

Decision on Error of Law

58. I have sympathy for the Judge who, at the hearing, was  unaware  as  to
    the existence of Dr Singh's letter of 10 September 2019.  The  failings
    of the appellant's solicitors and counsel,  and  the  failings  of  the
    administration at Taylor House in  respect  of  the  fax  sent  by  Mr.
    Rajagopal on 12 September 2019 were simply unknown to the Judge.

59. However, as observed by the Judge at [18]-[19] of his decision,  by  17
    September 2019 he was aware of  the  letter  before  he  completed  and
    signed his decision. He was also aware that the medical opinion  as  to
    fitness to give evidence was made very recently in time, and  prior  to
    the hearing. I am required to consider  whether  he  adopted  a  lawful
    approach to the situation in which he found himself from  17  September
    2019 onwards. For the reasons detailed below, I conclude  that  he  did
    not act fairly and consequently his decision as to the article 3 appeal
    has to be set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

Procedural unfairness

60. There is no complaint by the appellant as to the Judge's conduct at the
    hearing. It is accepted that the Judge was unaware of Dr Singh's letter
    as none of the various avenues adopted by G Singh Solicitors  to  place
    the document before him prior to, or during, the hearing had succeeded.



61. Rather, the grounds assert that upon receiving  the  letter  the  Judge
    should have directed that the hearing be heard  de  novo.  Confusingly,
    the grounds assert that such approach should have been adopted  because
    there was 'sufficient evidence' that the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    witness and 'there is doubt as to his instructions'.  The  former  does
    not require a hearing de  novo  in  this  matter  as  it  concerns  the
    approach the Judge was required to adopt in his holistic  consideration
    of credibility: AM (Afghanistan) v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, [2018] 2 All E.R. 350.  In  any  event
    the Judge had accepted at the hearing that  the  appellant  was  to  be
    considered vulnerable. As to the second contention, there was simply no
    cogent evidence before the Judge that the  appellant  lacked  capacity.
    Indeed, his various legal representatives have proceeded on  the  basis
    that he has capacity to instruct, with no application to  the  Tribunal
    for a litigation friend to be appointed in these proceedings.

62. The focus at the hearing before me was upon a  bald  assertion  in  the
    grounds, without more, that there had been procedural  impropriety.  It
    is unfortunate that the author of the grounds  decided  to  provide  no
    further detail as to this complaint. At the hearing, I proceeded on the
    basis  that  the  complaint  was  implicitly  founded  upon  procedural
    unfairness and related to the approach adopted by the  Judge  upon  his
    receiving Dr Singh's letter after the conclusion of the hearing.

63. Upon receiving the letter, the Judge could properly have adopted one of
    two steps. Firstly, he could  have  issued  directions  requesting  the
    appellant to confirm whether reliance continued to be  placed  upon  Dr
    Singh's letter and if the  answer  was  in  the  affirmative  for  both
    parties to indicate whether they would wish to  make  oral  or  written
    submissions on the issue. An alternative approach would  have  been  to
    have simply resumed the hearing at a later date, at the convenience  of
    the representatives, and hear oral submissions on the contents  of  the
    letter.

64. Could the Judge have adopted a  third  approach  of  simply  proceeding
    without a hearing by  taking  the  medical  evidence  at  its  highest,
    observing that the respondent had not challenged the  medical  evidence
    previously filed with the Tribunal? Such an approach would be  anchored
    on at least two presumptions: that the respondent would agree with such
    course of action and that the contents of the letter could sustain such
    approach. Neither presumption could be appropriately  presumed  and  so
    this approach was not open to the Judge in this matter.

65. The approach adopted by the Judge was simply to  proceed  and  complete
    the writing of his decision. He considered the letter in the absence of
    submissions from the parties and expressed criticisms of it at [42] and
    [43], above. As is clear from  [20],  above,  the  Judge  proceeded  on
    several assumptions which can properly now be identified as wrong.

66. The Judge was no doubt aware that  the  appellant  had  given  evidence
    before him at the hearing, without complaint, and so the  issue  as  to
    fitness to 'give' evidence could be considered redundant.  Further,  he
    had at the hearing confirmed that he would treat  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness. However, the  position  remained  that  Dr  Singh's
    letter had been filed and served and there was no express  confirmation
    that it was no longer relied upon.

67. In addition, thought short, the letter presented  the  most  up-to-date
    psychiatric assessment of the appellant and should properly be  weighed
    in the holistic assessment as  to  credibility:  AM  (Afghanistan),  at
    [21].

68. In the circumstances, by adopting the approach  of  proceeding  in  the
    absence  of  submissions,  when  it  was  unclear  as  to  whether  the
    representatives had knowledge of a document filed with the Tribunal, or
    in the alternative whether reliance continued to be placed upon  it,  I
    conclude that the Judge clearly erred in law. He  was  aware  that  the
    letter had not been before him at the hearing, a fact  unknown  to  the
    parties. In the absence of submissions from either party addressing the
    document it was unclear as to whether it continued to be relied upon.

69. The question for me is whether the Judge materially erred in law.

70. If the issue of fitness to give evidence had  been  raised  before  the
    Judge at the hearing, he would have been required to assess whether the
    appellant would be able to understand the questions he would be  asked,
    apply his mind to answering them, and convey intelligibly  the  answers
    he wished to give.  Suicide ideation, without more, is  not  sufficient
    to establish incapacity for the purposes of fitness to give evidence.

71. On the issue  of  fitness  to  give  evidence,  the  letter  is  wholly
    inadequate.  It  confuses  vulnerability  with  capacity.  There  is  a
    presumption that an adult is capable, though this may be rebutted by  a
    specific finding of incapacity. Dr Singh is silent as to  capacity  and
    fails to expressly apply the criteria as to capacity as set out in  the
    Mental Capacity Act 2005. The high point of the letter  in  respect  to
    capacity may be said to be the observation that the appellant 'was  not
    able to give a coherent account of himself'. However, on its face  this
    is not a sufficiently clear medical opinion that the  appellant  lacked
    capacity. Indeed, I am satisfied that  Dr  Singh  was  not  considering
    capacity when providing such opinion, because her reasoning as  to  the
    appellant's 'fitness' is rooted in his vulnerability:

         'In my clinical opinion [the appellant] is not in a  fit  state  to
         give  evidence  in  oral  hearing  [sic]  as  this  will  lead   to
         deterioration in his mental state and further cause  emotional  and
         mental harm. He will not be able to cope with giving  evidence  and
         the process will increase the risk of suicide.'

72. When  considering  the  appellant's  vulnerability  in  light  of  such
    evidence, the Judge would have been required to be mindful of the Equal
    Treatment Bench Book and in  particular  the  chapters  concerned  with
    mental disability, particularly memory. However, vulnerability does not
    by itself automatically equate to incapacity.

73. Having considered  the  letter,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  wholly
    inadequate for the purpose on which reliance  is  placed  upon  it.  It
    lacks basic detail as to the circumstances of the  consultation.  There
    is no reference as to whether the appellant informed Dr Singh as to his
    ongoing interaction with the NHS. It provides an opinion as to  fitness
    to give evidence with no engagement with capacity. No detail  is  given
    as to why the appellant's attention  and  concentration  was  poor.  No
    detail is given to whether the appellant believed himself incapable  of
    giving a coherent account of his personal history, or whether this  was
    Dr Singh's professional opinion. No detail is given to the  observation
    that the  appellant  was  'extremely  traumatised'  by  events  in  his
    marriage. No critical  assessment  is  detailed  as  to  whether  other
    medical practitioners engaged with the appellant over  time  considered
    his risk of suicide to be enhanced, or  not,  by  the  appeal  process.
    Indeed, Dr Singh provides no detail as to from what base  the  risk  of
    suicide is said to rise  from.  Whilst  being  mindful  of  Dr  Singh's
    qualifications and experience, and also being aware  that  her  medical
    opinion has been accepted in other appeals, I am  satisfied  that  this
    letter is wholly inadequate and cannot properly be relied upon in  this
    matter. I explicitly state that such finding does not necessarily equal
    or entail the discrediting of Dr Singh as a  medical  expert  in  other
    matters. As this  case  amply  establishes,  well-meaning,  experienced
    professionals can make errors. However,  her  letter  was  and  remains
    incapable of founding a cogent  submission  as  to  unfitness  to  give
    evidence.

74. It is well established that  what  fairness  requires  depends  on  the
    particular context, both legal and factual: R. v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department Ex p. Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531]. I am satisfied that
    the present case was one in which the duty to act fairly did apply as a
    matter of principle.

75. In R (Osborn) v Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115,  at  [65],
    the Supreme Court confirmed the proposition that the test  for  whether
    there has been procedural fairness or not is an objective question  for
    the court to decide for itself. The court's function is 'not merely  to
    review the reasonableness of  the  decision-maker's  judgment  of  what
    fairness required'. Lord Reed observed,  at  [67],  that  'one  of  the
    virtues of procedurally fair decision-making is that it  is  liable  to
    result  in  better  decisions,  by  ensuring  that  the  decision-maker
    receives all relevant information  and  that  it  is  properly  tested'
    [emphasis added].

76. Recalling Lord Donaldson MR's judgment in R v. Leicester City Justices,
    ex parte Barrow [1991] 2 QB 260, at 290, that any  unfairness,  whether
    apparent or actual and however inadvertent,  strikes  at  the  root  of
    justice, I am mindful that a reasonable judge considering the letter at
    a resumed hearing and noting the clinical opinion as to fitness to give
    evidence, may have considered  adjourning  the  hearing  to  permit  Dr
    Singh, or another psychiatrist, to address capacity: Rule  4(3)(h)  The
    Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Rules 2014. I am also  mindful
    that Mr. Harding, an experienced counsel, would in all likelihood  have
    observed the failings contained within the letter  and  may  well  have
    advised the appellant as to the merits of  seeking  an  adjournment  to
    secure further medical evidence in relation  to  his  ability  to  give
    evidence. It would be a judicial decision as to whether an  adjournment
    would be granted, but I cannot conclude that an adjournment  would  not
    have been granted on the facts  arising.  In  circumstances  where  the
    Judge sought no submissions on the letter and erroneously presumed that
    the appellant had provided instructions not to rely upon it,  I  cannot
    be sure that the appellant was not prejudiced by the  approach  adopted
    by the Judge. Consequently, the decision of the Judge must properly  be
    set aside.

Remaking the Decision

77. Both parties confirmed that if procedural unfairness were  established,
    and findings of fact were required to be remade in their entirety, this
    was a matter  that  should  properly  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

78. I have considered  the  Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of  appeals  in
    this Tribunal, in particular  paragraph  7.2,  and  conclude  that  the
    effect of the material error of law has been to deprive  the  appellant
    of a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

79. Consequently, I set aside the decision in  respect  of  the  article  3
    appeal alone and remit it back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House with no findings of fact preserved.

80. The decision as to the article 8 appeal is preserved as  the  appellant
    has not appealed against this element of the Judge's decision.

Medical opinion - Dr Singh

81. I observe the Judge's considerations of Dr Singh's report  and  letter,
    and his accompanying observations:

          . There was a failure by Dr  Singh  to  detail  how  the  Clinical
            Outcomes in Routine Evaluation Scale and Hamilton  Rating  Scale
            were applied, at [33]


          . The report was not a 'particularly detailed one', at [40]


          . There was an acceptance of the  appellant's  stated  history  at
            'face value' without further enquiries, at [40]


          . There was a failure to consider whether the appellant's low mood
            and anxiety related,  in  part,  to  the  appellant's  uncertain
            immigration status, at [40]


          .  The  letter  provides  'only  a  broad-brush'  sketch  of   the
            appellant's current condition, at [42]


          . There was no detail provided as to the assessment conducted on 9
            September 2019, at [42]


          . No explanation was given as to why the  appellant  was  in  such
            poor mental state in September 2019 when he had  been  receiving
            treatment through the NHS for approximately one year,  to  which
            he had responded 'somewhat effectively', at [42]


          . Dr Singh's letter 'displays a distinct lack of nuance and detail
            expected of expert evidence', at [43]

82. Having addressed Dr Singh's letter above, I confirm that  I  have  read
    her report with care. Ultimately, a holistic assessment of the evidence
    will have to be undertaken at the resumed hearing. However, I  informed
    Mr. Akhter as to my concerns with Dr Singh's report in this matter  and
    it is appropriate that I detail such concerns in my decision.

83. A copy of the instructions sent to Dr Singh should properly  have  been
    filed and served by G Singh Solicitors.  It  is  essential  that  legal
    representatives are  mindful  of  their  duty  to  cooperate  with  the
    Tribunal and to help the Tribunal deal with a case fairly  and  justly.
    In matters where an appellant has  previously  not  been  found  to  be
    credible, either  by  the  Tribunal,  or  as  in  this  matter  by  the
    respondent in circumstances where the  appellant  withdrew  his  appeal
    before a hearing, it is imperative that an expert  be  informed  as  to
    such adverse conclusions before they embark upon their assessment.  The
    appellant should ensure that the Tribunal  is  made  aware  as  to  the
    substance of the information that has been conveyed to an expert.

84. Dr Singh appears to have uncritically accepted the  appellant's  stated
    personal and emotional history. I observe at  this  juncture  that  the
    appellant informed Dr Singh at the consultation  on  17  November  2018
    that his wife, an EEA national, was a paranoid  schizophrenic  who  was
    physically, verbally and emotionally abusive to  him.  He  informed  Dr
    Singh that they were together  for  a  period  of  time  but  had  been
    separated for some 3� years  before  the  consultation:  section  4  of
    report. This is suggestive that the couple had separated in  or  around
    May 2015, which was 2 months after the  appellant's  first  application
    for an EEA residence card and 17 months before his second  application.
    However, in his witness statement dated 5 September 2019, he states  at
    para. 6 that the relationship ended after he  withdrew  his  appeal  in
    June 2018. It will be for the First-tier Tribunal to  assess  the  true
    factual situation and consider whether there are other possible  causes
    of the symptoms identified by Dr Singh: MN v. Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1746, [2021] H.R.L.R. 2, at [121].

85. A consequence of the uncritical approach  adopted  to  the  information
    provided, which was undertaken in circumstances where Dr Singh  appears
    to have been unaware as to the respondent considering the  marriage  to
    be one of convenience, is that the prognosis  at  section  6.4  of  the
    report reads as if simply repeating the appellant's  assertions  rather
    than being a reliable indication as to the likely course of the medical
    condition. Such an approach is entirely unhelpful.

86. Dr Singh opines that if the appellant were 'to be returned [to  India],
    he will kill himself before going as he is estranged  from  his  family
    due to his marriage, and soon after  the  marriage  his  father  passed
    away. He will not have any support from his family. He will be isolated
    and that can lead to desperation causing him to take his own life'. The
    certainty used as to the appellant seeking to kill himself is,  in  the
    experience of this Tribunal, unusual  and  particularly  so  where  the
    consultant psychiatrist is aware that the previous month the  appellant
    was identified as low risk of self-harm  by  his  GP.  Further,  having
    identified suicide ideation being such that the appellant  'will'  kill
    himself, Dr Singh took no steps to identify relevant interventions that
    would aid the appellant in the short- to medium-term.

87. I note the importance of the identification of diagnostic criteria, and
    it is a primary requirement of any expert  opinion  on  an  applicant's
    psychological state to explain how they meet  the  diagnostic  criteria
    for the condition in  question.  Dr  Singh  failed  to  undertake  this
    elementary requirement.

Earlier EEA decision(s)

88. The core of the appellant's claim relates to his mental health and  the
    adverse consequences of his marriage to an EEA national.  By  means  of
    his witness statement dated 5 September 2019 he provides detail  as  to
    the  relationship.  He  acknowledges  one  of  the   two   unsuccessful
    applications he made for an EEA residence card, detailing, inter alia:

         '5.   ... My application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card  was  under
             consideration by the Home Office in 2017  ...   My  application
             was refused by the Home  Office.  An  appeal  was  lodged.  The
             appeal was listed for  hearing  in  May  2018  and  had  to  be
             adjourned for medical evidence to be  provided  regarding  [the
             appellant's wife's] mental health. By the time the  appeal  was
             again listed for hearing in June 2018, [the appellant's wife's]
             mental health had worsened again. She was in no  fit  state  to
             attend the hearing and their relationship became  very  strain.
             There  was  a  detailed  medical   report   on   the   paranoid
             schizophrenia of [the appellant's wife]. I had no choice but to
             withdraw the appeal.'

89. It is understood that the applications for an EEA residence  card  were
    refused on the ground that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  I
    observed to Mr. Lindsay at the hearing that  a  judge  at  the  resumed
    hearing will be greatly aided by  the  respondent  filing  and  serving
    copies of the two relevant decisions, dated 25 August 2015 and 14 April
    2017.

90. Mr. Akhter is aware that the burden is placed upon  the  appellant  and
    the First-tier Tribunal may well expect an explanation as  to  why  the
    appellant withdrew his appeal, in circumstances where if his wife  were
    unable to attend the hearing, he could have sought to have relied  upon
    documentary evidence to establish the marriage  was  not  entered  into
    solely for immigration advantage.

Covering letter for December 2018 application

91. The First-tier Tribunal would be aided by a copy of the covering letter
    accompanying the application of  December  2018.  The  parties  are  to
    liaise as to its filing.

Notice of Decision

92. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  23
    September 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007, in respect of the human  rights  (article  3)
    appeal alone:

93. The decision as to the human rights (article 8) appeal stands: [76].

94. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a fresh hearing before any Judge other than Judge Hoffman.

95. No findings of fact are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

96. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 25 March 2021


-----------------------
[1] I take this opportunity to observe that there is  not,  as  asserted  by
the appellant, a procedural rule that the evidence of a witness  not  called
by a party to give evidence at a hearing must be accepted by a judge  unless
and until a judge directs of their own volition  that  the  witness  attends
the hearing and gives live evidence. It is a matter for a judge as  to  what
weight to give to the evidence.

