
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hU/10419/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2020                   |On 3 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                        JOSEPHINE ONYEBUCHUKWU KERRY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hussain ('the Judge') sent  to  the  parties  on  2
    December 2019 by which the appellant's appeal against a decision not to
    grant her leave to remain on  human  rights  (article  8)  grounds  was
    refused.

 2. The appellant relies upon undated grounds  of  appeal  filed  with  her
    appeal notice on 4 May 2020 and supplementary grounds of  appeal  filed
    by email on 8 June 2020.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Keith granted permission to appeal on all  grounds
    by a decision sent to the parties on 6 August 2020.



Rule 34

 4. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

 5. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule  2(1)  of  the
    2008 Rules,  and  also  at  rule  2(2)-(4),  UTJ  Keith  indicated  his
    provisional  view  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  determine  the
    following questions without a hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

 6. The parties were requested to  inform  the  Tribunal  if,  despite  the
    directions, a hearing was required. The time limit for such  objections
    has passed and neither party raised  an  objection  to  the  Tribunal's
    provisional view.

 7. The appellant's legal representatives filed short submissions by  means
    of email correspondence, dated 12 August 2020. The respondent  has  not
    filed submissions.

 8. I have considered whether it is appropriate  to  consider  this  appeal
    under rule 34. In undertaking such consideration, I am  mindful  as  to
    when an oral hearing is to be held in order to comply with  the  common
    law duty of fairness and also as to when a decision  may  appropriately
    be made consequent to a paper consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board
    [2013] UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115. In the circumstances, being mindful  of
    the importance of  these  proceedings  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
    overriding objective that the  Tribunal  deal  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly, I am satisfied that it is just and appropriate to proceed under
    rule 34.

Anonymity

 9. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and no request for  such
    direction has been made in the written submissions before me.

Background

10. The appellant is a national of Nigeria and is aged 47. She  was  issued
    with entry clearance as a visitor on 14  March  2007  and  subsequently
    entered the country. She overstayed.

11. An application for an EEA residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national was refused by the respondent on 13  September  2016  and  the
    appellant's appeal was dismissed by both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the Upper Tribunal.

12. On 27 February 2019  the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  of  her
    liability for removal from this country. By  means  of  an  application
    dated 15 March 2019 the appellant  sought  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights (article 8) grounds. She relied upon being a carer for  an  aunt
    who has cancer and  a  cousin  with  Down's  Syndrome.  The  respondent
    refused the application by a decision dated 29 May 2019. The respondent
    concluded that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules ('the Rules') and  that  exceptional
    circumstances did not arise.

Hearing before the FtT

13. The matter came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on 16  October
    2019. The appellant was represented. The respondent did not attend.

14. The appellant gave evidence and relied upon her witness statement.  Her
    'aunt', or more precisely her second cousin, "EO",  gave  evidence  and
    detailed her medical condition. She confirmed that she was in remission
    but continued to suffer pain from chemotherapy. She explained that  she
    struggled to undertake tasks such as cooking and that on very bad  days
    she could not get out of  bed.  Also  before  the  Judge  were  various
    documents including two letters from medical  practitioners  concerning
    EO dated 29 April 2015 and 7 March 2019.

15. By his decision of 2 December 2019, the Judge dismissed the appeal.  He
    reasoned, inter alia, at [32] - [34]:

         "32. I have no reasons to doubt that the appellant's  aunt  suffers
             from the conditions described above. I  am  also  prepared  to
             accept that the appellant supports  her,  although  I  am  not
             clear of the extent of that support. The reason I am not clear
             is because, firstly, the appellant does not live in  the  same
             household as her aunt and secondly, as  was  observed  by  the
             Secretary of State, there appears to be no reference in any of
             the medical reports to the appellant playing any role  in  her
             aunt's  care.  That   is   surprising   because,   given   the
             disabilities she appears to be experiencing and given that the
             household includes another person that  may  have  some  other
             disability, it is highly  unlikely  that  there  has  been  no
             social services  involvement.  If  there  has  been  a  social
             services involvement, then there is likely to be a care  plan.
             That  care  plan  would  describe  the  role  played  by   the
             appellant.

         33.  The only care  plan  that  there  is  produced  goes  back  to
             December  2013,  presumably  when  the  appellant  [sic]   was
             discharged. That makes  no  mention  of  the  appellant  being
             assigned any role in supporting her aunt.

         34.  In the absence of clear evidence as to degree  and  extent  of
             support provided by the appellant to her aunt, it is difficult
             to gauge the extent of the private life  that  exists  between
             the appellant and her answer."

16. I observe that the Judge considered  the  provision  of  care  and  the
    ensuing relationship between the appellant and EO  solely  through  the
    lens of private life and not, additionally, as family life. The  latter
    was advanced by the original grounds of appeal filed  with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

17. As to the appellant's private life the Judge reasoned, at [35] - [39]:

         "35. The appellant undoubtedly has a private life in  this  country
             which would comprise relationships and  associations  she  has
             built up here over the 12 years that she has lived here. It is
             interesting the appellant says that she came to  this  country
             as a visitor but then overstayed here for reasons  beyond  her
             control without explaining what those  were.  That  said,  the
             appellant clearly has been here for a substantial period which
             requires recognition.

         36.  On balance, I am prepared  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
             established a private life in this country.

         37.  In assessing the proportionality of her  removal,  I  have  to
             take  into  account  the  public  interest  considerations  in
             section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002. In so doing, I note that the  appellant's  private  life
             was developed at a time when she was unlawfully  here.  Whilst
             the appellant speaks English, there is no  evidence  presented
             as to  her  financial  independence.  She  said  that  she  is
             currently in a relationship but gave no further details as  to
             the immigration status of  her  partner.  I  assume  that  the
             partner may not be  lawfully  here,  otherwise  the  appellant
             would have rushed to regularise her status  on  the  basis  of
             that relationship.

         38.  Looking at the evidence in the round, I find that the interest
             of immigration control in this  case  outweighs  any  negative
             impact on the appellant of being removed from this country. In
             relation to any adverse consequences to her  aunt,  there  are
             clearly available provisions within  the  state  structure  to
             support persons like the appellant's aunt. Whilst that support
             may not be as good as the support the appellant will  provide,
             in my view, it is sufficient to ensure that there is no  undue
             harshness suffered by the aunt and her daughter.

         39.  In view of the above, I find that the appellant is  unable  to
             succeed in this appeal."

Decision on error of law

18. I am satisfied that the decision of the Judge contains material  errors
    of law which require the decision to be set aside.

19. A primary concern is to the approach  taken  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's aunt, EO. The Judge accepted  that  EO  suffered  from  the
    conditions described and was prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant
    supports her, but he found that he was not clear as to  the  extent  of
    the support. In reaching such conclusion he relied upon  the  appellant
    not living with EO and her not being referred to in any medical  report
    as playing any role in EO's care.  Such  approach  failed  entirely  to
    engage with the evidence provided by both women  as  to  the  appellant
    assisting with basic household chores including cooking  and  cleaning,
    as well as bathing and personal hygiene. Evidence was also provided  as
    to the appellant  shopping  on  behalf  of  EO  and  her  daughter  and
    accompanying EO to hospital appointments. There is no reference to this
    evidence in the Judge's decision.  The absence  of  such  consideration
    fatally undermines the Judge's assessment. Whilst the appellant  has  a
    significant hurdle  to  cross  to  establish  familial  dependency,  as
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Kugathas v. Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, [2003]  I.N.L.R.  170,  natural
    justice dictates that the evidence presented is lawfully considered.

20. A further concern is that on at least two occasions the  Judge  engages
    in speculation as to circumstances arising in this matter. Firstly,  at
    [32], he speculates as to why there is no mention of the  appellant  in
    the medical letters before him. Secondly,  in  the  same  paragraph  he
    speculates as  to  whether  or  not  there  has  been  social  services
    involvement with EO. I observe that it is unfortunate  that  the  Judge
    did not ask questions of the appellant and EO on these issues when they
    were giving evidence before him. Such approach has unfairly denied  the
    appellant and her witness the  opportunity  to  address  concerns  that
    troubled the Judge.

21. Such material errors go to the heart of the appellant's  claim,  namely
    her relationship with EO, and adversely impacted upon the consideration
    of her article  8  appeal  both  under  and  outside  the  Rules.  Upon
    considering the decision in the round I am satisfied that the  decision
    of the Judge must be set aside.

Remaking the decision

22. As to the re-making of this decision I note the fundamental  nature  of
    the material errors identified. I have given careful  consideration  to
    the Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of  appeals  in  this  Tribunal,  in
    particular paragraph 7.2, and conclude that the effect  of  the  errors
    has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

23. Consequently, I set aside this decision and remit it back to the First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 2
    December 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

25. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a fresh hearing before any Judge other than Judge Hussain. No  findings
    of fact are preserved.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan             Dated: 2 November 2020

