

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Numbers: HU/10087/2017,
                        HU/10094/2017 and HU/10091/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 November 2018                   |On 22 November 2018                    |
|                                      |                                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                                   1) S C
                                  2) S M C
                                  3)  S I C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor
      (Taj Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




        1. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  P
           J M Hollingworth on 20 September 2018 against  the  decision  to
           dismiss the Appellants' linked Article 8 ECHR  appeals  made  by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones QC in a decision  and  reasons
           promulgated on 22 June 2018.  The Appellants  are  nationals  of
           Bangladesh, mother  and  dependent  children,  who  entered  the
           United Kingdom in 2010 as the dependants of their husband/father
           who held a Tier 2 visa. The husband/father  was  prosecuted  for
           assault on the First Appellant in 2016 and was  sentenced  to  2
           years, 3 months imprisonment.  The family is now separated  from
           him, although there is  limited  contact  between  him  and  the
           children.


        2. The Respondent refused the Appellants' timely  applications  for
           further leave to remain on 29 August 2017.  The First  Appellant
           had  not  met  the  English  language  requirement   under   the
           Immigration Rules, nor the financial  requirements.   The  First
           Appellant had contended that  she  would  face  difficulties  in
           Bangladesh because of her Catholic religion,  the  breakdown  of
           her marriage for which her family in Bangladesh blamed  her  and
           her lack of qualifications which would make  finding  employment
           difficult.  Her children did not speak Bengali  and  would  face
           problems in adapting to life in Bangladesh.


        3. Judge Jones QC found that Article 8 ECHR was  engaged  but  that
           there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  continuation  of
           family life in Bangladesh, and that it was  reasonable  for  the
           British born children to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  their
           mother.  He gave extensive reasons: see [17] of his decision. He
           recognised that  the  First  Appellant  had  faced  a  difficult
           situation.  Even so, he rejected much of the  First  Appellant's
           evidence, finding that she could obtain work in Bangladesh,  her
           family had not disowned her and her children spoke at least some
           Bengali.  Applying section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
           Nationality Act 2009, the  children's  best  interests  were  to
           remain  with  their  mother.  The  family  could   relocate   to
           Bangladesh where the children would continue to be educated, and
           have the advantage of growing up within  the  country  of  their
           nationality, immersed in its culture  and  traditions.     Hence
           the appeals were dismissed.


        4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not properly assessed  section  117B
           of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the
           reasonableness of the children's leaving the United Kingdom,  as
           well as their degree of integration.   It  was  also  considered
           arguable that the judge had not considered the relevant parts of
           the Immigration Rules.


        5. The Respondent served a rule 24 notice in the form of  a  letter
           dated 6 November 2018, indicating that the appeals were opposed.


      6.    Mr Shah for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  submitted  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  The  Notice  of  Appeal  had
           raised paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules,  which
           was also mentioned in the First Appellant's  witness  statement,
           but the judge had not dealt with the point.   The  oldest  child
           was a qualifying child. The judge had not  engaged  sufficiently
           with the evidence about the family background and the children's
           position  so  the  proportionality  analysis  was  faulty.   The
           onwards appeals should be allowed.


      7.    Mr Jarvis for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice  dated
           6 November 2018.  It had  been  accepted  that  the  Immigration
           Rules could not be met, as the judge had recorded.  There was no
           evidence  from  the  representative  who   appeared   below   to
           contradict the judge's statement.  The children's best interests
           had been fully considered by the judge.  The  Appellants  simply
           disagreed with the judge's decision.  The onwards appeals should
           be dismissed.


      8.    The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's  view  a
           generous one.  Insufficient attention had been paid to the clear
           and succinct decision  of  a  very  experienced  judge  who  had
           addressed all of the essential issues in the  appeals,  and  had
           done so with sympathy for a difficult situation, as he noted  at
           [21] of the determination.


      9.    The tribunal accepts the submissions made by Mr Jarvis on behalf
           of the Respondent.  The claim that the Immigration Rules had not
           been considered was unarguable because, as the judge recorded at
           [7] of  his  decision  and  reasons,  it  was  accepted  by  the
           Appellants' representative at the first  instance  hearing  that
           the Immigration Rules could not be  met  and  that  the  appeals
           could only be argued on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.  There  was  no
           evidence from the representative to suggest that the  judge  had
           not recorded the submissions accurately.


      10.   There  was  no  dispute  that  both  children  were  Bangladeshi
           nationals born in the United Kingdom, nor that the  older  child
           (born on 10 February 2009, as the judge recorded)  had  been  in
           the United Kingdom for more than 7 years.  There was no  dispute
           that the  older  child  was  a  "qualifying  child"  within  the
           definition  set  out  in  section  117D  of   the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  thus  making  section  117B(6)
           applicable.  The length  of  that  child's  residence  had  been
           accepted and was fully factored into the judge's  evaluation  of
           proportionality for Article 8 ECHR  purposes.    The  judge  was
           fully entitled to reach his  findings  on  the  evidence  placed
           before him.


      11.   There was no evidence that the position of the older  child  had
           been argued before the judge on any other  basis.   In  reality,
           the   issues   which   arise   under   paragraph   276ADE(1)(iv)
           (incorrectly  identified  as  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  in   the
           grounds of  appeal,  which  has  no  application)  are  for  all
           practical purposes in the context of the facts  of  the  present
           appeal identical to those in section 117B(6): the  focus  is  on
           "reasonableness". Thus the relevant issues  were  considered  by
           the judge and so there is nothing in  the  point,  ignoring  the
           absence of any evidence that the point was in fact raised at the
           hearing.


      12.   The assertion that the judge had not taken into account  all  of
           the relevant facts of  the  family  history  has  no  substance.
           There were in truth a number of sensitive matters which had been
           examined in the Family Court proceedings,  to  which  the  judge
           made appropriately discreet reference: see, e.g.,  [10]  of  the
           determination. Ultimately the judge had cumulatively  considered
           the  reasonableness  of  the  family's  return,  with   specific
           reference to the children, and gave ample  sound  reasons.   The
           judge's decision, although reached before  the  release  of  the
           Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53,
           reflects the key principles of  reasonableness  now  enunciated.




       13.  As with so many similar appeals which come before the First-tier
           Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
           Chamber, this was in reality about  personal  choice,  a  choice
           which does not exist under Article 8 ECHR absent an  ability  to
           comply with the Immigration Rules or very compelling/exceptional
           circumstances.  The  family  was  not  being  split  up.   Their
           presence in the United Kingdom had at all times been precarious,
           lawful but temporary and not settled.  The family were not being
           expected to return to an unsafe, uncivilised place, but  to  the
           country of their own nationality and culture, where  the  mother
           had spent the  majority  of  her  life,  and  where  there  were
           extended family members.


      14.   The tribunal finds that there  was  no  error  of  law  and  the
           onwards  appeal  must  be  dismissed.  The  tribunal  makes   an
           anonymity direction  in  view  of  the  fact  that  two  of  the
           Appellants are minors.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
      reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed                            Dated  15 November 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
























































































































































































































































































