
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10768/2018
     HU/10730/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 1 August 2019             |
|On 3 July 2019                                |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          mr mOhamAd fuawad bhaiji
                              mrs aysha bhaiji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by A Y & J
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are  husband  and  wife.   The  second  appellant  is  a
    dependant of the first appellant.  They appealed against a decision  of
    the respondent refusing the first appellant  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant and the application of his  wife  to  remain  as  his
    dependant.  The basis of the refusal was the respondent's  belief  that
    the first appellant had lied in his income tax returns.

 2. The appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Rhys-Davies  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 December 2018 and the appellants appeal with
    leave to the Upper Tribunal.  Following a hearing at Field House on  21
    March 2019, in a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  4  April  2019
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf found for the reasons that he  gave,
    that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  contained  material
    errors of law such that it had to  be  remade.   However,  rather  than
    remit the decision back to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  (so  it  was
    later found) without having any detailed discussion with the parties as
    to the course that should then be followed in light of his  finding  of
    an error of law,  and  without  hearing  further  argument  or  further
    evidence Judge Shaerf then went on to remake the decision himself again
    dismissing the appeal.

 3. Subsequently this decision  was  set  aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsley in a decision  dated  7  May  2019  in  accordance  with  Rule
    43(2)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  which
    provides that a decision which disposes of proceedings  (such  as  this
    decision) may be set aside if the Upper Tribunal considers it is in the
    interest of justice to do so and (among other reasons  which  would  be
    sufficient to allow this Tribunal to set aside the decision) "there has
    been some other procedural irregularity  in  the  proceedings".   Judge
    Lindsley found that the procedural irregularity was

         "due to the matter being remade  without  the  parties  having  the
         opportunity to make submissions where  there  was  a  finding  that
         there  was  a  material  error  of  law  with  respect  to  adverse
         credibility findings regarding the appellants, and where it was not
         clear  as  to  the  extent  of  the  parties'  agreement  that  the
         substantive appeal could be dealt with without further  submissions
         if such an error of law was found".

 4. In other words, the position now was that an error of law  having  been
    found, it was incumbent on this Tribunal to move on to hear submissions
    on behalf of both parties as to what course  should  then  be  followed
    with regard to the remaking of the decision.

 5. Although in paragraph 3 of her decision, Judge Lindsley  directed  that
    "the remaking of the hearing will be relisted on  the  first  available
    date", both parties were in agreement that the  appropriate  course  to
    follow was for this Tribunal to hear submissions as to  the  course  of
    the remaking hearing and to reach a decision  as  to  how  this  appeal
    should now proceed.

 6. It is not necessary to go into any detail as  to  the  issues  in  this
    case, because it is sufficient and it is common ground that one of  the
    main if not the main issue is as to whether  the  first  appellant  was
    indeed dishonest as claimed or whether he has an honest explanation for
    why it was that his income was under-declared in the year in  question.
    Apparently, his explanation is that he believed that his accountant had
    submitted an honest return (in accordance with the  instructions  which
    the first appellant had given him) and had given  him  the  funds  with
    which to pay the tax that was due but that the accountant  had  instead
    submitted a reduced and  dishonest  return  on  the  first  appellant's
    behalf and retained the balance himself.  Clearly this and other issues
    will have to be determined in due course and it is  common  ground  now
    between the parties that there will have to  be  a  rehearing  of  this
    appeal and that this will involve witness evidence  which  will  go  to
    this and  other  issues.   On  behalf  of  the  appellants,  Mr  Bazini
    submitted that given that the issues  will  have  to  be  heard  afresh
    (which is accepted on behalf of the respondent) and this will in effect
    necessitate a completely fresh hearing it will be appropriate for  this
    appeal to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the
    appellant's appeal rights can be maintained.

 7. In the circumstances of this case, this Tribunal  agrees  and  will  so
    direct.  Accordingly, I make the following decision:

    Decision

    This Tribunal upholds  (and  remakes)  the  decision  of  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Shaerf promulgated on 4 April  2019  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davies, and directs that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to be reheard by any judge other  than
    Judges Shaerf or Davies.  The rehearing will be a de novo hearing, with
    no findings of fact retained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2019


