

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/10489/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reason          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 22 November 2017                  |          On: 5 December 2017        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR JUBER AHMED NAYEEM
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, Counsel instructed by Syed Shaheen
solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department.  For ease of reference though, I refer to the  parties  as
      they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The Appellant appeals  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  28
      October 2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain  on  family
      and private  life  grounds.  His  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Feeney promulgated on 22 June 2017 ("the Decision").

   3. The facts of the Appellant's case are as follows.  He is a national of
      Bangladesh born on 22 July 1999.  He was brought  to  the  UK  by  his
      mother as a visitor in 2011.  He claims that she  then  abandoned  him
      here in the care of his uncles.  The Respondent does not  accept  that
      the Appellant has lost contact with his mother or that she  could  not
      look after him if he were removed to Bangladesh.  He is in  any  event
      now an adult (although he was still a child at the date of the  appeal
      in the First-tier Tribunal).

   4. The Judge found the evidence given by the  Appellant's  uncles  to  be
      unsatisfactory in large part.  Nonetheless, she concluded  that  since
      the Appellant had arrived in the UK aged just  eleven  years  and  had
      built up a private life in the nearly six years that he had been here,
      his best interests favoured remaining in the UK.  She  concluded  that
      the   Respondent's   decision   to   remove    the    Appellant    was
      disproportionate.

   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.   I
      will turn to the detail of those in the discussion below.   Permission
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  in  the  following
      terms, so far as follows (so far as relevant):-

           "...

           2.    Ground (1) - the Judge found [at 45] that it  is  unlikely
           that the appellant was working in his uncle's restaurant  as  an
           employee on the basis that the appellant was attending school at
           the time. This finding is inconsistent with the  Judge's  having
           noted [at 31] that checks made by the Respondent with the  local
           authority showed that the appellant was in fact working  in  the
           uncle's restaurant.  It is also submitted that the Judge wrongly
           allowed the appellant's uncle to remain in the court  room  when
           the appellant gave evidence on this issue.

           3.    Ground (2) - the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for
           finding that the appellant's  mother  who  lives  in  Bangladesh
           would be unable to support and accommodate  the  appellant  upon
           his return.

           4.    Ground (3) - the Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
           considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act: the Judge [at
           66] wrongly balanced the appellant's ability  to  speak  English
           [under  s117B(2)]  against  his  precarious  immigration  status
           [under s117B(5)], when the two factors are disjunctive.

           5.    The Judge's decision has been shown  to  involve  arguable
           errors of law that might have made a material difference to  the
           outcome of the appeal.  Permission is granted."

   6. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
      error of law in the Decision and if so to either re-make the  decision
      or remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.




   Discussion and conclusions

   7. The Respondent's grounds span ten paragraphs.  I do not need to repeat
      them all because, as Ms Jones pointed out,  some  of  them  appear  to
      recite the background facts or set out additional facts which  do  not
      appear to have been before the Judge and cannot  be  relevant  to  any
      error of law.  Some recite the findings of the  Judge  without  giving
      any indication of an error in those findings. Those paragraphs  amount
      to a mere disagreement with the findings.

   8. In light of the way in which Mr Wilding dealt with the grounds in  his
      oral submissions, the salient paragraphs appear to be [6] and [10]  of
      the grounds which read as follows:-

           "[6]  The Judge having dismissed the appeal under the Rules [48]
           ventured into a proportionality assessment out  with  the  Rules
           [49-52].   It  is  clear  that  the  appellant  is   approaching
           adulthood.  He has not been in  the  UK  for  seven  years.   He
           received education in UK at public expense,  which  was  clearly
           engineered  by  the  family  as  per  judge's   findings.    His
           immigration status was clearly precarious.  Furthermore  he  was
           working as per checks with the local authority when  he  had  no
           permission to do so, irrespective of whether  he  was  receiving
           appropriate or any remuneration for such work.  Whether  or  not
           he was coerced into such work has not been explored  (and  could
           not reasonably be explored at  the  hearing  as  his  uncles  it
           appears were in the room when he gave evidence).  He is  clearly
           not financially independent.

           ...

           [10]  Having concluded that the best interests of the  appellant
           are to remain in the UK, assuming that his  assessment  was  not
           flawed,  the  judge  was  obliged  to  factor  this   into   the
           proportionality assessment taking into  account  s.117B  factors
           inserted into the 2002 Act.  The judge's consideration  of  this
           section with all due respect to him is perfunctory.  At [66] the
           learned judge "balances" the appellant's precarious status  with
           his ability to  speak  English.   However  these  are  separate,
           disjunctive factors to be  considered  and  cannot  be  used  to
           balance one another.  Furthermore knowledge  of  English  is  at
           best a neutral factor.  117B(2) does not mean that knowledge  of
           English Language should be treated a matter which  can  militate
           positively in the  appellant's  favour  in  the  proportionality
           assessment.  See inter alia Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803."

   9. Mr Wilding's main submission based on the above was that  the  Judge's
      assessment is "two dimensional"  and  fails  to  factor  into  account
      properly or at all the public interest in permitting the Appellant  to
      remain when his presence has been unlawful for most of  his  stay  and
      particularly when he cannot meet the Immigration Rules in relation  to
      his private and family life.  Mr Wilding  accepted  however  that  the
      Judge was entitled  to  reach  the  view  she  did  as  to  where  the
      Appellant's best interests lay.

  10. Ms Jones took me through the grounds in some detail.  In light  of  my
      summary at [7] above, I do not need to repeat  her  submissions.   She
      submitted that the Judge found the Appellant's best interests strongly
      favoured him remaining in the UK.  As she pointed out, the case of  EV
      (Philippines) & others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      [2014] EWCA Civ 874, relied upon by the Respondent in her grounds does
      not militate against such a finding. That case  permits  consideration
      of how long a child has been in education in  the  UK  and  the  stage
      reached.  That is the approach taken by the Judge.

  11. Ms Jones also pointed out  that  the  Judge  did  not  ignore  factors
      adverse to the Appellant.   Indeed,  the  Judge  decided  some  issues
      against the Appellant and expressed herself dissatisfied with some  of
      the evidence given for the Appellant, particularly that of his uncles.
       She found for example that the Appellant's family  had  contrived  to
      bring him to the UK to have a better life ([42] of the Decision).

  12. I turn then to the basis of the Decision.  The Judge accepts that  the
      Appellant has formed emotional ties with his  uncle  and  family  with
      whom he has lived (for the most part) since his arrival.  She  accepts
      that the Appellant has been in education in the UK even if  he  worked
      at  his  uncle's  restaurant  outside  school  hours.  She  notes  the
      Appellant's evidence that he wishes to remain in the UK and finds that
      "[h]e has formed family and social ties here, as well as ties  to  the
      wider community which is evidenced through the many photographs I have
      seen.  He has plans and aspirations  for  his  future  and  these  are
      firmly rooted to the United Kingdom."

  13. The Judge accepts that the Appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration
      Rules ([48] of the Decision). She correctly directs  herself  at  [51]
      that she is  required  to  consider  whether  removal  would  lead  to
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant such that it  would
      be  disproportionate.   That  is  the  exercise  that  she  thereafter
      conducts from [52] onwards.

  14. The starting point for the Judge's consideration is at [52] where  she
      says this:-

           "...Although consideration  is  given  to  the  length  of  time
           somebody has spent in the United Kingdom as  a  child,  in  this
           particular case I'm influenced  by  the  stage  at  which  Juber
           arrived in the United Kingdom.  Juber was 11 years  old  and  he
           has spent  crucial  years  of  his  development  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  He has currently been here for in excess of six  years
           and is approaching adulthood.  The consequences of  his  removal
           to a country from which he has been absent for  a  consideration
           amount of time would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
           for him.  He would in effect abandon his education and the  life
           he  enjoys  here.   I  consider  that  as  a   result   of   the
           circumstances  a  further  consideration  under  article  8   is
           warranted."

  15. As I have already noted, the Appellant was, at the date of the hearing
      and the Decision, just under eighteen years old and therefore his best
      interests had to be considered as he was still  a  child.  That  is  a
      primary consideration and the Judge deals with it  as  such.    In  so
      doing, she accepts that,  based  on  her  earlier  finding  about  the
      relationship between the Appellant and his uncles, he  enjoys  both  a
      private and family life in the UK.

  16. Having reviewed the case law  concerning  best  interests,  the  Judge
      proceeds to make findings about what those require.  She  there  takes
      into account the unusual circumstances of this case in  terms  of  the
      lack of relationship between the Appellant and his mother and his more
      developed relationship with his uncles. She also  takes  into  account
      the Appellant's educational progress.  She concludes that it would  be
      in the Appellant's best interests to remain in the UK with his  family
      here.  As I have already noted, Mr Wilding accepted that this  finding
      was open to the Judge on the evidence.  That then is  the  cornerstone
      from which the Judge's consideration of Article 8 proceeds.

  17. The Judge goes on at [61] to [63] of  the  Decision  to  set  out  the
      factors in favour of the Appellant as follows:-

           "[61]...I accept he has not been in the  United  Kingdom  for  7
           years but he has been here for over 6 years and I must  look  at
           the wider circumstances including his age on arrival.  The  fact
           that Juber has been here for  several  years  and  from  such  a
           crucial age  is  a  weighty  consideration  in  the  balance  of
           competing considerations.  He has  been  fully  integrated  into
           British society.  His personal identity has developed.   He  has
           formed friendships and social links.  Juber has grown up in  the
           United Kingdom. Whilst his primary focus in early years was upon
           his parents, given the length of time he has lived here, he  has
           formed extensive ties with the wider  community.   I  take  into
           account the benefit  of  stability  and  continuity  of  Juber's
           social and educational provision.  There was no evidence  before
           me what  educational  provision  might  be  made  for  Juber  in
           Bangladesh and I accept that educational provision is available,
           however, I find the potential disruption of  his  studies  at  a
           time when he is about  to  complete  his  GCSE  syllabus  to  be
           considerable and certainly not in his best  interests.   I  find
           the upheaval would inevitably adversely affect  his  ability  to
           settle into a new educational regime and  adversely  affect  his
           ability to settle into a new educational  regime  and  adversely
           affect his ability to learn.  I find he is unlikely to  be  able
           to take up his education in Bangladesh where he left off in  the
           United Kingdom.

           [62]  Juber might have initially come here on a visit visa  with
           his parents.   He  was  too  young  to  understand  and  had  no
           expectation of remaining, however, the passage of time  and  his
           integration into British  Society  has  inevitably  changed  his
           circumstances and has given him certain expectations as  to  his
           future prospects for remaining in the United Kingdom.   Although
           I do accept his uncles and mother bear responsibility for this.

           [63]  There is  limited  information  as  to  how  he  would  be
           expected to support himself in Bangladesh or  whether  he  would
           have any home to return to at all.  The evidence that his mother
           works as a domestic has been consistent and I am  not  satisfied
           that she would be able to accommodate Juber.  Juber may make the
           best of a forced exit but I am not satisfied taking into account
           VW [2009] EWCA Civ 5 that it is reasonable to expect him to go."

  18. The Judge then considers the other side of  the  equation  namely  the
      public interest.  She properly directs herself at [64] to section  117
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   She  correctly  notes
      that the central focus of her assessment is the proportionality issue.

  19. Her analysis of the public interest balance is then set out at [66] of
      the Decision onwards as follows:-

           "[66] I take into account the public policy reasons that  attach
           to maintaining immigration control and in  particular  that  the
           private life was acquired at a time when Juber's immigration was
           precarious, indeed he was an overstayer.  I balance this against
           the  fact  that  the  appellant  can  speak  English   and   has
           qualifications and prospects  of  employment  (although  I  note
           these are neutral factors).  I  attach  limited  weight  to  the
           address given in the application form as Juber did not  complete
           the form himself and in any event, I accept the explanation that
           he divides his time between the two addresses.

           [67]  I take into account my findings that Juber cannot  satisfy
           the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I  have  taken  into
           consideration, applying section 55 BCIA 2009, it would not be in
           Juber's best interests to return, even to live with  his  mother
           as a family unit, for the reasons given above.   I  weigh  this,
           together with my earlier findings, against the strong weight  to
           be given to the need to maintain immigration control in  pursuit
           of the economic well-being of the country.

           [68]  I take into account that I am entitled to factor into  any
           assessment the impact removal has on those sharing a  life  with
           the appellant in terms of Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD  2008]  UKHL  39.
           Juber's removal will no doubt have an impact on his  uncles  who
           have been responsible for his care.

           [69]  Looking at all the factors in the round I  find  that  the
           respondent's decision is  disproportionate.   In  reaching  this
           decision I take into account my earlier findings.  I  take  into
           account that the appellant's immigration status  in  the  United
           Kingdom has always been precarious.  However, I factor into that
           assessment that he is a minor and could not  have  simply  taken
           himself back to Bangladesh.  The appellant has enjoyed  life  in
           the United Kingdom as a child and now as he approaches adulthood
           he has made the United Kingdom his home such that is in his best
           interests to stay.  I find  this  factor  tips  the  balance  in
           Juber's favour.  As a consequence, I find that any  interference
           would be disproportionate."

  20. I accept that if the Judge balanced the Appellant's ability  to  speak
      English and maintain himself as positive  factors  against  the  other
      factors militating against the Appellant, she  was  wrong  to  do  so.
      However, she expressly notes that these are neutral  factors  (and  if
      she was making a finding that the Appellant is financially independent
      that is contrary to her earlier finding that  he  is  not).   However,
      reading that sentence in context, the Judge is there simply  balancing
      the unlawfulness of the Appellant's stay against his  integration  and
      educational success which were factors in his favour  taken  from  the
      earlier passage.

  21. Contrary to Mr Wilding's submissions, the Judge has expressly  weighed
      in the equation that the  Appellant  is  unable  to  meet  the  Rules.
      However, the Judge took into account (and was entitled to do  so)  her
      finding about where the Appellant's best interests lay.  She  accepted
      that there is a strong public interest in removing the Appellant.   In
      her conclusion at [69] of the Decision, the Judge takes  into  account
      in short summary the  factors  for  and  against  the  Appellant  and,
      balancing those, reaches the conclusion that the Appellant should  not
      be removed.

  22. On its facts, this is a finely balanced case and another  Judge  could
      undoubtedly have reached the opposite conclusion on the same  findings
      and evidence.  However, assessments of this nature are  not  an  exact
      science.  They inevitably involve a matter of personal assessment.

  23. Provided the Judge took into account factors both for and against  the
      Appellant and properly recognised her duty to take  into  account  the
      strong public interest in removal, she cannot be said to have erred in
      her conclusion.  For the  reasons  I  have  given,  and  based  on  an
      analysis of the salient passages in the Decision, I am satisfied  that
      the Judge has properly conducted the balancing exercise.  The Decision
      does not disclose any material error of law.



DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Decision of Judge Feeney promulgated on 22 June 2017.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  5 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
