
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10683/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2017                    |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                       Mr idris olasunkanmi oladipupo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Michael West, Ineyab Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr
         R G Walters promulgated on 25 January 2017.  Although, for  reasons
         I will come to shortly, in the  header  and  case  reference  there
         appear to be a second and a third  appellant,  there  is  only  one
         appellant in the current appeal to the Upper Tribunal today.


      2. That appellant, Mr Idris Oladipupo, was born on 14 March  1977  and
         is a citizen of Nigeria. He has two daughters who I understand were
         both born in the United Kingdom. His wife, and the mother  of  both
         the daughters, is Miss Modinat Ayoka Tijani. She currently has  the
         benefit of a Tier 1 Entrepreneur visa which is valid until 13  July
         2018.


      3. The appeal from the refusal of leave to remain  was  brought  under
         the provisions of private and family life in the Immigration  Rules
         and under Article 8 outside those Rules.  Judge  Walters  dismissed
         the appeal on both bases.


      4. On 15 August 2017, Judge  Doyle  gave  permission  to  appeal.  For
         present purposes I need only recite paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grant
         of permission.

         "3.  At [4] of the decision the judge  records  that  that  parties
             agree that the second and third appellants have  not  made  an
             application for leave to remain  and  the  respondent  has  no
             power to consider an application which has not been made.   On
             that basis the judge finds that there are no valid appeals for
             the second and third appellants.  It is arguable that  amounts
             to a material error of law.  It is arguable that the  Tribunal
             has jurisdiction to consider  an  appeal  against  a  decision
             which the respondent should not have made and it has not  been
             withdrawn.


         4.   The judge's proportionality assessment is found  between  [57]
             and [71] of the decision.  His findings  there  focus  on  the
             second and third appellants.  Little  is  said  of  the  first
             appellant.  It is arguable  that  a  more  carefully  reasoned
             balancing exercise is required."

      5. Mr West, represents the appellant today, but also seeks to speak on
         behalf of the so-called  "second  and  third  appellants".   It  is
         regrettable that Miss P Glass who acted for those appellants before
         the First-tier Tribunal is not herself here today because  the  way
         in which Mr  West  has  sought  to  develop  the  grounds  requires
         revisiting a concession which was  made  on  behalf  of  all  three
         "appellants" in the First-tier Tribunal.


      6. The judge records the following in paragraph 4 of the decision.

             "In the first appellant's  reasons  for  decision  letter  the
             respondent writes 'As your two children (the second and  third
             appellants) have no leave to remain in the United Kingdom they
             have  both  been  added  to  your  application  and  will   be
             considered together'.  Both representatives  agreed  that  the
             respondent had no powers to consider an application which  was
             not before her.  It follows that she could not make a decision
             on such an application and it follows from that the second and
             third appellants have no valid appeals."



      7. What Mr West says to me today is  that  I  should  read  down  that
         paragraph and find a more limited concession than  appears  on  its
         face. He submits that although both representatives agreed that the
         respondent had no powers to consider an application which  was  not
         before the Secretary of State, that was as far  as  the  concession
         went.  He submits that the  following  sentence  (where  the  judge
         asserts the second and third appellants have no valid  appeals)  is
         akin to a separate adjudication  made  by  the  judge  of  his  own
         motion.



      8. I do not think that Mr West's submission  can  be  correct  on  any
         reading of the  paragraph.   I  expressly  asked  Mr  West  whether
         Counsel then acting invited the Tribunal of its own motion still to
         hear the  appeal  and  he  said  he  was  not  able  to  make  that
         submission.  It seems to me that paragraph 4 represents the correct
         recording of a full and unambiguous concession that the  judge  was
         only to deal with the appeal of the first appellant and not for any
         appeal  (valid  or  otherwise)  which  the  judge  might  have  had
         jurisdiction to entertain. Mr West did not invite me to adjourn the
         appeal to make enquiry into what may have transpired in the  First-
         tier Tribunal, or to solicit a witness statement from counsel  then
         acting. He recognised, I suspect, that  such  ventures  would  have
         proved futile.


      9. The judge duly proceeded to act upon the concession and dealt  with
         the matter solely  by  reference  to  the  position  of  the  first
         appellant. The legitimacy of such a reading of the decision is made
         explicit from paragraph 72 of the  decision  where  the  notice  of
         decision appears. It is clearly written in the singular and  states
         that the appeal (namely that of the first appellant)  is  dismissed
         on human rights grounds.


     10. Although Mr West  made  his  submissions  with  circumspection,  an
         appellant (especially one with  the  benefit  of  specialist  legal
         advice) may not re-open a point expressly conceded with the  First-
         tier Tribunal.  I do not consider that the fact that the  so-called
         "second and third appellants" can constitute a legitimate criticism
         of the decision.  The judge was not  invited  (whether  by  counsel
         then acting for the  appellant  or  otherwise)  to  deal  with  the
         position of the second and third appellants. Quite the contrary, he
         was expressly encouraged not to do so. Nothing that has  been  said
         to me this morning leads me to conclude that there is any  material
         error of law in the judge doing exactly what he was asked by  those
         acting at the time and limiting  his  adjudication  solely  to  the
         position of the current appellant.


     11. That then leaves the second matter which Mr West has argued, namely
         that there is a material error of law in the judge failing properly
         to  exercise   his   judicial   function   on   the   question   of
         proportionality:  balancing  on  the  one  hand  the  human  rights
         interests of the appellant and on the other the public interest  in
         the maintenance of proper immigration control.

     12. The primary point made by Mr West is  that  if  one  looks  at  the
         analysis of the judge  in  paragraphs  57  and  following,  greater
         prominence is given to the position of the  so-called  "second  and
         third appellants" rather than to  the  appellant  himself.   It  is
         suggested that  there  was  insufficient  weight  accorded  to  the
         disadvantage which might be afforded to young girls when leaving to
         travel to Nigeria and that insufficient weight  was  given  to  the
         fact that the elder of the two children was on the cusp  of  moving
         into full-time education. It is suggested that the judge failed  to
         have regard to the impact on fracturing an existing family unit  in
         the United Kingdom.


     13. Mr Naith, for the Secretary of State,  submits  that  although  the
         discussion is brief, there is sufficient to indicate that the judge
         took all  relevant  factors  into  account  and  carried  out  that
         balancing exercise. If one reads  holistically  paragraphs  57  and
         following there is a clear understanding by the judge  of  all  the
         relevant factors that were in play.  One unusual  feature  of  this
         case is that the judge was only dealing  with  a  relatively  short
         period of time as Miss Tijani's leave to  remain  lasted  until  13
         July 2018. The judge stated in paragraph 64:

             "I find that the best interests of these children would be  to
             remain with the first appellant and  their  mother.   Although
             their mother has leave to remain as an entrepreneur  until  13
             July 2018 I found her evidence wholly unbelievable  concerning
             her supposed business and its profits.  Technically of  course
             Miss  Tijani  cannot  be  removed  before  13  July  2018  but
             hopefully she will have regard to the best  interests  of  her
             children and go with them and the first appellant to Nigeria."



     14. The judge rightly makes the point that for the preponderance of the
         time that  the  first  appellant  has  been  in  this  country  his
         immigration status was precarious.  This is  recited  in  paragraph
         69. The judge was entitled, as he did, to afford little  weight  to
         private life established over that period.


     15. In my assessment having heard submissions and reviewed the decision
         thoroughly there  is  nothing  in  the  proportionality  assessment
         carried out by the judge which can conceivably amount to a material
         error of law.  It must therefore follow that neither of the grounds
         as developed by Mr West before me today has merit and  this  appeal
         must in consequence be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

   1) Appeal dismissed and decision of First-tier Tribunal affirmed.


   2) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     26 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


