
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10738/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th April 2019                             |On 18th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                              mr Mohammad Rafiq
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to remain.
     The appeal that came before Judge Malcolm at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 16 November 2018 was dismissed.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 13
    March 2019. He stated "I believe that it is properly arguable that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  wrongly  placed  the  burden  on  the
    Appellant to prove that he did not use deception.  All  the  challenges
    may be argued."

 3. I had the benefit of the presence of Mr Brooks and Ms  Jones  who  have
    been helpful in focussing on the key issue.  It is accepted by Ms Jones
    that the judge wrongly placed a  burden  of  proof  on  the  Appellant,
    whereas it fell on the Respondent where an allegation of deception  was
    being made, this was an error of law, and that given  it  went  to  the
    heart of the case it could not be anything other than material.

 4. It was accepted by Mr Brooks that Grounds 2, 3, and 4 played no further
    part in this hearing. Both representatives agreed  that  the  Appellant
    had not had a fair hearing in the first place because the wrong  burden
    of proof had been applied.

 5. Accordingly, the only proper course of action in this particular appeal
    would be to set the decision aside in its entirety and remit the matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham for a de novo hearing so  that
    all matters can be properly ventilated and determined.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal will issue any consequential directions.  The matter will  not
    come before Judge Malcolm.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019






FEE/COSTS AWARD

I make no fee or costs award as the matter is ongoing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019
