
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 June 2017                          |On 26 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                         URMILABEN BHAGUBHAI MISTRY
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by One Immigration
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge promulgated 22.8.16, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  22.10.15,
    to refuse his application for LTR on Human Rights grounds.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 10.8.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    29.12.16. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission  to  appeal  on
    9.2.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 22.6.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below I found such error of law in  the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 6. The history and background to the appeal has  been  somewhat  confused.
    The appellant's husband is a British citizen born in India, but  having
    lived between the ages of 10 and 30 in Kenya. He  came  to  the  UK  in
    1971. He worked in the UK until 2013, retiring at age 73.

 7. He married the appellant, a citizen of India, and she came to the UK in
    2011 with entry clearance as a spouse, with probationary  leave  for  2
    years. The refusal decision erroneously states that she came on a visit
    visa. Unfortunately, she neglected to apply for FLR or ILR  before  the
    expiry of her spousal visa, and did not make her next application until
    9 months after the expiry of her leave. Mr Nicholson submitted, and  Mr
    Harrison did not demure, that had she made application in  2013  before
    expiry of  her  leave,  she  would  most  probably  have  succeeded  in
    obtaining further or indefinite leave  to  remain.  At  that  time  her
    husband was still working and she would only have needed to demonstrate
    adequate accommodation  and  maintenance.  The  failure  to  renew  her
    spousal leave was obviously an oversight.

 8. There have been a number of previous applications to that which is  the
    subject of this appeal, one of which involved an appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. After some discussion  and  investigation  in  the  Home
    Office file, Mr Nicholson and  Mr  Harrison  agreed  that  the  correct
    regime under which the present application should be considered is that
    of Appendix FM. The Secretary of State  considered  EX1  and  concluded
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    in India. Judge Lodge came to the same conclusion and went on  at  [24]
    of the decision to  find  nothing  exceptional  about  the  appellant's
    circumstances that was not already covered by the  application  of  the
    Rules. The judge also concluded that it was  not  disproportionate  for
    the appellant  to  return  to  India  to  make  application  for  entry
    clearance.

 9. However, in granting permission to appeal, Judge  Grubb  considered  it
    arguable that the judge's conclusion that there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles to continuing family life in India was irrational,  and  that
    the judge failed to properly assess the article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules, applying Chikwamba.

10. The Rule 24 response, dated 23.2.17, submits that the  grounds  are  no
    more than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

11. The essential facts of the case include the following:

      a) There is no dispute as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship
         between the appellant and her British citizen husband;

      b) They have had a steady and stable home life in the UK since 2011;

      c) The failure to apply for FLR was an oversight and the Tribunal  can
         be satisfied that had the application been made in  time  it  would
         most likely have been successful;

      d) At the time the application should have been made, the husband  was
         still working. He has now retired and enjoys a  state  and  private
         pension, though this is likely to be  less  than  the  Appendix  FM
         threshold minimum income;

      e) He has family in the UK, but none in India;

      f) He has  a  range  of  health-relates  ailments,  including  asthma,
         arthritis,  osteoporosis,  bronchitis,  hypertension  and   cardiac
         complications. He has had problems with his pelvis since a fall  in
         India in 1997. In short, he is not in the best of health and is now
         elderly. He stated that he would not  be  able  to  live  in  India
         because of the dusty climate and diesel fumes;

      g) Whilst he has visited India and speaks the native language, he  has
         not lived in India since the age  of  10,  spending  his  formative
         years in Kenya. However, he has visited  for  lengthy  periods  and
         thus is familiar with the culture;

12. The circumstances when applied the EX2 definition of  very  significant
    difficulties which could not be overcome or  which  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the appellant or her husband,  are  probably  best
    assessed  as  borderline.  Judge  Lodge  concluded   that   they   were
    insufficient  to  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  and,  strictly
    interpreted, that conclusion was open to the judge.

13. However, I find that in considering the circumstances outside the Rules
    pursuant to article 8 ECHR, the judge's  conclusion  that  the  removal
    would not be disproportionate is not sustainable by cogent  reason  and
    is irrational. Given the ages, length of residence,  state  of  health,
    his British citizenship and the inadvertent way in which renewal of her
    spousal visa was overlooked, there would be  no  practical  purpose  of
    requiring the appellant to return to India to make an  application  for
    entry clearance. Nothing has changed in the nature or subsistence of  a
    genuine relationship would have continued to subsist without hindrance,
    had the right application been made at the right time. This was not  in
    real terms a situation of precarious family life. That  one  neglectful
    error has cause years of heartache and expense for  the  appellant  and
    her husband.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
    disproportionate to separate the  appellant  from  her  husband  or  to
    require them to continue family life in India. I am satisfied that  the
    facts so obviously call for the application  to  be  granted  that  the
    refusal to do so is disproportionate and unjustifiably harsh. There  is
    no public interest to be protected here that is prejudiced by  allowing
    the appellant to remain, as she would have been able to do had she made
    the right application at the right time. The law has to be applied in a
    sensible and practical way rather than purely literal. As the Court  of
    Appeal in Agyarko stated, it is possible that a  case  might  be  found
    exceptional for the purposes of the relevant test under  article  8  in
    relation  to  precarious  family  life   even   when   there   are   no
    insurmountable obstacles to  continuing  family  life  overseas.  I  am
    satisfied that the cumulative compelling and compassionate  factors  to
    be taken into account in the proportionality  balancing  exercise  that
    ultimately must fall in the appellant's favour and justify allowing the
    appellant to remain, at least outside the Rules, if not within them.

Conclusions:

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on
                    human rights grounds only. The appeal remains  dismissed
                    on immigration grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions  were  made  on  the  issue.  Given  the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been allowed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated

