
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10046/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 1 October 2018                       |On: 25 October 2018             |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                             MR MUHAMMAD SALAAH UDDIN
                                         Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

                               THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




Representation:
For the appellant: Mr A Slater of Counsel
For the respondent: Mr Candola, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant born on 1 January 1949,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  appealed
   against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 1 June 1995 refusing
   his application based on his long residence in the United Kingdom. First-
   tier Tribunal Judge PS Aujla dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  human
   rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 26 June 2018.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
   who stated that it is arguable that the Judge  materially  erred  in  not
   considering  the  22-year  delay  by  the  respondent  to   execute   his
   deportation  decision  and  did  not  consider  this  aspect  within  the
   balancing exercise. The appellant has spent 26 years in this country  and
   the impact this has on the public interest in  his  removal  should  have
   been considered.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights which was  the  only
   issue in the appeal. He stated that it was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant that he did not satisfy the requirements in paragraph  276  ADE
   on stability grounds as he was still  subject  to  a  deportation  order,
   albeit made 22 years ago.

4. The Judge stated that the respondent did not dispute that  the  appellant
   has lived continuously in the United Kingdom since he first arrived on 30
   June 1992, (26 years ago). Therefore, he  has  established  private  life
   this country. The interference will be caused by his removal engages  the
   operation of Article 8. In determining proportionality,  the  appellant's
   favourable circumstances must  be  balanced  against  the  need  for  his
   removal as someone who is without  leave.  The  appellant  came  to  this
   country when he was 43 years old and he is now 69 years old. He has  been
   absent from this country of nationality for 36 years old  and  will  have
   difficulties settling in Pakistan. This appears to be the  sum  total  of
   the strength of the appellant's private life in the United  Kingdom.  The
   Judge concluded that the appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom is
   proportionate.

5. The grounds  of  appeal  state  that  the  Judge  failed  to  assess  the
   appellant's human rights through the lens of the  immigration  rules  and
   distinguish between deportation order for a foreign criminal on conducive
   grounds and the old-style deportation order for those who had  overstayed
   visas and who would now be subject to administrative removal under of the
   Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The appellant was subject to a  22-year-
   old deportation order which was not based on any criminality on his part.
   The Judge failed to acknowledge this critical distinction.

6. I find that this is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal because the Judge did not give due weight to the fact  that
   the appellant has been in this country for 26 years. If there was  not  a
   deportation order made against the  appellant  in  1996,  he  would  have
   succeeded, under the immigration rules on the bases of  his  long  albeit
   unlawful residence in this country.

7. I said to the  parties  at  the  hearing  after  finding  that  there  is
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  I
   would not send the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal but  retain  it
   in the Upper Tribunal and invite submissions as the  deportation  order's
   continuing effect, if any. The appellant has not made an  application  to
   set aside the deportation order, so it technically still stands.

8. I however see no purpose in asking the parties to submit  submissions  on
   this issue because inevitably the result  would  be  that  the  appellant
   cannot be removed  from  this  country.  I  therefore  take  a  practical
   approach and take into account the public interest not to waste  judicial
   resources.

9. I cannot  see  any  circumstance  under  which  the  appellant  would  be
   required to leave the United Kingdom given his  long  residence  in  this
   country. Fairness demands that respondent cannot hold a deportation order
   over a person indefinitely. Although it would have greatly  assisted  the
   appellant if he had made an application to revoke the deportation  order,
   but be that as  it  may,  I  shall  conduct  a  proportionality  exercise
   required under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

10. The appellant has developed a private life in this  country  which  will
   be breached by his removal and there is no dispute about that. I consider
   the respondent's delay in executing the deportation order is so excessive
   and inordinate that it demonstrates a complete breakdown in the system of
   immigration control. The delay remains unexplained and entirely the fault
   of the respondent. I also find that the delay has  had  very  substantial
   effect in the  appellant's  case  as  it  has  allowed  him  to  build  a
   substantial private life in this country. The respondent cannot now  rely
   on his interest in a fair, effective and orderly immigration control.

11. The deportation order was made  in  1996,  the  appellant  made  further
   applications to remain in this country. The appellant's  applications  of
   2007, 2014, 2016 demonstrates that the appellant  was  willing  to  bring
   himself to the attention of the respondent. This still did not  prod  the
   respondent into action. This is a highly unusual case where  someone  has
   remained in this country for 22 years after a deportation order has  been
   issued.

12. I take the point made on behalf of the appellant  that  the  appellant's
   deportation was not based on any criminality but  because  he  overstayed
   his visitor visa and as of the current law, only liable to administrative
   removal. The delay has been so inordinate that the law has  substantially
   changed regarding deportation.

13. Given my remarks above, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and remake the decision and allow the appellant's  appeal  under
   Article 8.

DECISON

The appellant's appeal is allowed  under  the  Article  8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.


Signed by

Ms S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                         Dated this 20th day of October 2018


