
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10824/2015
      Hu/12615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 January 2018               |On 24 January 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                      MRS CHRISTINE AGNES CHARLES-MOHAN
                             MISS ROSEANNE MOHAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L. Santamera, counsel instructed by Dylan
                    Conrad Kreolle
For the Respondent:    Mr. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The First Appellant is a national of Trinidad & Tobago, born on  26.1.58.
The second Appellant is her daughter, born on 27.2.88. The  first  Appellant
arrived in the United Kingdom, accompanied by her elder  sister,  Elizabeth,
on 25.3.68, in order to join their father, who had British nationality.  The
first Appellant  remained  in  the  UK  until  1979  when  she  returned  to
Trinidad. She came to the UK for a visit  on  26.7.97,  returning  again  to
Trinidad. On 24.10.04 both Appellants came to the  UK  with  valid  6  month
visit visas. On 3.9.14 they applied for  leave  to  remain  on  private  and
family life grounds and this application was refused on  29.10.14  with  the
right of appeal.

2. The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Caswell for  hearing  on
2.3.17. In a determination promulgated on 15.3.17, the Judge  dismissed  the
appeal. She found that the first Appellant had suffered abuse at  the  hands
of her father who had manipulated her with  the  promise  of  releasing  her
passport to her [13] but found there  was  clear  evidence  that  the  first
Appellant  had  never  had  a  British  passport  or  ILR  [12].  The  Judge
considered  whether  there  are  any   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
Appellants' return to Trinidad and concluded at [16] that there are not.  At
[17] she held that there is no appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the
Rules.

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  made
in time and in a decision dated 31.10.17, First tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson
granted permission to appeal on the basis that the  Judge  confined  herself
to consideration of whether or not the appeal  succeeded  under  the  Rules,
when that was not and could not be  a  ground  of  appeal,  given  that  the
appeal had been brought on human rights  grounds;  there  was  a  lacuna  of
reasoning concerning the issue of whether there were compelling reasons  and
an absence of assessment with regard to the necessary Razgar  structure  and
mandatory regard  to  sections  117A-D  of  the  NIAA  2002  and  applicable
authorities.

Hearing

4. At the hearing before me, Ms Santamera relied on the  grounds  of  appeal
and submitted that the issue is whether or not the  judgment  by  the  First
tier Tribunal Judge sufficiently dealt with all the issues in the case.  She
submitted that there had been a failure to consider the factors  in  respect
of paragraph 276ADE(vi) individually and cumulatively and  properly  in  the
round. The Judge had further failed to apply sections  117A-D  of  the  NIAA
2002. She submitted that on a  proper  construction,  section  117A(2)  read
with  section  117B(v)  means  that  the  court  has  a  discretion  in   an
appropriate case to attach more or less weight  to  precarious  or  unlawful
residence  and  that  insufficient  consideration  had  been  given  to  the
positive factors, namely section 117B(2)  proficiency  in  English  as  both
Appellants are native English speakers and financial  independence,  as  the
first Appellant has a means of living and income which is not  dependent  on
the State and is a positive factor.

5.  Ms  Santamera  submitted  that  there  has  been  a  distinct  lack   of
consideration of the test set out in Jeunesse v  Netherlands  and  the  fact
that there are exceptional cases where a migrant  whose  immigration  status
is precarious can still succeed under Article 8. The  Judge  further  failed
to consider whether there were compelling reasons to allow  the  appeal,  in
particular, that the first Appellant was in the UK and  educated  and  lived
here for 15 years; she honestly and genuinely believed she had the right  to
remain permanently, which may have  come  about  through  deception  by  her
father. She then spent a considerable period of time  back  in  Trinidad  as
she could not find a  route  back  here  and  applied  to  the  Embassy  and
produced ample evidence of  her  previous  life  in  the  UK.  In  terms  of
compelling reasons why a forcible return would  not  be  proportionate  this
must be considered. She has been a productive member of society and none  of
these very positive factors have  been  weighed  properly  in  the  balance,
either  by  the  decision  maker  or  the  Judge.  The  first  Appellant  is
established in the community and has solid  friendships.  Her  past  history
constitutes compelling circumstances.

6.  In  response  to  a  question  from  the   Upper   Tribunal   requesting
clarification of why at [17] the Judge found there was no article 8  appeal,
Ms Santamera submitted that article 8 was clearly raised in the  grounds  of
appeal and that even if submissions had  not  been  expressly  made  by  the
Appellants' representative at the first tier tribunal hearing it  was  still
incumbent on the Judge to consider Article 8.

7. In his reply, Mr Harrison sought to rely upon the rule 24 response  dated
27.11.17. He submitted that it was a peculiar case  in  that  the  arguments
being put forward are that there  are  compelling  reasons  as  to  why  the
Appellant and her daughter should be allowed to stay but  the  fact  remains
that she did not have leave to remain in the UK previously. She returned  to
the UK after a considerable period of time away and came in on a visit  visa
for 6 months and then overstayed  and  eventually  made  an  application  to
regularize her stay. It was made very  plain  she  did  not  have  either  a
British passport or ILR. Whether she believed that or not is immaterial.  He
submitted that the Judge had  gone  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  sound
reasons, has had regard to the law and considered it and  concluded  on  the
circumstances of this case that the appeal had to be  dismissed.  There  was
no error of law.

8. Ms Santamera in response submitted that the first Appellant  had  ILR  on
her Trinidad passport in respect of  the  entry  clearance  visa  issued  on
23.3.68.

Decision

9. I find material errors of law in the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
Judge Caldwell, essentially  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grant  of
permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  expanded  upon  by  Ms
Santamera in her submissions. Whilst the appeal was brought on the basis  of
human rights and Article 8 was clearly raised in the grounds of appeal,  the
Judge erroneously concluded at [17] that there was no appeal  on  Article  8
grounds outside the Rules, when this was the very basis of  the  appeal.  It
was thus incumbent upon the Judge to engage with the Article  8  appeal  and
to apply the relevant jurisprudence and statutory  provisions  viz  sections
117A-D of the NIAA 2002.

10. I further find that there is a  paucity  of  reasoning  in  the  Judge's
findings and conclusions as to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules,  in  light
of the first Appellant's particular history  and  circumstances,  which  she
accepted at [13] and the fact that the second Appellant has resided  in  the
UK since the age of 16 in 2004. Whilst  the  Judge  made  reference  to  the
lengths of residence of both Appellants, she  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
evaluative  assessment  of  the  evidence  and  provide  reasons   for   her
conclusion at [16] that she could not find that either Appellant would  face
any particular obstacles to integration into Trinidad.

11. I also explored with the parties the  evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's
immigration status upon arrival in 1968 up to her departure from the  UK  in
1981. In the evidence there is a letter from the first  Appellant's  sister,
Elizabeth Lucille Marine (Charles) dated 14.11.07 in which  she  has  copied
the entry stamp in her passport, made on arrival in the UK  with  the  first
Appellant in 1968 [details set out in the directions below]. I expressed  my
concern to the parties that insufficient attempts had been made  to  clarify
whether or not the Appellant was granted either ILR or  British  citizenship
as the dependant of her father.

12. In light of my findings that the decision of First tier  Tribunal  Judge
Caswell contains material errors of law, I quash  that  decision  and  remit
the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal. I make  the
following directions:
                              ________________

                                 DIRECTIONS
                              ________________

1. The appeal is remitted to the First  tier  Tribunal,  Manchester,  to  be
listed after 3 months, with a 3 hour time estimate.

2. The Appellant  and  Respondent  are  to  use  their  best  endeavours  to
ascertain the immigration status of the First Appellant on  arrival  in  the
UK on 25.3.68 [entry stamp 568 in London]  and  thereafter  up  to  1981.  A
search of the files and/or subject access request should be made in  respect
of the following names:


    (i)    Christine Agnes Marin (DOB 26.1.58 Port of Spain, Trinidad)
    (ii)   Christine Agnes Marine (ditto)
    (iii)  Christine Agnes Charles (ditto)


3. The Respondent is to confirm whether a British passport with number  [  ]
was issued to the  First  Appellant  either  in  her  own  name  or  as  the
dependant of her father, Calvin Charles and  whether  an  entry  certificate
M/92/33 was issued in Port of Spain on 11.1.68.

4. The Appellant's solicitors are required to provide an indexed,  paginated
bundle of supporting evidence.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

23 January 2018
