
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10129/2016
                                                               HU/14170/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st August 2017                      |On 20th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                           KA-D (FIRST appellant)
                            FJ (SECOND appellant)
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants     Mr A Malik, Counsel, instructed by Solomon Shepherd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first appellant is KA-D.  The second appellant is his  partner  FJ.
    Both are nationals of Ghana.  They have two children, P  born  on  [  ]
    2012 and N born on [ ] 2009.

2.   Both appellants applied for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    based on their private and family life.  Such leave was refused by  the
    respondent in decisions  dated  23rd  March  2016  and  16th  May  2016
    respectively.

3.   The appellants sought to appeal against those decisions,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi  on  2nd  May  2017.   By  a
    decision of 23rd May 2017 the appeals were dismissed.

4.   Subsequently leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  that
    Judge's decision was granted on 14th July 2017.  Thus it  is  that  the
    matter comes before me to determine the issues under challenge.

5.   The first appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  in  2006  and
    has remained.  He came having been refused permission to remain when he
    was a working holidaymaker and he decided to enter  without  having  to
    pay the associated fees.

6.   The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on 19th June 2008  with
    leave to enter as  a  visitor  but  subsequently  remained  unlawfully.
    Subsequently she was granted leave to remain  on  10th  September  2013
    until 9th March 2016  on  the  basis  of  being  a  parent  to  British
    children.

7.   That citizenship for her children had been obtained by a claim made  by
    the appellants that the children were  in  fact  the  children  of  the
    second appellant's former  husband  who  was  a  British  subject.   It
    subsequently transpired that  the  first  appellant  was  in  fact  the
    natural father of both children.  It was considered that deception  had
    been exercised by both appellants to mislead the authorities as to  the
    citizenship of their children.   Accordingly  the  citizenship  of  the
    children was revoked.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  circumstances  in  which
    the application for citizenship had been made and concluded  that  both
    appellants were dishonest in that regard.  The best  interests  of  the
    children were considered, it being found  by  the  Judge  that  it  was
    reasonable for them to return to Ghana with their parents.

9.   Challenge has been made both as to the findings of fact  by  the  Judge
    as to the behaviour of the appellants and also  it  is  also  contended
    that the Judge failed to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  various
    principles relating to the children.

10.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  a  limited
    basis,  namely  an  absence  of  fact-finding  with  reference  to  the
    appellants and a lack of consideration  of  their  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

11.  Thus it fell to me to determine these issues.

12.  Mr Malik, on behalf of the appellants, submitted that the Judge  failed
    to give proper consideration to paragraph 276ADE and to the issue as to
    whether there were very significant obstacles to family life continuing
    in Ghana.  It is also said that there had been a failure to engage with
    Section 117A-D - particularly to the positive factors  that  should  be
    held  in  favour  of   the   appellants   in   the   consideration   of
    proportionality.   The  first  appellant  was  a  former  teacher   and
    seemingly able to pick up work  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  second
    appellant was also working and seemingly the breadwinner of the family,
    so therefore that they were not financially dependent  upon  the  state
    and that they had integrated well within  the  community  in  terms  of
    family life and also church life.  Both spoke English.  It is said that
    those matters were not articulated  and  that  there  was  in  essence,
    therefore, an imbalance in the proper consideration of removal.  It  is
    said that inadequate consideration was given to their circumstances.

13.  So far as the issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration,
    although that matter was not specifically considered by the Judge it is
    clear from paragraph 29 of the determination that the reasonableness of
    return was very much a matter that was considered.   It  was  noted  in
    particular by the Judge that there was an extended family in Ghana  and
    that the links with the family were strong.  The first appellant was  a
    teacher who had worked in Ghana and well aware of the education  system
    and would be able to assist the children particularly in settling  into
    schools in Ghana.  The Judge noted also that the family as a whole  had
    been on holiday to visit the family in Ghana, particularly in 2014.

14.  Given the strong family links that the appellants have with  family  in
    Ghana it is difficult to conclude otherwise than  that  there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to return.  I invited Mr Malik, on behalf of
    the appellants, to identify to me what  factors  were  relied  upon  as
    creating very significant obstacles to return but the only matter  that
    was prayed in aid was the length  of  their  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I recognise of course that the Judge should have  articulated
    the issue of insurmountable/very significant obstacles as part  of  the
    consideration for return. However, it is perfectly apparent that  there
    is nothing to found any basis for that matter  on  the  facts  as  were
    found or presented.  In that connection I have had regard  to  the  two
    witness statements of both appellants and find nothing  that  indicates
    that return was not otherwise than possible.

15.  In terms of paragraph 276ADE at the time when the application was  made
    neither child was a qualified child  and  so  the  considerations  that
    would otherwise arise in that paragraph did not arise.  However  it  is
    clear from paragraph 26 of the determination that the Judge has focused
    upon 276ADE(1)(iv) and Section 117B(6) recognising that  by the hearing
    at least one child is  a  qualified  child.   The  issue  therefore  is
    whether it was reasonable for that child to return  to  Ghana  and  the
    Judge has clearly identified the factors which make it so.

16.  The Judge, in paragraph 26 of the determination, highlighted  the  case
    of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  It was recognised  that  it  was
    important to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  children  before
    considering whether it was reasonable to expect any child to leave  the
    United Kingdom.

17.  In terms of the best interest, the Judge has focused in paragraphs  27,
    28,  29  and  30  of  the  determination  upon  their   situation   and
    circumstances, applying in particular the principles as set out  in  EV
    (Philippines).  The Judge reached the conclusion that neither child had
    formed independent links  with  the  community  separately  from  their
    association with their  birth  family,  the  children  being  8  and  5
    respectively.  The  overall  conclusion  of  the  Judge  was  that  the
    children's best interests were served with remaining  as  part  of  the
    family, although it may be said in fairness  to  the  appellants'  case
    that the remarks by the Judge were somewhat formulaic  as  regards  the
    children and did not condescend upon particulars.  There is nothing  to
    indicate, however, that they had any  particular  need  or  requirement
    which should have been particularly borne in mind.  The  generality  of
    their situation and circumstances at  church  and  school  and  in  the
    community were considered in paragraph 29 as was their extended  family
    in Ghana.

18.  Certainly, however, the reasonableness of  return  was  considered  and
    the findings on that matter entirely open to be made by the Judge.

19.  In terms of proportionality, my attention was drawn by Mr Tufan to  the
    decision of Treebhawon and Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13  (IAC)  which  recognised  that  the
    parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of the Act of  2002  was  to
    give proper effect to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Thus  private  life
    developed  or  established  during  periods  of   unlawful   precarious
    residence might be accorded little weight and Section 117B(4)  and  (5)
    are to construed and applied accordingly.  Mere hardship or  difficulty
    or  upheaval  or  inconvenience  is  unlikely  to  satisfy   the   very
    significant hurdles test in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.



20.  In that decision at paragraph  16,  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
    effect of Section 117A(2)(a) is that the court or  Tribunal  must  have
    regard to everything contained in Section 117B.  The ability  to  speak
    English and financial  independence  and  integration  in  society  are
    relevant factors in that regard. However deception had been applied  to
    facilitate continuing residence and presumably employment.

21.  Even if the Judge had  fallen  into  error  in  failing  to  articulate
    clearly the matters that were potentially in favour of the  appellants,
    it is clear that the finding that it was proportionate to  expect  them
    to return, was a proper one in all the circumstances and inevitable  in
    light of their immigration behaviour as found by the Judge.

22.  In terms of MA (Pakistan) the court had articulated in paragraph 54  of
    the judgment that there  is  nothing  intrinsically  illogical  in  the
    notion that whilst the child's best interests are for  him  or  her  to
    stay, it is not unreasonable to expect him or her to go.   That  is  so
    even if the reasonableness test should be  applied  so  as  to  exclude
    public interest considerations bearing upon the parents.

23.  In relation to the challenges made therefore.  So far  as  the  failure
    to take the positive factors in favour of the appellants are concerned,
    as set out in 117A to D, it is  abundantly  clear  that  those  factors
    would, in the circumstances of  this  particular  case,  have  made  no
    material difference to the weight to be given to  the  public  interest
    considerations.  It was entirely proper for the Judge to conclude  that
    proportionality did indeed support removal.   There  was  no  basis  to
    conclude that there would be any very significant obstacles to  removal
    or to integration in Ghana.

24.  The proper interests of the children were considered  and  particularly
    in terms of the reasonableness of their return as a family  unit  as  a
    whole.

25.  In all  the  circumstances  therefore,  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dismissing the appeals in respect of family/private life shall stand  .



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            [pic]                      Date 18 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD












