
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 28 February 2019                    |On 14 March 2019              |
|Prepared on 11 March 2019                    |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MR HENRY HAGAN
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Widdison, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  17  November  1956.  He
      appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Easterman sitting at Hatton Cross on 19 November  2018  in  which  the
      Judge dismissed an appeal by the Appellant against a decision  of  the
      Respondent dated 20th of April 2018. That decision was to  refuse  the
      Appellant's application for leave to remain under the requirements  of
      the Immigration  Rules  (Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276  ADE),  and
      Articles 3 (prohibition of  torture)  and  8  (right  to  respect  for
      private and family life) of the Human Rights Convention.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 28 March 2003  unlawfully.
      He has had no leave to remain since  arriving.  On  7  March  2011  he
      applied  outside  the  Rules  on  compassionate   grounds,   but   his
      application was rejected by the Respondent. A further  application  on
      19 April 2011 was refused by the Respondent with no right of appeal. A
      third application on 6 July 2012 under Article 8 was refused  with  no
      right of appeal on 26 July 2013. On 23 August 2012 the  Appellant  was
      served with form IAS 151 A as an immigration offender. On 23 July 2014
      the Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  on  family/private  life
      grounds which was  again  refused  with  no  right  of  appeal  on  23
      September 2014. A human rights Article 8 application was refused on 14
      February 2017. On 13 November 2017  the  Appellant  made  the  present
      application the refusal of which led to these proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was set out by the Judge at [16] to [37]  of  the
      determination.  Briefly,  the  Appellant  stated  that  in  line  with
      tradition and because he was the oldest male child he was summoned  by
      family members to marry a second wife and produce male offspring,  the
      Appellant already had two daughters by his first wife. His refusal  to
      marry another woman resulted in him being banished from the family and
      declared an outcast.  One  of  his  uncles  threatened  to  stone  the
      Appellant  to  death  if  the  Appellant  did  not  comply  with   the
      instruction to marry as a result of which the Appellant had  to  leave
      Ghana. The Appellant's daughters remained with his wife's parents.


   4.  After arriving in the United Kingdom, the Appellant made a number  of
      applications which I have summarised above. The  Appellant  complained
      that he had been poorly advised by his legal representatives, who  had
      not explained to him he could have applied for asylum although he  had
      not made a formal complaint to the previous representatives because he
      had insufficient funds to do so. He had been in the United Kingdom for
      14 years by the time of the hearing before Judge Easterman and  he  no
      longer felt any cultural connection with Ghana. He had separated  from
      his wife in 2017 and currently lived with his cousin and his  cousin's
      family who provided him with support.  The  Appellant  had  worked  in
      Ghana as a mechanic but was doubtful that  he  would  find  work  upon
      return at his age. He could not live in another area of  Ghana  as  he
      believed that the news of his return would  spread  and  he  would  be
      punished for refusing to honour the chief's demand. He had not  worked
      whilst in the United Kingdom but if he got permission to stay he would
      like to work either as a mechanic or an electrician. There  were  very
      significant obstacles to him resettling in Ghana.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. At [47] the Judge stated that if the Appellant's  claim  was  accepted
      the Appellant would be at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  and  if  the
      Appellant had given this  account  to  previous  representatives  they
      could not have  failed  to  realise  that  the  best  course  for  the
      Appellant would be to apply for asylum. The Judge noted the lack of  a
      formal  complaint  made  against  any  of  the  Appellant's   previous
      representatives notwithstanding that a complaints  procedure  existed.
      The Ghanaian government's ability to protect individuals  affected  by
      tribal issues was tempered by their ability to enforce  the  law  more
      generally. Whilst there  might  be  a  discrepancy  between  what  the
      government would like to be able to do and what it actually could  do,
      there was a system of law enforcement in Ghana even if some of it  was
      through the tribal chiefs in their home areas.


   6. There were no physical punishments for refusing a traditional position
      as the Appellant had done and this did  not  support  the  Appellant's
      claim that he was likely to be stoned. Stoning would undoubtedly be  a
      criminal offence in Ghana and the police  would  offer  the  Appellant
      protection if they were aware of the matter. There was  a  sufficiency
      of protection available. If the Appellant's account were true he would
      have brought it to the attention of the United Kingdom  authorities  a
      long time ago. Even if the account were true, the Appellant could live
      away from his family and therefore away from danger. The Appellant did
      not know what would happen if he did not succeed to be a chief himself
      and had no male heir.

   7. At [56] the Judge wrote: "turning to insurmountable obstacles  to  the
      Appellant returning, which really means very significant  hardship,  I
      see no special hardship for  the  Appellant  to  return  to  his  home
      country of 45  years  and  his  daughters,  other  than  the  sort  of
      hardships one would expect for someone to  leave  the  country,  where
      they have been for 14 years." No evidence of any substance to show the
      Appellant was culturally integrated in the United Kingdom had been put
      forward. The Appellant had spent more than 45 years in  Ghana  and  to
      say he had lost all culture ties was  simply  unbelievable.  He  spoke
      regularly to his daughters in Ghana. At [58] the Judge stated: "nor do
      I accept that he would have any significant obstacles to returning  to
      his  home  country".  The  Appellant  could   find   work   in   Ghana
      notwithstanding his age. There were no insurmountable obstacles to the
      Appellant  reintegrating  into  Ghana.  Any  interference   with   the
      Appellant's  private  life  in  this  country  was  proportionate.  He
      dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Appellant appealed against this decision making four main  points.
      The first was that the Judge  was  said  to  have  applied  the  wrong
      standard of proof applying a higher standard of proof to the Article 3
      claim namely the balance of probabilities. The Judge had  referred  to
      it being virtually impossible to believe that the Appellant  had  been
      given inadequate poor  and/or  negligent  advice,  but  this  was  not
      something rare. It was something that members  of  the  judiciary  had
      commented upon negatively. Even the Judge had noted some confusion  as
      to whether there was or was not a  Convention  reason  for  an  asylum
      claim. It was entirely possible that an inexperienced or  inadequately
      trained immigration representative might also share this confusion and
      so not advise the Appellant on making a protection claim because  they
      may have believed that there was no such valid claim.


   9. The 2nd ground argued that the Judge had failed to consider  objective
      evidence appropriately. It was not open to the Judge to say there  was
      sufficiency of protection. The Respondent's own background information
      highlighted serious problems with the police:  brutality,  corruption,
      negligence and impunity. Sufficiency of protection was  variable.  The
      Judge's finding appeared to indicate that he had applied an  incorrect
      standard of proof. Contrary to the conclusion of the Judge the  United
      States Department of State human rights report 2017  had  stated  that
      deaths and injuries had occurred as a result of chieftaincy  disputes.
      This also impacted on the Appellant's  private  life  claim  since  it
      indicated  very  significant  obstacles  which  would  impact  on  the
      Appellant's ability to establish a private life in Ghana.

  10. The 3rd ground argued that the Judge had  applied  an  incorrect  test
      under the Immigration Rules. The correct test was whether  there  were
      very significant obstacles  to  integration  not  whether  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles  to  continue  family  life.  Throughout  the
      determination  the  test  of   insurmountable   obstacles   and   very
      significant obstacles were interchangeably used as if  they  were  the
      same test. The tests were distinct as the  Respondent's  own  guidance
      made clear. The key issue was whether or not the  Appellant  would  be
      able to continue the private life  he  had  developed  in  the  United
      Kingdom not whether he would be able to continue his family life  with
      his daughters. The Appellant's length of time in  the  United  Kingdom
      coupled with the specific circumstances he would find himself in  upon
      return would be very significant obstacles to relocation.

  11. The 4th ground argued that the Judge had failed to consider  case  law
      particularly  Parveen  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  932  which  held  that   the
      multiplied effect of hardship, difficulty or hurdles could suffice  as
      very significant obstacles. The Appellant's account of his chieftaincy
      dispute  was  credible  and  consistent  with  the  objective  country
      evidence and satisfied the definition of very  significant  obstacles.
      Herrera [2018] EWCA Civ 412 was a case where a  65-year-old  Appellant
      who had overstayed from 2002  made  an  application  on  private  life
      grounds. The Appellant in that case was in a more favourable  position
      than this Appellant yet had succeeded. No clear reasons were given why
      these authorities were not applicable which breached  the  requirement
      set out in MK Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 to give reasons.

  12. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  on  18  January  2019.  In
      granting permission to appeal she stated that having read paragraph  8
      of the decision she was satisfied that the Judge may have muddled  the
      standard of proof. The decision did not show the Judge had  considered
      the country information before him before coming to  his  conclusions.
      The Judge may have muddled the tests applicable to Article  8  and  it
      was arguable that the Judge had failed to consider relevant case  law.
      The Respondent replied to the grant of permission pursuant to rule  24
      arguing that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
      determination as the Judge had correctly applied the law  and  reached
      conclusions open to him on the evidence.

The Hearing Before Me

  13. In consequence of the grant of permission to appeal  the  matter  came
      before me to determine in the first place whether there was a material
      error of law in the decision such that it felt to  be  set  aside.  If
      there was not the decision at first instance would stand. If there was
      I would make directions for the rehearing of the appeal.


  14. Counsel for the Appellant relied on the grant  of  permission  arguing
      that the Judge had confused the specific test set out under  paragraph
      276 ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  was  whether  there  were
      significant obstacles faced by the Appellant upon return to Ghana. The
      Judge had referred to insurmountable obstacles rather than the correct
      test. This was not a protection claim it was an Article 8 private life
      application. I queried this with counsel as it appeared that what  had
      been argued at first instance was that this was an  Article  3  claim.
      Counsel replied that the Judge should have considered each part of the
      claim separately because the claim was presented  in  addition  to  or
      alternatively that Article 3 applied. The  Judge  had  not  considered
      Herrera. At [27] the Judge was wrong when he said that the Appellant's
      father was still alive, both the Appellant's parents were deceased.

  15. In reply the Presenting Officer indicated he relied  on  the  rule  24
      response. The Judge had rejected the protection  claim  which  was  15
      years old because it was not credible. The argument that the Judge had
      applied an incorrect standard of proof was misconceived. There were no
      findings made by the Judge which were pointed to by the Appellant that
      could show the Judge's findings would have been  materially  different
      if another test was applied. The facts spoke for  themselves  in  this
      case. It was not clear where the Judge was supposed to have applied an
      incorrect standard of proof for Articles 3 or 8. Given  the  delay  by
      the Appellant in claiming international protection there  appeared  to
      be no challenge to the Judge's conclusion that a qualified immigration
      practitioner would have made  an  earlier  claim  on  the  Appellant's
      behalf.

  16. The Judge had analysed the country background  information  from  [49]
      onwards quoting the  Australian  country  advice.  Relocation  was  an
      option. There was no evidence from the family that the tribal chief of
      the village had any further interest in the Appellant.  There  was  no
      reason why the Appellant could not relocate  to  Accra  or  live  with
      other family members. It was difficult to see what  the  relevance  of
      the case law relied upon by the Appellant was in this case.

  17. In conclusion counsel argued that the reason why the Appellant had not
      pursued a complaint against previous advisers was because, having paid
      a  substantial  amount  of  money  in  legal  fees,  finances  were  a
      significant factor in the decision not to make a complaint. It was not
      uncommon for representatives to give bad advice. That was why  Parveen
      was relied on.

Findings

  18.  Paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  the
      requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of their private life in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  relevant
      ground for the purposes of this appeal is  sub  paragraph  (vi)  which
      provides that where an applicant has lived continuously in the  United
      Kingdom for less  than  20  years  there  would  be  very  significant
      obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country  to  which
      they would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom.


  19. A significant part of the challenge to the determination in this  case
      is that the Judge applied the wrong test under the Immigration  Rules.
      The  Judge  made  reference  at  various  points  to   "insurmountable
      obstacles to the Appellant returning", see [56] which  he  defined  as
      very significant hardship. At [60] he referred again to insurmountable
      obstacles but crucially at [58] the Judge stated in terms that he  did
      not accept that the Appellant would have any significant obstacles  to
      returning to Ghana. This in fact is a lower test than that  prescribed
      by the rules which refers to very  significant  obstacles  not  merely
      significant obstacles. If that was an error, it was an  error  in  the
      Appellant's favour and not one which could found a material  error  of
      law such that the determination fell to be set aside.

  20. The ground argued in this case comes down to a submission that because
      the  Judge  had  used  other  terminology  in  other  parts   of   the
      determination the fact that he then did use the correct test should be
      disregarded. I do not accept that argument. It is quite clear that the
      Judge was aware that the  test  was  whether  there  were  significant
      obstacles to the Appellant's return to Ghana. Some  of  the  confusion
      may have stemmed from the Respondent's argument when counsel  for  the
      Respondent submitted that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      the Appellant returning to Ghana. That  confusion  was  compounded  by
      counsel's submission (who appeared for the Appellant and who  appeared
      before me) quoted at [37] that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements
      either of Article 3 or  paragraph  276  ADE  (vi)  "on  the  basis  of
      insurmountable obstacles". Given the  unhelpful  submissions  made  by
      both advocates to the Judge, he did surprisingly well in  nevertheless
      finding the correct test to be applied and applied it.

  21. The 2nd ground seeks to argue that  the  Judge  applied  an  incorrect
      standard of proof. The standard of proof for Article 3 is the same  as
      the standard of proof for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  claims
      that is that there is a  reasonable  chance  or  likelihood  that  the
      Appellant will be at risk upon  return.  The  standard  of  proof  for
      Article 8 is the usual civil standard of balance of probabilities. The
      determination in this case was criticised by Judge Andrew who  granted
      permission to appeal as arguably muddling the standard of proof at [8]
      of the determination. In that paragraph, the Judge specifically stated
      that he applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof  which  he  correctly
      defined. That standard of proof applied to the Article 3 part  of  the
      claim and the Judge was making it clear that that was what he meant. I
      do not perceive the muddle which  Judge  Andrew  apparently  perceived
      when granting permission.

  22. At [9] the Judge went on to consider the separate claim  made  by  the
      Appellant in this case under Article 8 that his private life would  be
      interfered with if he was refused further leave. The  Judge  correctly
      directed  himself  that  the  first  consideration  was  whether   the
      Appellant could meet the rules and only in a very few  cases  would  a
      claim based on the personal  circumstances  of  an  Appellant  succeed
      outside the rules. The Judge  directed  himself  on  the  step-by-step
      approach under Razgar and noted the impact  of  section  117B  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The argument is that  the
      Judge had not applied the balance of probability test when considering
      Article 8 and the Immigration Rules.

  23. The Judge's reference to the Appellant's claim to have  lost  cultural
      links to Ghana as being "simply unbelievable"  does  not  in  my  view
      suggest that the Judge was applying too high a standard of  proof  for
      the Appellant. Rather, if anything, the Judge was indicating that  the
      test for the Appellant to meet to show he had lost cultural links  was
      a relatively low one but he could not even meet that. If the Appellant
      could not meet a low standard of proof, he certainly could not show on
      the balance of probabilities that it was more likely than not that  he
      had lost cultural links to Ghana. Whilst I appreciate that  the  Judge
      could, in as little as one sentence, have stated that he was  applying
      the usual civil standard to the Article 8 claim, I cannot see that the
      Appellant suffered as a result of the test which the Judge did apply.

  24. The 3rd argument made by the Appellant  is  that  the  Judge  did  not
      properly consider the country background information and had come to a
      too optimistic view about the risk to persons who did not comply  with
      the dictates of the tribal chief. The Judge had before him the country
      advice on Ghana issued by the Australian government's  Refugee  Review
      Tribunal and he accepted that as authoritative and  applied  it.  That
      information indicated  that  there  was  no  physical  punishment  for
      refusing  a  traditional  position  although  there  might  be  social
      ostracism. That of itself it has to be said would not lead to a breach
      of Article 3.

  25. The Appellant counters in the grounds with an extract from the  United
      States Department of State Report 2017. In the event of a conflict, it
      was a matter for the Judge to decide which evidence he  preferred  and
      he evidently preferred the  report  from  the  Australian  authorities
      rather than from the American authorities. Chiefs do  appear  to  have
      some authority in Ghana devolved from the government to keep some sort
      of order. The Judge was  aware  at  [50]  that  there  was  background
      evidence to suggest that there had been clashes in the  capital  Accra
      where people had internally relocated relating to chieftaincy disputes
      which was what the US State Department report was  referring  to.  The
      important point for the Judge was that  there  was  a  system  of  law
      enforcement in Ghana some of which was carried out through the  tribal
      chiefs but much it appeared outside the tribal chiefs  and  undertaken
      by  the  central  government.  I  do  not  see  that  the  Judge   had
      misunderstood the background information or misapplied it.

  26. The issue was whether there was a sufficiency of  protection  for  the
      Appellant in the event that his claim was  true.  The  Judge  did  not
      accept that the claim was true but nevertheless looked at  the  matter
      on an "even if"  basis.  The  grounds  take  issue  with  the  Judge's
      conclusion as to the adequacy of protection, but it  is  important  to
      note that the test under the well-known authority of  Horvath  is  not
      whether there is an absolute system of protection but whether there is
      an adequate one. It may well be that the  Ghanaian  police  have  some
      difficulties whether with corruption or otherwise but that is far from
      saying that there is no functioning  police  force  in  Ghana  and  no
      ability to protect. There is no country guidance to indicate that that
      is the case and no reason why the Judge should have come to  any  such
      conclusion. The Judge's conclusion as to sufficiency of protection was
      sound. I do not accept Judge Andrew's comments in this regard either.

  27. The final point made by the Appellant is  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      consider relevant case law. Partly this is a reference to  Parveen  in
      which criticism was made of poor representation. The point  the  Judge
      was making was that he could not accept that the Appellant might  have
      been so unlucky each time he went to different representatives that no
      one was able to advise him to make an asylum claim on the basis of his
      claimed chieftaincy problem. That there are practitioners in the field
      of immigration law who fall below the  standards  one  can  reasonably
      expect is not in dispute. However, the Judge  evidently  felt  it  was
      stretching  coincidence  too  far  to   suggest   that   the   various
      representatives the Appellant had approached over the years (while  he
      made several unsuccessful applications for leave) would  not  at  some
      point have advised him to make a claim for asylum if he had told  them
      about his problems with the chieftaincy. The Appellant was not advised
      to claim asylum because he had not mentioned that he had problems with
      the chieftaincy because, in turn, that was an invention he had made at
      the last moment to try  to  ensure  he  could  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


  28. There was a substantial delay in this case, the  Appellant  had  never
      had leave to be here but had  made  a  series  of  applications.  This
      indicated some knowledge of the workings of the immigration system  of
      this country and an ability to instruct lawyers on his behalf. It  was
      straining credulity to believe that at no point had the Appellant been
      told he could make an asylum claim. The  Appellant's  explanation  for
      not making a formal complaint about poor representation was  also,  in
      the Judge's view, a very thin one. The Appellant claimed that  he  had
      no money to make a complaint. Nevertheless, he must have had funds  to
      pay for his present (and previous) representation. It is difficult  to
      see why no complaint was made if the Appellant really was  the  victim
      of incompetent advice. In short, the case law cited by  the  Appellant
      was of no relevance to this case at all.

  29. The case cited of Herrera did not assist the Appellant, the Judge  was
      aware that the case had been quoted to him, see  [36]  but  since  its
      relevance in this case was very limited there was no particular reason
      why the Judge should have analysed it. Both gentlemen  were  in  their
      60s and both made applications on private life grounds, neither having
      leave to remain. In the case of Herrera, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      had found there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant
      reintegrating into Argentina. That was on the basis of  the  facts  as
      found by the Judge including a finding of a lack of continuing ties to
      Argentina. In the instant case before me Judge Easterman  found  there
      were no significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  reintegration  into
      Ghana on  the  basis  of  the  facts  that  he  found,  including  the
      Appellant's continuing ties to Ghana.

  30. It is important to note what the Court of Appeal said in Herrera:  "It
      is trite law that in performing an assessment of that  kind  different
      Judges may reasonably reach different conclusions. Appellate Tribunals
      must always guard against the temptation to characterise as errors  of
      law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the  weight  to
      be given to different factors, particularly if the first Tribunal  had
      the advantage of hearing oral evidence." Herrera is not authority  for
      the proposition that gentlemen in their 60s  who  have  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for several years without leave are entitled  to  leave
      to remain without more. They must show that there are very significant
      obstacles to reintegration. In the case of Herrera, the Appellant  was
      able to show that, in the instant case before me the Appellant was not
      able to show that.

  31. The authority cited in the grounds of Kamara is of limited  importance
      in the instant case. There was scant evidence before the judge of  the
      appellant's integration into the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  was  not
      impressed by how many years the appellant  had  spent  in  the  United
      Kingdom living unlawfully, see [58]. The Judge indicated that  he  was
      aware of the effect  of  section  117B  of  the  2002  act  and  would
      therefore have been aware that given that the appellant's status  here
      was unlawful, little or no weight could  be  ascribed  to  it  in  the
      proportionality  exercise  under  Article  8.  At   [57]   the   Judge
      specifically stated that no evidence of any substance to show cultural
      integration was put forward.

  32. The test in Kamara is not relevant if no evidence of substance is  put
      before a Judge to show integration. The grounds of  onward  appeal  in
      this case amount to no more than a disagreement with the  decision.  I
      do not accept the point made by Judge Andrew that Judge Easterman  had
      arguably failed to consider relevant case law. That case law  was  not
      relevant and therefore there was  no  arguable  error  in  failing  to
      analyse it in the body of the determination. Overall, I  do  not  find
      there is any material error of law in this determination and I dismiss
      the Appellant's onward appeal. The Appellant had no leave  to  remain,
      he had evidently not lost cultural ties with Ghana speaking  regularly
      to his daughters there. He had made a very late claim for asylum after
      making a series of Article 8 claims. His claim had no merit and it was
      open to the Judge in those circumstances to dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 11 March 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 11 March 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

