
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10461/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 February 2017                | On 26 June 2017                   |
|                                   |                                   |



Before


                        DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                       FRANCISCA OBIELLEY COMMEY

                               (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                  Appellant

                                     and



                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Let Dat Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence,  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.


2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I F Taylor (hereafter "the Judge"),  promulgated  on  18
    July 2016, which dismissed the Appellant's appeal  and  held  that  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse her entry clearance to join her  father
    (hereafter  "the  sponsor")  present  and  settled  in   the   UK   was
    proportionate  and  not  unlawful  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.


Background


3.    The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 29 February 2000.


4     On 26 June 2015, the Appellant applied for  entry  clearance  to  join
    the sponsor in the UK who it was claimed had  sole  responsibility  for
    her. That application was refused on 30 September 2015.  The  Appellant
    duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.


The Judge's Decision


5.      The  appeal  was  listed  before  the  Judge  as  a  paper  hearing.
    Accordingly, the Judge proceeded to consider the evidence filed by  the
    parties. The Judge directed himself appropriately. He noted the  issues
    under the Immigration Rules was confined to  whether  the  sponsor  had
    sole responsibility for the Appellant, or whether  there  were  serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which made her  exclusion
    from the UK undesirable by virtue  of  paragraph  297(i)  (e)  and  (f)
    respectively. While the Judge accepted the Appellant's financial  needs
    were met by the sponsor,  he  did  not  accept  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility. The Judge noted the Appellant's natural mother  resided
    in Ghana and concluded that "... it would be surprising if she did  not
    take some responsibility for her own child ..." [21]. Accordingly,  the
    Judge was not satisfied that the mother had abdicated responsibility.


6.    Further, the Judge found the evidence of the  Appellant's  aunt  (with
    whom the Appellant resided) lacked particulars or details, and was thus
    not satisfied that she had no responsibility for the  Appellant  beyond
    day-to-day care. Further still, the Judge was not satisfied that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    the Appellant's exclusion undesirable. The Judge noted that  there  was
    no  evidence  of  any  mental  or  physical  limitations  to  the  aunt
    continuing to care for the Appellant. Finally, the Judge concluded that
    while a refusal of entry  clearance  interfered  with  the  Appellant's
    family and  private  life,  he  concluded  that  the  interference  was
    proportionate. The Judge noted there was no evidence the Appellant  had
    not been properly cared for and noted that  she  had  been  "very  well
    looked after by her aunt for over ten years and there is no  reason  to
    suggest that that cannot continue". The Judge noted the family had been
    separated because of the choices made by the sponsor  and  that  family
    life  could  be  maintained  through  visits   and   other   means   of
    communication.  Accordingly, the Judge dismissed the appeal.


7.    The Appellant lodged grounds of appeal and on 24 November 2016,  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission to appeal.





The Hearing


8.    I heard brief submissions from both  representatives  at  the  end  of
      which I reserved my decision.


Decision on Error of Law


9.    I am not satisfied that the Judge  erred  in  law  for  the  following
reasons.


10.   The Appellant's representative referred to  two  documents  issued  by
      the Judicial Service of Ghana of July 2014, which  purported  to  show
      the sponsor had full parental responsibility for the Appellant. It was
      argued that this evidence had either not been considered by the  Judge
      or that he failed to give sufficient weight to it. I am satisfied that
      there is no merit in these submissions.  First,  while  the  arguments
      before me centred around the question of weight, permission to  appeal
      was not granted on the basis that the Judge failed to give  sufficient
      weight to the documentary evidence.  Even  if  it  had  been,  it  was
      entirely, in the absence of irrationality (which is not alleged here),
      a matter for the Judge as to what weight to attribute to the  evidence
      before him.


11.   Second, the Judge did consider a letter from the Judicial  Service  in
      Ghana at [11] and factored that  evidence  into  his  assessment.  The
      Appellant's  representative  was  unable  to  confirm  that  a  second
      document from the Judicial Service adduced  before  me,  was  in  fact
      placed before the Judge. A copy of that document in so far as I  could
      discern did not appear in the Tribunal's file. I am satisfied that the
      Judge  considered  the  evidence  that  was  before  him  and  did  so
      appropriately in the context of all the evidence that was before him.


12.   Further, while I agree with Ms Pettersen  that  the  Judge's  findings
      could have been clearer, I am satisfied that upon a  holistic  reading
      of his decision that his findings are not so contradictory  such  that
      it renders his decision unsustainable. While the  Judge  accepted  the
      Appellant was  cared  for  by  her  aunt  and  that  the  sponsor  had
      "exercised some and possibly the majority of parental responsibility",
      it is clear that the Judge did not accept that this amounted  to  sole
      responsibility. The Judge gave several  reasons  for  discounting  the
      evidence noting that the assertions made by the  sponsor,  mother  and
      aunt, that the sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  lacked  details  or
      particulars. The Judge noted in particular  that  "...there  are  many
      assertions made  but  little,  if  any,  examples  of  what  is  being
      undertaken by the sponsor that could amount  to  sole  responsibility"
      [23]. It was this lack of particulars that led the Judge  to  conclude
      at [21] that, "I am not satisfied that she [the mother] has  abdicated
      responsibility  for  the  appellant."  These  findings  are,   in   my
      judgement, sufficiently clear and supported by the evidenced.


13.   While no submissions  were  made  at  the  hearing  on  the  remaining
      grounds of appeal, I have considered them and conclude that  they  are
      of no substance. In my judgement, the  Appellant's  grounds,  such  as
      they  are,  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the   Judge's   factual
      conclusions and his appraisal and evaluation of the evidence, none  of
      which give rise to an error of law.


14.         In summary, I am satisfied  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  when
      read as a whole sets out findings that were sustainable,  sufficiently
      detailed and based on cogent reasoning.


 Conclusion


15.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's decision should stand.


Decision


16.   The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed      Date 16 May 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral














