
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10132/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2018                            |On 19th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            MR SHREE PRASAD DURA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Layne, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  born  on  13th  July  1985.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    as the adult dependent relative of his late  father,  Mr  Ganga  Parsad
    Gurung.  The Appellant's application  was  considered  as  a  dependent
    relative under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of  Appendix  FM.   The  Appellant's
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 30th March 2016.   I
    am aware that there have been  previous  applications.   The  Appellant
    appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rahman sitting at Taylor House on 29th June 2017.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on  17th  July  2017  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 17th July 2017.   Those  grounds  contended  that  the  findings  at
    paragraphs 51 and 52 of the determination were unsustainable  and  that
    such findings did not relate to the case and that the findings  related
    to two other cases which were heard on the same day and it is submitted
    that the judge had made reference to those authorities in his decision.
     It was submitted that those cases based on different facts,  different
    evidence  and  different  claims  reached  almost  exactly   the   same
    conclusion and that an extract of  the  final  paragraphs  of  findings
    reflected that.  The  Secretary  of  State  submits  the  Tribunal  had
    somehow managed to apply the findings of  those  linked  cases  to  the
    facts of this individual case and that the findings were  unsustainable
    and the findings have to be re-made.

 3.  Further,  it  was  contended  that  the  findings  in  the  case  were
    speculative and that the findings showed that the Tribunal  had  failed
    to show evidence of emotional dependency as per Kugathas and  therefore
    the Tribunal had erred in law.

 4.  On  12th  January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer   granted
    permission to appeal.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Mr Dura is referred  to  herein  as  the  Appellant,
    albeit that this is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel, Mr Layne.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Clarke.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Clarke takes me to paragraphs 45 onwards in the current decision and
    refers me to paragraph 65 onwards in the linked  decision  referred  to
    above.  He submits that the similarity in  the  wording  therein  shows
    that the judge has not turned his mind to the issues that  were  before
    him in this case.  Further, he submits that there has been  a  lack  of
    findings on emotional dependence and that the approach adopted shows  a
    speculative approach to historic injustice.  He submits that there is a
    paucity of reasoning and that  there  has  been  no  reference  to  the
    evidence provided purportedly by the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  and
    consequently it has not been reasoned  that  family  life  exists.   Mr
    Layne  in  brief  submission  submits  that  emotional  dependency   is
    addressed at paragraph 35 but I  challenged  him  with  regard  to  the
    findings made at paragraphs 18 and 21 by the judge and he did not  wish
    to push this particular issue any further.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. It is appropriate to address this matter  in  two  ways.   The  initial
    thrust of the Secretary of State is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    has misplaced within this decision paragraphs from another decision.  I
    have had the benefit of looking at both  those  decisions.   There  are
    slight  differences  therein  which  show  that  they  are  effectively
    standard paragraphs used by the judge in cases of this  nature.   There
    is nothing wrong in a judge setting out the law and making  appropriate
    reflections as to whether or not family life has  or  has  not  arisen.
    What however the judge needs to do is to ensure that findings are  made
    on the facts.  Consequently, I do not find there to be any error of law
    that is material on the approach adopted by the judge in using  similar
    paragraphs in both decisions.

10. Where, however, the judge has erred in  law  is  to  be  found  in  his
    approach to this matter.  At paragraph 18 of his decision the judge has
    noted that the Appellant's mother appeared before him with  a  view  to
    giving evidence through an interpreter in Nepalese  but  that  she  had
    stated that she did not understand the interpreter and consequently the
    Appellant's representative at that hearing (and it was  not  Mr  Layne)
    confirmed that the hearing should proceed by way of submissions only.

11. Thereafter, the judge has noted the evidence at paragraph  21  that  it
    consisted of undated and unsigned statements.  The judge has then  gone
    on to  make  conclusions  at  paragraph  35  and  paragraph  35  is  of
    importance.  It states:

         "I note the detailed and consistent evidence from the appellant and
         his mother ... I have no reason to disbelieve the  factual  account
         put forward by the appellant".

12. It is difficult to see how the judge has made these findings.   He  had
    heard no evidence from the Appellant's Sponsor.  The witness statements
    to which he has  given  read-through  consideration  are  unsigned  and
    undated.  It is hard to see that they are worth consequently the  paper
    upon which they are written.  To make findings based on that  evidence,
    where it is then admitted and accepted that all that  is  done  by  the
    Appellant's representatives  is  to  make  submissions,  confounds  the
    reality that the  judge  could  possibly  in  such  circumstances  have
    concluded that the evidence was "detailed and consistent" and confounds
    the fact that the judge made a finding that  he  believes  the  factual
    account put forward by the Appellant.  That  evidence  has  never  been
    tested.  In such circumstances the findings  of  the  judge  which  are
    extremely limited are not ones which are sustainable and  the  approach
    of  the  judge  shows  clearly  a  material  error  of  law.   In  such
    circumstances the correct approach is to set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal with none of the findings of fact to stand  and  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) On finding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses
    a material error of law the decision is set  aside  with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.

 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an  ELH  of  two
    hours.  The restored hearing is to be heard before  any  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Rahman.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve thereafter  an
    up-to-date bundle of subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which
    they seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 4) That a Nepali interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
