





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/10658/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |               Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On 24 July 2017                   |               On 8 August 2017          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Mohammad Abdul Nadeem
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, counsel (instructed by E1 Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parker,  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
      against her decision refusing his application for indefinite leave  to
      remain on the basis of ten years' lawful residence.

   3. The claimant entered the UK as a student on 15 September 2005 and  was
      subsequently granted further  periods  of  leave  to  remain  in  that
      capacity until 19 March 2016.  On  20  August  2015  he  submitted  an
      application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten  years'
      lawful residence.

   4. The secretary of state considered his application under paragraph 276B
      of the Rules and refused it on one of the general grounds  of  refusal
      available under paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules which sets  out
      the grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to  remain
      in the UK should normally be refused.

   5. One of the general grounds of refusal is paragraph 322(5), namely  the
      undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in the  UK
      in light of his conduct  (including  convictions  which  do  not  fall
      within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations or the  fact  that
      he represents a threat to national security.

   6. The secretary of state noted that as part of his application to extend
      his leave to remain as a Tier  4  student  on  27  January  2012,  the
      claimant had  relied  upon  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS.  It  was
      contended that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that  the
      certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker
      and further noted that his scores from the test, taken on  18  October
      2011, at Portsmouth International College, had been cancelled by  ETS.
      The secretary of state was accordingly satisfied that the  certificate
      had been fraudulently obtained and that the appellant  used  deception
      in his Tier 4 application.

   7. Although the claimant did not rely on that certificate in his  current
      application for indefinite leave to  remain,  his  complicity  in  the
      fraud contributed to an extremely serious attack on the maintenance of
      effective immigration control. As a result,  the  secretary  of  state
      found that his presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good
      as his conduct made it undesirable to allow him to remain in  the  UK.
      His application was thus refused under paragraph 322(5) with reference
      to paragraph 276B(iii) and paragraph 276D  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      [3].

   8. The secretary of state also concluded that  there  was  no  basis  for
      permitting him to remain under Appendix FM of the Rules.  Nor  did  he
      meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1).   There   were   no
      exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of leave to remain  under
      Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

The claimant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

   9. The claimant gave evidence at his appeal hearing on 25  May  2017.  He
      denied that he had obtained his test results fraudulently.

  10. The Judge set out his evidence in full  from  paragraphs  [9-19].   In
      2011 he found out that his  college's  sponsorship  licence  had  been
      suspended. He then looked for an approved TOEIC centre, Opal  College,
      which was close to his home. He elected to sit an exam  for  which  he
      paid a fee.

  11. He attended Opal College on 18 October 2011. He described how he  took
      the test that day. He again attended on 21 October 2011  and  sat  the
      remaining two components - [12].

  12. He was then granted further leave to remain as a student  and  applied
      for indefinite leave in  August  2015,  having  completed  ten  years'
      lawful residence.

  13. In support of that application he submitted  a  further  English  test
      certificate, a Grade 5 Examination in spoken English, ESOL (entry  3),
      CEFR Level B1.1 with distinction. He also completed English tests from
      City & Guilds in which he obtained a distinction - [13].

  14. He was surprised to learn of the secretary of state's allegations that
      he had taken a test on 18 October  2011  at  Portsmouth  International
      College by way of a proxy test taker.

  15.  He  had  heard  from  friends  that  the  Home  Office  was  refusing
      applications on account of fraudulently obtained TOEIC results but was
      not worried as he had sat his own  TOEIC  test.  After  receiving  the
      refusal letter he tried to contact Opal  College to verify that he sat
      the exam with them but at that stage the college was no longer there.

  16. He claimed in evidence that he had never used any  deception.  He  had
      never breached any immigration condition and  never  had  recourse  to
      public funds. He had established "a decent public life". It  would  be
      harsh and wrong for him to be removed [16].

  17. The Judge noted that in his oral evidence, he expanded his account  of
      having taken the English language test at Opal College. The  college's
      receptionist called him to say that he had passed the test and that he
      should come in and get  the  result.  He  went  to  Opal  College  and
      informed the receptionist that he was aware that there  were  problems
      with the Home  Office.  The  receptionist  gave  him  a  copy  of  the
      College's list of exam participants and results which was  hanging  in
      the reception area. She made him a  copy  which  he  included  in  his
      bundle. At the same time she gave him his test results which  were  in
      his bundle.

  18. The claimant also stated that he had taken an IELTS test in  India  in
      2004 which he had passed with an overall band score of 5. He took  the
      TOEIC test in 2011.

  19. When he applied for indefinite leave he had to take another test which
      he sat in July 2015 at Trinity College.  He obtained a distinction  at
      CEFR Level B1.1 - [18].

  20. In cross-examination it was put to  him  that  there  was  a  list  of
      candidates who took the TOEIC test at Portsmouth International College
      on 18 October 2011 identified by the certificate number as well  as  a
      print out identifying him as the holder of  the  relevant  certificate
      number, stating that the certificate was invalid. It was  put  to  him
      that the certificate number was the same as that which appeared in his
      bundle at page 27 which was a TOEIC certificate which  claimed  to  be
      genuine. He could not explain this but stated that he had  never  been
      to Portsmouth International College and had taken  the  test  at  Opal
      College without using a proxy test taker.

  21. He claimed that he first found  out  about  the  ETS  issue  when  his
      friends were "victims". He was sure that there would be no problem for
      him as he had genuinely taken the test himself.  After  receiving  the
      refusal notice he tried to contact Opal   College  but  they  were  no
      longer open. He had not made any inquiries with ETS themselves.

  22. Judge Parker considered the evidence before her. She had regard to the
      decision in Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ  1167.  She  set  out  the  relevant
      factors to be taken into account  in  considering  the  allegation  of
      dishonesty as referred to at [69] of SM and Qadir v SSHD  [2016]  UKUT
      00229 (IAC).

  23. She found that the evidence relied on by the secretary  of  state  was
      sufficient to meet the evidential burden. She also had regard  to  the
      evidence of the claimant who had acquitted himself 'extremely well' in
      cross examination [21].

  24. He gave a consistent account  throughout.  He  relied  upon  his  test
      result  certificate  and  was  able  to  provide  an  account  of  the
      circumstances in which he sat the test. He gave evidence  fluently  in
      English at the hearing, albeit that some six years had  elapsed  since
      2011  and  accordingly  little  weight  was  given  to  that   factor.
      Nevertheless, she had regard to his educational qualifications, noting
      that he has taken English language qualifications in respect of  which
      no allegation of fraud has been made either before or after the  TOEIC
      test  taken  in  2011.  His  qualifications   and   English   language
      qualifications all support his case that he had no  need  to  cheat  -
      [21].

  25. She noted that much was made of his failure to contact ETS directly to
      attempt to verify  his  test  score.  The  appellant's  representative
      asserted that ETS had moved all their operations to the United  States
      and no longer had a presence in the UK and it was  not  reasonable  to
      expect him to contact them directly.  He  had  tried  to  contact  the
      college where he took the test but it was no longer in existence.  She
      was therefore satisfied that the appellant did what he could to verify
      his test result [22].

  26. Moreover, the  secretary  of  state  would  have  been  aware  of  the
      discrepancy between the information they held and  that  presented  by
      the claimant concerning the test centre. He submitted evidence that he
      took the test on 18 October 2011 at a college in London,  whereas  the
      secretary of state's case was that the test was taken at a college  in
      Portsmouth.

  27. There was no evidence that  the  secretary  of  state  took  steps  to
      clarify the obvious discrepancy. The secretary of state was in contact
      with ETS, owing to ongoing litigation and was best placed  to  conduct
      such a verification check. Further, the claimant submitted a  copy  of
      the list of candidates and results photocopied by the receptionist  at
      the Opal College at the time he collected his test results. It  was  a
      poor photocopy but bore the name of the college. His evidence had  the
      ring of truth  -[22].

  28. In the circumstances Judge Parker was not satisfied in the round  that
      the respondent had discharged the legal burden of  establishing  fraud
      in this case.

  29. She also  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  discretion  was
      exercised by the secretary of state having found that the claimant had
      engaged in the conduct alleged. However, there was no need for this to
      be considered having regard to the finding that the secretary of state
      had not satisfied the legal burden.

  30. In the circumstances she was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  met  the
      requirements for a grant of leave to remain indefinitely on the  basis
      of ten years' lawful residence under the Immigration Rules.

  31. She noted that the appeal is on human  rights  grounds  only  but  the
      findings made  concerning  his  long  residence  application  and  his
      ability to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  were  relevant  when
      considering proportionality under Article 8(2).

  32. The claimant relied on a claim to a private life in the UK. He has now
      resided here for almost 12 years, significantly in excess of  the  ten
      year period required under the Rules for the grant of indefinite leave
      to remain. At the date of the secretary of  state's  decision  he  had
      completed ten years of lawful residence. There was no evidence that he
      had ever breached the terms of his leave, nor committed  any  offence.
      He is a man of good character.

  33. The Judge had regard to the public interest factors under s.117B.  She
      was satisfied that he is able to speak English. He has  qualifications
      and has worked part time while studying. There was no evidence that he
      had ever had recourse to public funds. There was no evidence  that  he
      had been here unlawfully at  any  stage.  Although  his  leave  should
      properly be described as precarious, as he has always been here  on  a
      temporary basis, after being granted leave to remain in February  2013
      until March 2016 he would have been aware that he would have completed
      ten years' lawful residence on 15 September 2015 and was  entitled  to
      apply for indefinite leave to remain - [27].

  34. In the  circumstances,  she  found  that  the  refusal  constituted  a
      disproportionate interference with his rights under Article 8 and  the
      appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

  35. On 29 June 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  M  Holmes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He found that it is  arguable
      that the Judge failed to follow the guidance of SM and Qadir or Shehad
      and MA upon the correct approach to the burden of proof. Arguably  the
      decision demonstrated a reversal of the burden of proof.

  36. It was also arguable that the Judge erred by allowing  the  Article  8
      appeal without making any findings to identify the  nature  and  scope
      and strength of the private life that would mean the decision  engaged
      Article 8.

The appeal

  37. Mr Clarke relied on the grounds. He submitted that the Judge failed to
      give adequate reasoning as to why the secretary of state has  not  met
      the legal burden, nor for the  finding  that  there  is  any  innocent
      explanation.

  38. It did not follow from the fact that the claimant was able  to  record
      details of the circumstances in  which  he  took  the  test,  that  he
      personally took the test. The Judge did not refer to the BBC  Panorama
      documentary provided to every hearing centre  and  may  therefore  not
      have been aware of the methods  used  which  would  not  preclude  the
      candidates from  having  travelled  to  the  test  centre  and  having
      knowledge of the procedures and  contents  of  the  test  itself  even
      though he may not have taken it personally.

  39. Further, there may have been reasons why a person who is able to speak
      English to the required level would  nonetheless  cause  or  permit  a
      proxy candidate to undertake an ETS test on his behalf  or  cheat.  He
      referred to MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 at [57].

  40. The Judge had accordingly erred by failing to  give  adequate  reasons
      for holding that  the  appellant  clearly  speaks  English  and  would
      therefore have no reason to secure a test  certificate  by  deception.
      Further, the Judge had regard to a "poor  photocopy"  which  bore  the
      name Opal College which the Judge took into account. The secretary  of
      state had not had the opportunity to verify the document and given its
      poor quality the Judge erred in relying on it.

  41. Mr Clarke submitted that the claimant did not do  all  he  could  have
      done, for  example  by  going  to  Portsmouth  College  itself  or  by
      approaching ETS directly. He submitted that the Judge "erred badly" at
      [22] regarding the secretary of state's failure to clarify the alleged
      discrepancy between the  claimant's  evidence  and  the  secretary  of
      state's concerning the location of the test  centre.  That  in  effect
      amounted to a reversal of the burden of proof.

  42. With regard to the second ground, Mr Clarke accepts that this is  "not
      the strongest of grounds".  He  acknowledged  that  the  secretary  of
      state's policy guidance on rights of appeal regarded paragraph 276B as
      sufficient in itself to be construed as a human rights claim. However,
      it is missing an engagement with the nature and extent of the  private
      life.

  43. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Karim referred to the first headnote  in
      MA, supra. The question of  whether  a  person  engaged  in  fraud  in
      procuring a TOEIC  English  language  proficiency  qualification  will
      invariably be intrinsically fact sensitive.

  44. He also referred and relied on paragraph  57  of  SM  and  Qadir.  The
      Tribunal set out the applicable principles and jurisprudence regarding
      allegations of dishonesty. The evidential  pendulum  swings  in  three
      different directions. The secretary of state is  required  to  produce
      sufficient evidence to raise an issue  as  to  the  existence  or  non
      existence of a fact in issue.  The  spotlight  then  switches  to  the
      applicant. If he  discharges  the  evidential  burden  of  raising  an
      innocent explanation, a  further  transfer  of  the  burden  of  proof
      occurs. Where that is satisfied, the burden rests on the secretary  of
      state to establish on the balance  of  probabilities  that  his  prima
      facie innocent explanation is to be rejected.

  45. He submitted that the three stage approach was adopted in the  appeal.
      In this case, the claimant gave evidence at length. The  supplementary
      bundle was handed in at the hearing itself.

  46. He referred to page 25 of the claimant's bundle which contains an Opal
      College print out of TOEIC results, where the claimant's  details  are
      set out. In addition, official score reports have been  provided.  The
      name as well as the date of birth of the  claimant  is  given  in  the
      score reports. Moreover, there are two separate  reports  relating  to
      two separate days when the tests were taken, on 18 October 2011 and 21
      October 2011. The same registration number on the score report at page
      27 of the claimant's bundle is recorded in Annex A with  regard  to  a
      test taken at Portsmouth International College  on  18  October  2011.
      There is no reference in the summary sheet produced by  the  secretary
      of state at Annex B with regard to the test taken on 21 October 2011.

  47. Mr Karim submitted that it was not perverse to find that the test  was
      taken at the same centre. It was open to the Judge  to  find  that  he
      took it at the same centre, as revealed in the TOEIC document produced
      by Opal College at page 25 of the claimant's bundle.

  48. He submitted that it was accepted at paragraph 7 of the  secretary  of
      state's grounds of appeal that the  ETS  verification  system  is  not
      infallible, although it is adequately robust and rigorous.  The  Judge
      was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  did  what   he   could   in   the
      circumstances. Nor was there a reversal of the burden  of  proof  when
      the Judge found that the secretary of state took no steps  herself  to
      clarify the obvious discrepancy. She noted that the secretary of state
      was in contact with ETS having regard to ongoing  litigation  and  was
      best placed to conduct such a verification.

  49. With regard to Article 8, paragraph 279 of the  Rules  were  found  to
      have been satisfied. By its very nature it is accepted that  a  period
      of ten years' lawful residence under the  Rules  constitutes  a  human
      rights claim. The Judge addressed the issue and found that the refusal
      constituted a disproportionate interference with the claimant's rights
      under Article 8.

      Assessment

  50. Judge C A Parker has given a careful and detailed decision setting out
      the  relevant  legal  and  factual  issues.  She   has   appropriately
      identified the applicable case law.

  51. She was satisfied that the respondent discharged the evidential burden
      relating to the allegation of deceit.  She  also  had  regard  to  the
      evidence of the claimant, which was set out in full from paragraphs [9-
      19]. I have already set out  this  evidence,  and  in  particular  the
      claimant's assertion that he took the test  at  Opal  College  on  two
      separate days without using a proxy test taker.

  52. She also had regard to the copy of the print out made  of  a  list  of
      candidates and results of Opal college's list of exam participants and
      results, which included the claimant.  His evidence  in  that  respect
      had "the ring of truth"- [22].

  53. As submitted by Mr Clarke, it is correct that she  took  into  account
      the fact that the secretary of  state  had  not  taken  any  steps  to
      clarify the discrepancy between  the  claimant's  and  her  assertions
      regarding the location of the test  centre.  However,   she  had  been
      informed by his representative that ETS had moved their operations  to
      the  United  States  and  no  longer  had  a  presence  in   the   UK;
      accordingly, it was not reasonable to expect the claimant  to  try  to
      contact them directly. He had tried to contact the  college  where  he
      took the test, but that was no longer in existence.

  54. She found that the secretary of state would have  been  aware  of  the
      discrepancy. This was  not  simply  the  case  of  a  claimant  having
      provided evidence that he had undertaken a test in which the secretary
      of state maintained a proxy test taker was used. The evidence was that
      he took a test at a  college  in  London  and  not  at  Portsmouth  as
      contended by the secretary of state. It was in that context  that  the
      Judge noted that there was no evidence that  the  secretary  of  state
      took steps to clarify the discrepancy,  as  she  was  best  placed  to
      conduct a verification check owing to ongoing litigation with ETS.

  55. I do not regard her comments to this  effect   at  [22]  amount  to  a
      reverse burden of proof. Nor  was  any  such  assertion  made  in  the
      grounds of appeal seeking permission.

  56. I find that the Judge  has  in  the  circumstances  properly  directed
      herself. She has also given adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
      secretary of state had not discharged the legal burden of proof.

  57. In the circumstances she found that there was no merit in the  general
      ground of  refusal  and  was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  met  the
      requirements for a grant of leave to remain indefinitely on the  basis
      of ten years' lawful residence under the Rules.

  58. She then directed herself on the basis that the appeal  was  on  human
      rights grounds only. The claimant's ability to meet  the  requirements
      under the Rules was relevant when assessing the proportionality  under
      Article 8(2). She noted that he relied on  a  claim  of  private  life
      here. She took into account the fact that he has now resided in the UK
      for almost 12 years, significantly in excess of the  ten  year  period
      required under the Rules.

  59. She took into account the public interest factors  under  s.117B.  She
      found  that  although  his  leave  could  properly  be  described   as
      precarious, as he has always been here on a  temporary  basis,  having
      been granted leave to remain in February 2013  until  March  2016,  he
      would have been aware that once he completed  the  ten  years'  lawful
      residence, which he had in September 2015, he was  entitled  to  apply
      for indefinite leave to remain.

  60. The Home Office's guidance in relation to the current rights of appeal
      dated 8 May 2017 accepts that an application made under paragraph 276B
      is a human rights application and the starting position is that  there
      is a right of appeal against a refusal.

  61. The claimant had contended that that during the 12 years that  he  has
      remained in the UK, he has established "a decent private life".

  62. I find having regard to the evidence as a whole  that  the  Judge  has
      made sustainable findings and conclusions which are neither irrational
      nor perverse.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made


      Signed


      Deputy      Upper      Tribunal      Judge      C       R       Mailer
         Date 4 August 2017








