
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10903/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    ABAAG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person.
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 14 August  2019,  following  a
       hearing at Harmondsworth  on  1  August  2019,  in  which  the  Judge
       dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Discussion


    2. The appellant, a male  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  5  June  1980,
       appealed the respondent's decision to refuse an application for leave
       on human rights grounds, relied upon by the appellant to prevent  his
       deportation from the United Kingdom.
    3. The Judge records at [5]  an  adjournment  application  made  by  the
       appellant on the basis that he had applied  for  exceptional  funding
       from the Legal Aid Board for him to be legally represented. The Judge
       sets out his reasons for refusing the adjournment  in  the  following
       terms:

             "5.   Having  heard  both  sides,  I  refused  the  appellants
                  adjournment application on the  basis  that  there  is  no
                  guarantee that the appellant will be  granted  exceptional
                  funds by the Legal Aid for him to be represented at  these
                  proceedings. He has not provided any compelling reasons as
                  to why he could not represent himself. The  appellant  had
                  sufficient time to make  an  application  for  exceptional
                  funding and/or instruct legal representatives."

    4. The Judge  records  that  the  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  which
       together with the  documentary  evidence  submitted  was  taken  into
       account in arriving at the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  claiming  the  adjournment
       application should have been granted as he did not have a  lawyer  to
       represent him and was unable  to  represent  himself.  The  appellant
       claims the decision is unfair  as  the  refusal  of  the  appeal  was
       central to his life and the lives of his five children.
    6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal in relation to this aspect of the challenge in the following
       terms:

             "As asserted, there was materially arguable that as  a  matter
             of natural justice the Judge erred in refusing the appellant's
             application for an adjournment to await  the  outcome  of  his
             public exceptional funding application to enable him  to  have
             the  benefit  of   legal   representation   in   his   appeal.
             Notwithstanding the degree of delay in  the  appellant  making
             his application for funding, there appears to have  been  bear
             account had of the constraints those in immigration  detention
             may face. The appellant furnished a copy of  this  application
             for  public  funding  providing  prima  facie  a   detail   of
             reasonings supporting his request for public funding, and  why
             he was unable to effectively represent  himself.  It  was  not
             shown in any real way that those reasons were weighed  in  the
             judicial  assessment.  Furthermore,  refusing  the  appellants
             adjournment application renewed at his hearing inter  alia  on
             the basis that there was no  guarantee  he  would  be  granted
             funding for representation appeared  to  set  the  bar  at  an
             unreasonable height for an appellant to meet, more especially,
             given that there was no guarantees per  se  when  applications
             are made for exceptional funding.

    7. Tribunals have considerable experience  in  dealing  with  appellants
       appearing  without  the  benefit  of   professional   representation.
       Constraints on the grant of public funding for immigration and asylum
       cases is the reason why many appellants have to either pay  privately
       for representation or appear as litigants  in  person.  There  is  no
       arguable  error,  per  se,  in  the  Judge  considering  whether  the
       appellant was able to represent himself in relation to this appeal.
    8. The appellant was asked at  the  Initial  Hearing  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal whether he had been granted public funding. He confirmed  he
       had not and had received a request for further information  from  the
       Legal Aid Board. The Judge's concern that there was no guarantee  the
       public funding will be granted within a reasonable time, or  at  all,
       has not been shown to be a  conclusion  infected  by  arguable  legal
       error.
    9. In relation to delay, the Judge noted the  respondent's  decision  to
       deport the appellant was made on 10 April 2018  and  his  application
       for leave  on  human  rights  grounds  refused  in  May.  The  actual
       deportation order was made in  June  2019  yet  the  application  for
       public funding was not made until 17 July 2019  indicating  delay  in
       the appellant's actions. The Court of Appeal in Kigen  and  Cheruiyot
       [2015] EWAC Civ 1286, at [29] wrote:

             "In the light of the old authorities to which I have referred,
             solicitors in general may have been under the impression  that
             any delay awaiting a decision by the Legal  Aid  Agency  would
             simply be ignored if an extension of time were required  as  a
             result. That is not the case and it is to be  hoped  that  any
             such misunderstanding will have been dispelled as a result  of
             the decision in this case. Those acting  for  parties  in  the
             position of these appellants will in future need to take steps
             either to lodge the necessary form promptly on behalf of their
             clients or to advise them of the need to do so  on  their  own
             behalf. Failure to lodge  the  necessary  request  within  the
             prescribed time may in future result in an extension  of  time
             being refused. However, given the degree of  uncertainty  that
             surrounded the matter,  I  am  persuaded  that  to  refuse  an
             extension of time in this case will  be  to  impose  on  these
             appellants greater prejudice and is justified by the delay"

   10. Kigen and Cheruiyot involved an individual seeking  an  extension  of
       time for lodging judicial review proceedings. Although  that  is  not
       the situation appertaining in this appeal  the  principle  concerning
       the need for individuals to  make  applications  for  public  funding
       promptly are equally applicable to statutory appeals.  The  appellant
       in this case did not do so which the Judge was arguably  entitled  to
       take into account.
   11. Of more importance,  when  assessing  the  fairness  of  the  Judge's
       actions, is the nature of the case itself. It was not  made  out  the
       case involved particularly complex issues for which specialist  legal
       representation would have been required. The appellant  had  provided
       documentary evidence and also gave oral evidence and was  subject  to
       cross-examination. The Judge clearly understood the core elements  of
       the appellant's case and it is  clear  from  the  evidence  that  the
       appellant received a fair hearing. It is not made out that  the  only
       decision available to the Judge on  the  facts  was  to  adjourn  the
       appeal. The overriding objectives are designed  to  ensure  effective
       and expeditious disposal of legal business in a fair and just manner.
       It is not  made  out  the  decision  of  the  Judge  infringes  these
       principles. No arguable legal error is made out on this ground.
   12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson also granted permission  to  appeal
       in relation to  a  second  issue  concerning  the  structure  of  the
       decision and the issues the Judge  was  required  to  assess  in  the
       following terms:

             "(ii)    additionally, by way of Robinson arguable error,  the
                  Decision disclose the Judge having misconceived the issues
                  before  them,  in  law,  failing  to  address   that   the
                  appellant's  Art   8   human   rights   appeal   concerned
                  deportation under S5(1) with reference to S.3(5)(a) of the
                  Immigration Act 1971, his deportation having  been  deemed
                  by the respondent under para  398(c)  to  the  Immigration
                  Rules (the Rules) to be  conducive  to  the  public  good,
                  because he had been convicted of an offence  which  caused
                  serious harm,  possessing/controlling  ID  documents  with
                  intent when sentenced to 30  weeks  imprisonment,  not  as
                  addressed by the Judge an  automatic  deportation  arising
                  under the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  citing  incorrectly  a
                  sentence of 12 months;


             (iii)    notwithstanding having gone on correctly  to  address
                  para 399 and 399 A of the Rules, it was arguable  that  in
                  failing to have afforded the appellant reasonable time  to
                  await the outcome of his public  funding  application  for
                  legal  representation,  that  the  absence  of  supporting
                  information of which the Judge found a concern, would have
                  potentially been mitigated;


             (iv)      the  Decision  disclose  an  overall  inadequacy  of
                  reasoning."

   13.  The  decision  under  challenge,  the  respondents  refusal  of  the
       appellant's human rights claim clearly informed  the  appellant  that
       the Secretary of State had decided to make a deportation against  him
       under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and refers to the fact
       that on 11 January 2019 the appellant was  convicted  at  Snaresbrook
       Crown Court for possession/control of identity documents with  intent
       for which he was sentenced on 11 February 2019 to 7  months  14  days
       (30  weeks)  imprisonment.  The  appellant  did  not  appeal   either
       conviction or sentence.
   14. There is arguable merit in the assertion the Judge erred in law  when
       stating at [1] that the appellant appealed the respondent's  decision
       made under section 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007 and [10]  in  which  the
       Judge refers to section 32 of that Act and to the appellant have been
       sentenced to a period of 12 months imprisonment.
   15. The power to make a deportation order is found in Section 3(5) of the
       1971 Act which gives the Secretary of State power to  deport  a  non-
       British Citizen (a) if he deems it to be conducive to the public good
       (b) if another member of the family is to be deported and  (c)  if  a
       court recommends it after conviction  of  an  offence  punishable  by
       imprisonment.  Section 3(5)(a) is reflected in paragraph 363  of  the
       Immigration  Rules,  which  states  that  a  person  is   liable   to
       deportation  where  the  Secretary  of  State  deems  that   person's
       deportation to be conducive to the public good.  Where the  automatic
       deport provisions do not apply it is a question of fact as to whether
       deportation is conducive to the public good.
   16. Such appeals previously required consideration of the  provisions  of
       paragraph 364 the Immigration Rules although the same  has  now  been
       revoked.  Since  paragraph  364  was  deleted  for  post  July   2012
       applications, the rules simply assert at paragraph 397 that a  deport
       order will  not  be  made  if  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
       obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  ECHR  or,  if  not
       contrary  to  those  obligations,   in   exceptional   circumstances.
       Paragraphs 398, 399 and  3999A  then  set  out  the  requirements  to
       consider when assessing the Article 8 position.
   17. The Judge refers to the provisions of these  relevant  paragraphs  at
       [12-13] clearly demonstrating  that  the  correct  test  was  at  the
       forefront of the Judge's mind. There is no right  of  appeal  against
       the deportation decision, the only right of appeal being against  the
       refusal of the human rights application.
   18. The first finding of note made by the Judge relates to  the  question
       of whether the appellant is a credible witness.  At  [34]  the  Judge
       finds he is not for the reasons set out which are adequately reasoned
       and have not been shown to be findings not available to the Judge  on
       the evidence.
   19. The Judge finds that the appellant had not provided any  evidence  to
       demonstrate he has been in the parental relationship with his claimed
       five children in the United Kingdom, that the appellant came  to  the
       UK at 20 years of age having spent his childhood and formative  years
       of his life in Nigeria where he stated he was  studying  medicine  at
       University, and where he has three siblings living who will  be  able
       to assist him on return. At [41] the Judge states:

             "41.     I have considered all aspects of 2014  Act  and  come
                  into my decision and find that the appellant does not have
                  any qualifying aspects under any of  the  subsections  for
                  this legislation. In the circumstances  I  find  that  the
                  respondent's decision is wholly  proportionate  to  deport
                  this appellant to Nigeria."

   20. The reference to the 2014 Act is a reference to section  117  of  the
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  specifically  117  C
       which is applicable to deportation appeals opposed  on  human  rights
       grounds. The Judge's conclusion is clear;  that  the  respondent  had
       established on the basis of the  evidence  made  available  that  the
       decision to deport the appellant is proportionate to any interference
       with a protected right relied upon in this appeal.
   21. I find that although reference to a sentence of 12 months and to  the
       automatic deportation provisions is wrong the Judge  clearly  applied
       the correct test when assessing  the  human  rights  aspects  of  the
       appeal and it is not made out the decision which effectively  upholds
       the deportation order as being proportionate is outside the range  of
       reasonable conclusions available to the Judge on the evidence.
   22. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Judge's findings and  clearly
       seeks a more favourable outcome to enable him to remain in the United
       Kingdom the grounds fail to establish arguable legal  error  material
       to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to warrant  a  grant
       of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

   23. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


   24. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 October 2019
