
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10066/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2017                |On 19th  September 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                               GURDEEEPAK [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr M Read; Counsel instructed by VAS UK
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  FtT  Judge
       Williams promulgated on  16th  December  2016  in  which  the  Judge
       dismissed an appeal against a decision made  by  the  respondent  on
       22nd March 2016, to refuse the  appellant's  application  for  entry
       clearance as the parent of a child present  in  the  United  Kingdom
       under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


    2. The appellant is a national of India.  He  made  an  application  for
       entry clearance as a parent of a child in the UK.  Both the appellant
       and [SS], whom the appellant claims is his ex-wife, were  interviewed
       on 22nd March 2016.


    3. The background to the application is set out in the decision  of  the
       Entry Clearance Officer and the witness statements that  were  before
       the FtT.  The appellant had been illegally present in  the  UK  since
       2011 and had made no attempt to regularise his stay.  He claims  that
       he has been in a relationship with [SS] since 2012, and that  he  had
       spoken to a solicitor prior to departing the UK for India in  January
       2015.  He was advised that he should return to India and  apply  from
       abroad for leave to enter.   [SS] travelled to India in July 2015 and
       they married on the 3rd August 2015.  The appellant claims that after
       his wife returned to the UK, their relationship  broke  down.   There
       are two children of the marriage.  The eldest child, the  appellant's
       son, is residing with him in India and their daughter lives in the UK
       with her mother.  In the refusal of entry clearance,  the  respondent
       stated:


             "Both you and your wife were interviewed in relation  to  your
             application. From these interviews I cannot be satisfied  that
             you are in fact separated. It is  my  opinion  that  you  have
             applied under this category to  circumvent  the  rules.   Your
             wife is British and for you to qualify  for  settlement  as  a
             spouse under appendix FM rules she would have to be earning an
             annual income of �18,600. You both confirmed during  interview
             that she is on benefits. This means that you would not qualify
             to join her and your children in the United Kingdom.


             You state that you and your wife are separated and there is no
             chance for reconciliation, however, neither of you has started
             divorce proceedings. Furthermore, you  were  only  married  in
             August 2015 and soon after your wedding your daughter fell ill
             and your wife returned to the UK with her for  NHS  treatment.
             Your relationship broke down while she was in the UK  and  you
             were in India. You have not met since then to reconcile."


    4. Before the FtT, the appellant relied upon a bundle comprising  of  83
       pages. The appellant's bundle included a witness statement  from  the
       appellant dated 25th October 2016 and a  witness  statement  made  by
       [SS] dated 20th October 2016. Both statements are signed and  contain
       a declaration that the facts stated in the  statement  are  true  and
       complete.


    5. The FtT Judge found that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements
       of the immigration rules.  At paragraph [7], the Judge states  "I  am
       satisfied that the appellant and wife are not separated and that  the
       appellant can apply for entry clearance as a partner  under  Appendix
       FM E-ECPT 2.3(iii).   I  reach  that  conclusion  for  the  following
       reasons".  The reasons are then set out at paragraphs [8] and [9]  of
       the decision.


             "8.  Firstly, the appellant claimed that  he  had  been  in  a
             relationship with his wife  since  2012  and  married  her  on
             03/08/15 in India. The appellant claimed that the relationship
             irretrievably broke down due to his wife committing  adultery,
             his wife also made that claim in her statement dated 20/10/16.
             However, this is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  wife's
             initial claim in her statutory declaration dated 16/02/16  (AB
             page 59), which vaguely states that  the  relationship  simply
             became  "strained",  with  no  mention  of  an  accusation  of
             adultery. The accusation of adultery is the  core  reason  for
             the breakdown of the  relationship,  and  the  fact  that  the
             appellant's wife did not mention it when matters were freshest
             in her mind undermines the credibility of the whole claim.


             9.      Secondly,    notwithstanding      the       supposedly
             irretrievable   breakdown   of   the relationship there is  no
             evidence from family members which would be readily  available
             (they were supposedly very much involved in the breakdown/ its
             aftermath) or of a Divorce Petition having  been  issued.  The
             only evidence of any legal proceedings is correspondence  from
             an Advocate's practice  (AB  pages  27-33).  I  attach  little
             weight to this documentation since it is photocopied  and  the
             originals  are   not   before   me.   Moreover,   whilst   the
             documentation refers to a divorce  petition  a  copy  of  that
             divorce petition (which  would  have  confirmed  the  supposed
             basis for divorce) has not been submitted, notwithstanding the
             claim that it was lodged on 01/04/16."


    6. Having considered all matters, the FtT Judge concluded  at  paragraph
       [10] of his decision that it is proportionate to interfere  with  the
       family and private life of the appellant as he is eligible  to  apply
       for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM or  alternatively,
       the appellants children and his  wife  can  visit  him  in  India  to
       maintain family life.


    7. In the grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant it is contended;


          a. The conclusion of the Judge that the appellant and his  ex-wife
             are not in fact  separated  is  baseless  and  contradicts  the
             evidence.  They are  separated  and  the  appellant  could  not
             therefore apply for entry clearance under the Partner route;


          b. The appellant's ex-wife  referred  to  the  relationship  being
             "strained" in her statutory declaration, as a reference to  the
             onset of the problems in  the  relationship.   Her  failure  to
             refer to the accusation of  adultery  does  not  undermine  the
             credibility of the claim. She had mentioned the  accusation  of
             adultery when interviewed. The Judge  failed  to  consider  the
             evidence as a whole. Had the Judge taken all the evidence  into
             account, he would not have concluded that  the  credibility  of
             the claim as a whole, is undermined.


          c. The Judge erred in  rejecting  the  account  of  the  appellant
             because there was no  evidence  from  family  members,  of  the
             breakdown of the relationship.


          d. The Judge erred in stating that there  was  no  evidence  of  a
             'Divorce Petition', and that  the  only  evidence  is  from  an
             Advocate's practice.  There was evidence of a divorce  petition
             at pages 29-33 of the appellant's bundle. The  court  documents
             confirm the matter was before the court.  The Judge should have
             accepted the documents to be genuine.


          e. The Judge failed to give due weight to the respondent's failure
             to provide a transcript of the interview.


          f. Article 8 was applied incorrectly as the decision  clearly  has
             such  a  dramatic  interference  on  the  appellant   and   his
             children's private and family life, as it  will  separate  them
             permanently.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro
       on 30th  June  2017.   He  noted  that  at  pages  [29]-[33]  of  the
       appellant's bundle, there are documents which  seem  to  refer  to  a
       divorce petition, and in light of this, it is arguable that the Judge
       reached his findings without considering all  of  the  evidence.  The
       matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of the
       FtT Judge involved the making of a material error of law, and if  the
       decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


    9. Before me, Mr Read submits that the Judge failed to consider  all  of
       the evidence that was before him.  The Judge failed to  consider  the
       statutory declaration that was at page [59] of the appellant's bundle
       that refers to  the  dissolution  of  the  relationship  between  the
       appellant and his ex-wife.  Mr Read submits that the failure to refer
       to this evidence set out in the statutory declaration is material  to
       the outcome of the appeal. He conceded that the divorce petition  was
       not in the appellant's bundle that was before the  FtT  and  accepted
       that there is a lacuna in the  evidence  before  the  FtT  about  the
       divorce itself.  He submits that the  Advocates  statement  that  was
       before the FtT refers to the breakdown of the marriage, and the Judge
       should have given  more  weight  to  the  explanation  given  by  the
       advocate for the delay. He submits that the veracity of the documents
       relied upon by the appellant were not  in  question,  and  there  was
       sufficient evidence put before  the  FtT  of  the  breakdown  of  the
       relationship,  to  establish  that  the  relationship   between   the
       appellant and his ex-wife has broken down as  they  claim.   Mr  Read
       submits that the respondent's case was essentially that the appellant
       had been dishonest  in  making  the  application  that  he  did.  The
       respondent  was  alleging  that  the  appellant  had  made  a   false
       application and it was therefore for the respondent to establish that
       the  appellant  had  indeed  been  dishonest.  He  submits  that  the
       respondent failed to establish that the appellant had been dishonest.


   10.  In reply, Ms Peterson submits that the documents  that  were  before
       the FtT at pages [27] to [33] of the appellant's bundle were  clearly
       considered by the Judge. A copy of the divorce  petition  itself  was
       not included in the bundle. She submits that the  appellant  did  not
       make any application for disclosure of the interview transcripts  and
       did not  apply  for  an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  so  that  the
       transcript of that interview could be made  available.   Ms  Peterson
       submits that it was open to the judge to conclude  that  he  was  not
       satisfied that the appellant and  his  wife  are  separated  as  they
       claim, for the  reasons  set  out  in  the  decision.  She  draws  my
       attention to the witness statement of [SS] and particularly paragraph
       [14] of that statement in which she states:


             "Bearing in mind the fact that we have shown we are more  than
             capable  of   maintaining   and   accommodating   each   other
             indefinitely, I would be grateful if you could allow  my  wife
             permission to remain in the United Kingdom so we can put  this
             disruption to an end and continue to live a joyous  and  happy
             married life."


   11. Ms Peterson submits that this passage  in  [SS]'s  witness  statement
       entirely undermines the  claim  that  the  appellant  and  [SS]  have
       separated as they claim. This passage in  the  witness  statement  in
       fact adds credence to the conclusion of the respondent and the  Judge
       of the FtT, that they have not separated.


DISCUSSION


   12. In R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  the  Court  of  Appeal
       held that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of a Judge  on
       the grounds of error  of  law,  it  has  to  be  satisfied  that  the
       correction of the error would have made a material difference to  the
       outcome, or to the fairness of the proceedings. A finding might  only
       be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it  was
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one  that  was
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   13. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge. The  Judge
       states at paragraph [9] of his decision;


             "...The  only   evidence   of   any   legal   proceedings   is
             correspondence from an Advocate's practice (AB pages 27-33). I
             attach  little  weight  to  this  documentation  since  it  is
             photocopied and the originals are  not  before  me.  Moreover,
             whilst the documentation refers to a divorce petition  a  copy
             of that divorce  petition  (which  would  have  confirmed  the
             supposed basis for divorce) has not been submitted,..."


   14. The Judge considered the material that is to be found at  pages  [27]
       to [33]  of  the  appellant's  bundle.   He  noted  that  whilst  the
       documentation refers to a divorce petition, a copy  of  that  divorce
       petition (which would have confirmed the supposed basis for  divorce)
       has not been submitted. Although the appellant claims that there  was
       evidence of a divorce petition before the FtT, Mr Read concedes  that
       a copy of the divorce petition was not before the FtT.  The fact that
       the divorce petition, which would have confirmed the  supposed  basis
       for the divorce, was not before the FtT, was plainly  a  matter  that
       the Judge was entitled to take into account when considering  whether
       the appellant and his wife have genuinely separated.  Although  there
       is no requirement for corroboration, in my judgment it also was  open
       to the Judge when he was considering the evidence as a whole, to note
       that there is no evidence from family members  that  were  supposedly
       very  much  involved  in  the  breakdown  of  the  marriage  and  its
       aftermath.


   15. I reject the submission that the Judge failed to have  proper  regard
       to the statutory declaration.   The  Judge  makes  reference  to  the
       statutory declaration at paragraph [8] of his decision. I reject  the
       submission by Mr Read that the failure to refer to the  assertion  at
       paragraph [7] of the statutory declaration that the relationship  has
       broken down, is material.   The  entire  thrust  of  the  appeal  was
       premised on the claim that the relationship has broken down and it is
       against that background that the Judge considered the appeal and  the
       evidence before him.


   16. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge to dismiss  the  appeal  on
       the material that was before him, for the reasons that he has  given.




   17. Paragraph [14] of the witness statement of [SS] is curious to say the
       least.   That  paragraph  urges  that  "..you  could  allow  my  wife
       permission to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  so  we  can  put  this
       disruption to an end and continue to live a joyous and happy  married
       life.".  As I have said, the statement contains a declaration that it
       is true and complete.  As Ms Peterson submits, that paragraph in fact
       lends support to the claim by the respondent, and the finding of  the
       FtT Judge  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  have  not  genuinely
       separated.  As that paragraph did not form part of  the  decision  of
       the FtT Judge's reasoning, I need say nothing more about it.


   18. At the end of the hearing before me, I handed down an  oral  decision
       setting out  briefly,  my  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal.   I
       informed the parties that a perfected decision would  be  promulgated
       in due course.  After the hearing had ended and I had handed down  my
       reasons for dismissing the appeal, I turned to other  matters  in  my
       list.  I was informed by the Tribunal clerk that Mr  Read  wished  to
       return before me and make an application  for  me  to  set  aside  my
       decision as he had erroneously made a concession that  he  wished  to
       withdraw.  Having had regard to Rule  43(2)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       Rules, and noting that although I had handed down an oral decision, a
       perfected decision was yet to be promulgated, with the  agreement  of
       Ms Peterson I agreed to hear Mr Read.  When the parties returned,  Mr
       Read stated that he would prefer to make a written application for me
       to set aside my decision under Rule 43(2)(d) of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       Rules.  Notwithstanding the  fact  that  my  decision  had  not  been
       promulgated, at 13:06 on the same day, an email was received  by  the
       Tribunal from Mr Read claiming to be an application  under  Rule  43.
       It is not entirely  clear  from  the  email  whether  the  Presenting
       Officers Unit has been served with a copy of the application.  I note
       that that a Home Office email address is cc'd.


   19. Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (as
       amended) provides that the Upper Tribunal may set  aside  a  decision
       which disposes of proceedings, or part of such a  decision,  and  re-
       make the decision or the relevant part  of  it,  if  (a)   the  Upper
       Tribunal considers that it is in the interests of justice to  do  so;
       and inter alia there has been some other procedural  irregularity  in
       the proceedings.  In the written application made by Mr  Read  it  is
       said that there has been a procedural error.  Mr Read contends that I
       appear to have been misled by his concession that no divorce petition
       was included in the appellant's bundles that was before the FtT,  and
       I was therefore wrong to proceed on the basis of that concession.


   20. The oral decision that I  handed  down  after  hearing  the  parties'
       submissions is not a final decision promulgated by the Tribunal which
       disposes of the proceedings.  It is when a  decision  is  promulgated
       that there is a decision of the Upper Tribunal which disposes of  the
       proceedings.  I have however considered the  further  representations
       made by Mr Read  in  writing,  and  whether  the  withdrawal  of  the
       concession that Mr Read made in his  submissions,  that  the  divorce
       petition was not in the appellant's bundle that was before  the  FtT,
       would alter my decision.   If  it  would,  I  would  have  given  the
       respondent an opportunity  to  respond  in  writing  before  a  final
       decision is promulgated.


   21. In my judgement, the concession made by Mr Read does not  affect  the
       outcome of the appeal before me.  As I have  set  out  at  paragraphs
       [13] and [14] above, the FtT Judge considered the material that is to
       be found at pages [27] to [33] of the appellant's bundle.  The  Judge
       refers at paragraph [9] of his decision to  the  evidence  of  "legal
       proceedings".  He noted that whilst the  documentation  refers  to  a
       divorce petition, a copy of that divorce petition (which  would  have
       confirmed the supposed basis for divorce) has not been submitted.   I
       have again carefully considered that  documentation.   At  page  [27]
       there is a letter from Tarlok  Singh  addressed  to  the  appellant's
       representatives in the UK and dated 17th October  2016.   The  letter
       states that a  "Divorce  Petition  is  pending"  and  is  "fixed  for
       03.12.16 for presence.".  The letter states that  [SS]  "has  already
       summoned (sic) in the case mentioned above".  At page [28], there  is
       a letter from Tarlok Singh addressed to the FtT dated 5th April 2016.
        In that letter Mr Tarlok Singh confirms that the  appellant  is  his
       client and that he was consulted by  the  appellant  about  filing  a
       divorce petition  on  2nd  March  2016.   He  states  "..The  Divorce
       petition  is  filed  on  01.4.2016  in  the  Hon'ble  Court  of   Mr.
       Jatinderpal Singh Khurmi, Addl. District Judge, Ludhiana bearing Case
       No. HMA/652/2016 and is  fixed  for  12.7.2016  for  the  service  of
       respondent".  I pause to note that the appellant's application to the
       respondent was made on 15th February 2016,  before  he  consulted  Mr
       Tarlok Singh.  If it is right that a Divorce petition  was  filed  on
       1st April 2016, that was after the decision  of  the  respondent  (on
       22nd March 2016) to refuse the application for entry  clearance.   At
       pages [29] to [33] of the appellant's bundle  are  various  documents
       that bear a seal of the "Copying Branch, District &  Session  Judge's
       Office".  As the Judge of the FtT rightly  noted,  the  documentation
       refers to a divorce petition, but a copy of that divorce petition has
       not been submitted.  The appellant claims that there was evidence  of
       a divorce petition before the FtT.  The Judge of the FtT accepted  at
       paragraph [9] of his decision that "whilst the  documentation  refers
       to a divorce petition, a copy of that divorce petition  (which  would
       have  confirmed  the  supposed  basis  for  divorce)  has  not   been
       submitted.".


   22.  In my judgement, the Judge had proper regard to the documents relied
       upon by the applicant.  The documents refer to a divorce petition and
       legal proceedings but a closer reading  of  the  documents,  confirms
       that the Judge was entitled to conclude that a copy  of  the  divorce
       petition itself had not  been  submitted.  In  my  judgement,  having
       considered the evidence before him, it was open to the Judge to  find
       that the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
       Section EC-PT.1.1. of Appendix FM sets out the requirements to be met
       for entry clearance as a parent. The appellant must meet all  of  the
       requirements of Section E-ECPT: Eligibility for entry clearance as  a
       parent.  Section E-ECPT.2.3(iii) provides that the applicant must not
       be eligible to apply for entry clearance  as  a  partner  under  this
       Appendix.  Here the Judge found that  the  appellant  can  apply  for
       entry clearance as a partner for the reasons that he has set out.  It
       was open to him do so.


   23. I have carefully read the paragraphs  that  the  appellant  seeks  to
       criticise and the decision as a whole. The Judge carefully  sets  out
       the evidence before him and  considers  the  inconsistencies  in  the
       evidence, and the explanations given by the  appellant.   It  is  now
       well established that although there is a legal duty to give a  brief
       explanation of the conclusions on the  central  issue  on  which  the
       appeal is determined, those reasons need  not  be  extensive  if  the
       decision as a whole  makes  sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
       accepted by the Judge.  It is equally well established that a finding
       might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity
       if it was irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or  one
       that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On  appeal,  the  Upper
       Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first instance, unless  it
       really cannot understand the original judge's  thought  process  when
       the Judge was making material findings.  Here, it cannot be said that
       the Judge's analysis of the evidence is irrational or  perverse.  The
       Judge did not consider irrelevant factors, and  the  weight  that  he
       attached to the evidence either individually or cumulatively,  was  a
       matter for him. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's  decision  is  a
       sufficiently reasoned decision that was open to him on the evidence.


   24. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   25. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date       19th September 2017


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


The appeal is dismissed and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date     19th September 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
