
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/10510/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 November 2017                        | On 25 January 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                             Romain Michael Gray
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge I M Scott promulgated on  27  February  2017.
    The appeal in this case was against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 17 October 2015 to revoke the indefinite leave to  remain
    that had been granted to remain to Michael Gray whom I refer to as  the
    claimant.

 2. For reasons which are not clear  the  decision  from  the  Home  Office
    states that the claimant has a right of appeal under Section 82 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act and sets  out  the  permissible
    grounds.  The judge proceeded to determine the appeal on that basis and
    allowed it.

 3. The Secretary of State in her grounds of  permission  submits  that  in
    fact the judge did not have the jurisdiction to  hear  the  case  given
    that since the changes introduced to the 2002 Act by Section 15 of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 which had come into  force  by  the  date  of  the
    decision. Thus, there was no right  of  appeal  that  the  decision  to
    revoke indefinite leave was not an immigration decision as defined  and
    thus there was no right of appeal against it.

 4. Having considered carefully  the  Act  and  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No.3 Transitional and Saving Provisions)  Order  2014  as
    amended I am satisfied that the Secretary of State's case is correct in
    that the changes brought in by the Immigration Act 2014  did  apply  to
    the decision made in this case to revoke indefinite leave to remain and
    therefore there was no right of appeal against that decision.  As there
    was no right of appeal against the decision the judge did not have  the
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. In doing so he made a  material  error
    of law and on that basis I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. I must remake the decision and for the reasons I have given I  conclude
    that there was no right of appeal in this case owing to the  amendments
    brought in by the Immigration Act 2014 and therefore the decision  that
    must be substituted in this case is to dismiss the appeal on the  basis
    that there is no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal  to  hear  the
    appeal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2. I remake the decision by dismissing it on the basis that the appeal  is
    not a valid appeal.


Signed                                  Date 27 November 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

