
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10072/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2017                           |On 07 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 poonam rai
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Froom promulgated on 12 July 2017.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer  in  New  Delhi  is  the
    appellant and Ms Rai is the Respondent, for  the  sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the Entry Clearance Officer as the Respondent and  Ms  Rai  as
    the Appellant.

3.   The Appellant is a national of Nepal born on  25  February  1989.   Her
    personal  circumstances  and  the  history  of  her   application   are
    summarised at paragraph 1 of the Decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    She is the daughter of Mr Tej Bahadur Rai (born on 20 March 1959),  who
    is a former member of the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas,  having  seen  service
    between 14 January 1980 and 31 March  1994  in  Hong  Kong,  Australia,
    Singapore, the UK, Belize, and Brunei.  He reached the rank of Corporal
    and  was  discharged  with  military   conduct   being   described   as
    "exemplary".  The Appellant's  father  and  mother  were  both  granted
    settlement visas and arrived in the UK in 2010.  Mr Rai was issued with
    entry clearance in January 2010 and arrived in May 2010.  His  partner,
    the Appellant's mother, was issued with entry clearance in May 2010 and
    arrived in May 2011.  The Appellant's siblings, Prakash Rai (d.o.b.  26
    June 1994), and Laxmi Rai (d.o.b. 9 August  1992),  were  also  granted
    entry clearance at the same time as their mother, but  entered  the  UK
    shortly before their mother on 24 August 2010 to join their father.

4.   The Appellant made an application for entry clearance as the  dependent
    daughter of a former Gurkha soldier.  The application was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a Notice of  Immigration  Decision  dated  22  March
    2016.  The Notice of Immigration Decision is a matter of record and its
    contents are summarised in the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraphs 3-4.  In such circumstances I  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse again the bases of the Respondent's decision.

5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC on human rights grounds.  The  appeal
    was allowed for the reasons set out in the Decision of Judge Froom.

6.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal, which  was  granted  on  26
    July 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes.

7.   Although the Appellant did not file  a  Rule  24  response  within  the
    appropriate timeframe, Mr Wilford has provided for  the  assistance  of
    the Tribunal a written document titled 'Appellant's  Speaking  Note'  -
    which Mr Nath was able to peruse prior to making his submissions in the
    appeal.

8.   In his  submissions  Mr  Nath  essentially  placed  reliance  upon  the
    Grounds of Appeal as drafted, and save for directing  my  attention  to
    the relevant paragraphs in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    referenced in some of the paragraphs of the Grounds, did  not  seek  to
    expand or otherwise amplify upon the Grounds as pleaded.  In all of the
    circumstances I did not find it  necessary  to  invite  Mr  Wilford  to
    expand further upon his so-called Speaking Note.

9.    In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  carefully  and
    thoroughly examines the facts of the particular case, setting them  out
    within  a  framework  of  self-directions  that  draws  adequately  and
    appropriately from the applicable case law and principles in respect of
    Article 8, in respect of family  life  between  parents  and  dependent
    children, and most particularly in  respect  of  the  circumstances  of
    adult children of Gurkha veterans.  I do not wish merely to  repeat  by
    lengthy recitation from what is in substance an exemplary  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, and so seek to  focus  only  on  the  specific
    aspects of the Respondent's challenge.

10.  The Respondent over eight  paragraphs  of  Grounds  essentially  raises
    three lines of argument to seek to impugn the decision of Judge Froom.

11.  The first argument is in  relation  to  the  issue  of  the  dependency
    between the Appellant and her  parents  and  the  question  of  whether
    family life existed in circumstances where the Appellant was  an  adult
    by the date of the Respondent's decision (and indeed had been an  adult
    for some time).  The Grounds rehearse some of the applicable principles
    by reference to the cases of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and AAO [2011]
    EWCA Civ 840, but essentially alight  upon  Judge's  phrase  "unmarried
    female child" at paragraph 27 of the Decision.  It  is  submitted  that
    the Judge had thereby conflated the concept  of  being  unmarried  with
    being dependent on others, and it is argued that this is  an  erroneous
    conflation.

12.   In  my  judgement  the   premise   of   the   Respondent's   challenge
    substantially fails to acknowledge the detailed,  careful  and  nuanced
    analysis and findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge with  regard  to
    family life.  Such analysis, as I have indicated above,  is  manifestly
    guided by the case law cited and quoted from, and  the  evidence  noted
    and recited in the Decision.  Paragraph 27 is not  confined  merely  to
    the fact that the Appellant is unmarried.  The Judge says this:-

         "In my judgment, the evidence shows that  the  appellant  would  be
         living with her parents and siblings but for the  fact  her  father
         was unable to bring her at the same  time.   She  is  an  unmarried
         female child and would be unlikely to leave her parents' home until
         she marries.  I accept the reason given for the sponsor's  decision
         to leave her behind in order to secure his own settlement status in
         the UK and I also accept this should not  be  taken  to  imply  the
         Appellant was living an independent life.   The  intervening  years
         have not broken the close family ties  which  exist  and  I  accept
         there is continuing real  and  effective  support.   I  accept  the
         Appellant is financially dependent on  the  sponsor  and  that  she
         continues  to  look  to  her  parents  for  emotional  support  and
         guidance.  This is in accordance with Nepalese cultural traditions.
          The family ties go beyond the normal ties of  love  and  affection
         between adult children and their parents.  It follows that  article
         8 is engaged in its family life aspect.  The decision maintains the
         position whereby family life cannot realistically  be  enjoyed  and
         therefore amounts to an interference of sufficient gravity."

13.  The summation therein of  the  foregoing  rehearsal  of  case  law  and
    evidence seems to me to go well beyond the suggested simple  conflation
    of  the  concepts  of  'unmarried'  and  'dependent'.  The  finding  of
    dependency, and the finding that ties go beyond the normal, is based on
    substantially more than being unmarried. In the  circumstances  I  find
    nothing of substance in this aspect of the Respondent's challenge.

14.  The second line  of  challenge  is  set  out  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    Respondent's  Grounds.   The  Respondent  criticises  the   Judge   for
    according significant weight to the so-called 'historical injustice' of
    Gurkha settlement policy, and also characterises  the  Judge's  finding
    that the Appellant would have been settled in the UK with her family by
    now but for the historic injustice as "pure speculation".

15.  With all due respect to the drafter of the  Grounds,  it  seems  to  me
    that they run contrary to the relevant case law, and  also  indeed  run
    contrary to the Respondent's own policy.

16.  The Judge recorded in his Decision  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    father to the effect that he would have settled in the UK had that been
    an available option at or shortly after his discharge  from  the  army.
    It is to be noted that the Respondent's  relevant  policy  -  which  is
    incorporated in the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal -
    says the following in respect of this issue at paragraph 17:

         "In order to qualify for settlement  under  this  policy  the  Home
         Office needs to be satisfied that  the  former  Gurkha  would  have
         applied to settle in the UK upon discharge with the dependent child
         if they had been born by then (but otherwise the child  would  have
         been born here).  If a sponsor states that he intended to settle in
         the UK on discharge, then, in the  absence  of  any  countervailing
         evidence, this requirement will normally be considered to have been
         met."

     In such circumstances the suggestion in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that
    this was a matter of pure speculation is not reconcilable  with  either
    the evidence that was before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Froom,  or  the
    Respondent's own policy.

17.  Moreover, in respect of the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the  historic
    injustice, it seems that the Grounds are irreconcilable with  the  case
    law in this area, and in particular the guidance recited by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Froom at paragraph 31 of his Decision from the  decision
    in Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 00567 (IAC), and in particular the following from the head note at
    paragraph (4):

          "Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but
         for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled  in
         the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of  the
         Article 8 proportionality  assessment  in  an  Appellant's  favour,
         where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  entry
         clearance  officer  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest   in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy."

18.  It is clear  that  the  case  law  has  now  established  that  a  very
    considerable weight is indeed to be accorded to the notion of  historic
    injustice.  In those circumstances I reject  this  particular  line  of
    challenge as being essentially fundamentally misconceived.

19.  The third line of challenge advanced on behalf  of  the  Respondent  by
    way  of  the  Grounds  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's
    consideration of proportionality with reference to the  fact  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules, and also with regard
    to the public interest considerations pursuant to section 117A-D of the
    2002 Act.

20.  To a certain extent this line of challenge must be read down  with  the
    observations in respect of proportionality that I have just referred to
    in Ghising. In any event, it seems to me that in substance  -  contrary
    to the submission in the Grounds of Appeal -  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did give consideration to the public interest considerations  set
    out in section 117B: see in particular paragraphs  33  and  34  of  the
    Decision.   Indeed,  Mr   Nath   very   helpfully   and   realistically
    acknowledged that on the face of it the Judge had had  regard  to  such
    matters in the course of reaching his decision in the appeal.

21.  Accordingly, I also reject the third line of argument advanced  by  the
    Respondent.

Notice of Decision

22.  I find no error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Accordingly the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom stands: the
    Appellant's appeal remains allowed.

23.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

