
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10539/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2018                       |On 02 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                GUNIC KALONGI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Gunic Kalongi, was born on 15 April 1998 and is  a  male
    citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  By a decision dated
    21 September 2015,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  refused  the
    application of the appellant, claiming to be  the  dependent  child  of
    Pitshonna Mafuta, a British  citizen  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the
    sponsor)  on  the  grounds  that  the  claimed  relationship  and  sole
    responsibility had not been established and that there were no  serious
    or compelling family or other considerations which made the appellant's
    exclusion  undesirable.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Rosemary Bradshaw) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    1 June 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   the   Entry   Clearance   Officer
    (represented by a Presenting Officer, Ms Hopkinson) accepted  that  DNA
    evidence had established  that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  were
    related as child and mother as claimed.   The  only  issue  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  was,  therefore,  whether   the   appellant   had
    established that  sole  responsibility  rested  with  his  mother  (the
    sponsor) or whether there were serious and compelling family  or  other
    considerations  rendering  his  exclusion  from  the   United   Kingdom
    undesirable.  The sole  ground  of  appeal,  under  the  2002  Act  (as
    amended), is on the basis that the decision of the ECO had led a breach
    of Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellant lives with his sister in DRC.  On  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellant complains that the  judge  had  overlooked  the
    fact that the appellant lives with  another  minor,  his  sister.   The
    judge found that paragraph 297(1)(f) of HC 395  (as  amended)  was  not
    satisfied in this instance:

         (f)  one parent or a relative is present and settled in the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care;

 4. The appellant argues that, although he has somewhere to live in DRC and
    a "small level of financial support from the sponsor", he does not have
    the "necessary care of an adult".  In the United Kingdom,  pursuant  to
    her own policy, the Secretary of State  would  not  allow  a  child  to
    remain in such a situation; for the same reasons, the respondent should
    not be permitted to leave a child  abroad  in  these  conditions  where
    there is an application for settlement.  The  grounds  also  point  out
    that the judge acknowledged that the sponsor and her husband would  not
    be able to go and live in South Africa nor would it be  reasonable  for
    them to return to the DRC.

 5. It is clear from the decision  that  the  judge  has  looked  first  at
    whether or not the appellant met the requirements of HC 395.   She  was
    correct to take that approach.  Having found that the appellant did not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, this was considered  as
    a relevant factor by the judge in her Article 8 analysis.

 6. I find that the judge was well aware that the appellant, although  aged
    19 at the date of the hearing before her, should be considered a  minor
    because he was under the age of 18 when he made the  application  which
    is the subject of this appeal.  That much is clear from [12], where the
    judge reminds herself of  the  need  to  consider  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The  judge  also  noted
    [15] that the appellant was "fully able to be independent if he chooses
    to be".  In particular, she recorded the fact that the appellant  lives
    with his grandparents and that there was no obvious reason why  he  had
    left their home; the sponsor in her evidence was unable to explain this
    move.  At [43], the judge took the view that the sponsor would be  able
    to  visit  the  appellant  in  DRC  where  he  had  living  nearby  his
    grandmother and also the company of his sister with  whom  he  resided.
    The fact that the sister was also a minor does not appear to have  been
    submitted to the judge at the hearing.  Instead, the judge  found  that
    the appellant is "receiving adequate physical and emotional care  as  I
    have no cogent evidence to the contrary".  She was satisfied  that  the
    current status quo "can continue".  She was  also  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was "living with a close  family  relative  (and  has  always
    done) and has  been  provided  for  by  his  grandmother  in  the  past
    certainly with financial assistance from the  sponsor".   She  was  not
    satisfied that there were "unmet needs that  should  be  catered  for".



 7. As I have noted above, the argument that the appellant  should  not  be
    allowed to remain living with his minor sister does not appear to  have
    been raised with Judge Bradshaw.  Indeed, before the Upper Tribunal, Mr
    Medley-Daley, who appeared before  both  Tribunals  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, concentrated his submission on the assertion that the  judge
    had not paid proper attention to the fact that  the  appellant  himself
    had been a minor for the purposes of the appeal.  As I  have  indicated
    above,  that  submission  cannot  stand.   So  far  as  the  sister  is
    concerned, I do not accept the submission that the  appellant  must  be
    granted entry clearance because he is not under the supervision  of  an
    adult in the DRC.  That is plainly not true; it is  apparent  from  the
    judge's findings that, although the appellant does not live in the same
    property as his grandmother, she continues to have a close  involvement
    with him and a supervisory role.  I agree with Judge Bradshaw  that  it
    is significant that the appellant (for reasons  which  are  not  clear)
    himself chose to leave his grandmother's home to live with his  sister.
    That appears to have been a change in the arrangements with  which  all
    parties were content, including the sponsor and  the  grandmother,  the
    clear implication being that the grandmother maintained  a  supervisory
    role.  It is my view that Judge Bradshaw has  considered  the  evidence
    carefully and has taken into account all relevant  circumstances.   She
    has reached a decision on the evidence which was available to her.  She
    was entitled  to  find  [44]  that  there  was  nothing  compelling  or
    exceptional in the circumstances of the appellant and his family  which
    would lead the Tribunal to  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
