
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11984/2018
                                                HU/11986/2018, HU/11989/2018
                                                HU/11992/2018, HU/11995/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   I) pow
                                   II) tto
                                  III) pto
                                   IV) eao
                                   V) tmo
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pickup, promulgated on 14th September  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  11th  September  2018.   In  the  decision,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants appear in five linked appeals.  They are all citizens of
    Nigeria.  They comprise a single family  unit.   They  consist  of  the
    mother, father, and three minor children, and their dates of birth  are
    1st July 1979, 4th July 1981, 28th October 2010, 2nd March 2012 and 9th
    October 2014 respectively.  The children, at the date of  the  hearing,
    were aged 7, 6, and 3  years,  and  were  all  born  in  the  UK.   The
    Appellants' appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing their claim to remain in the UK on the basis of  their  family
    life, and the decision appealed against is dated 18th May 2018.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The First and Second Appellants  met  in  the  UK,  although  both  are
    citizens of Nigeria.  The First Appellant, the mother, entered  the  UK
    on 23rd December 2008 with leave as a family visitor.   She  failed  to
    return after six months.  The  Second  Appellant,  the  father  of  the
    children, entered as a student on  16th  October  2009,  and  following
    further extensions of stay as a student, which expired in 2010, he also
    failed to return to Nigeria, and became  an  illegal  overstayer.   The
    children were born thereafter.  Then in a number of  applications  that
    they made to remain in this  country,  including  two  judicial  review
    applications in 2017, which were refused, they also  failed  to  attend
    for an interview on three occasions in  2015  with  the  Nigerian  High
    Commission, to facilitate their return to Nigeria.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a detailed, careful, and comprehensive  decision,  the  judge  found
    himself, on the day of the hearing on 11th  September  2018,  with  the
    Appellants appearing unrepresented.  He made it clear  that  he  "would
    help them present their case and ensure that they had  the  opportunity
    to put all the relevant matters before  the  tribunal"  (paragraph  6).
    The First Appellant gave evidence that she could not return to  Nigeria
    because there were very significant obstacles to their  integration  to
    life there and there would be insurmountable  obstacles  to  continuing
    family life in Nigeria (paragraph 8).  They went on to  say  that  they
    would be destitute and the children would end up on  the  streets,  and
    there was also a risk of kidnapping (paragraph 17).

 5. However, when the judge asked both of the First and Second  Appellants,
    as to why they had  overstayed,  the  First  Appellant  "has  given  no
    explanation for not leaving within the limits of her leave"  (paragraph
    22), and were clearly  determined  to  remain  here.   When  questioned
    further, "the first appellant appeared evasive, and unwilling to answer
    straight questions with straight answers" (paragraph 25).

 6. The judge went on to conclude that:-

         "the picture painted by the parents of life with  the  children  in
         Nigeria is not as bleak or desperate as they have claimed.  I  find
         that they have exaggerated  concerns  about  kidnapping  and  other
         difficulties.  The family will be returning together and will  have
         at least some element of family network of support as they  settle"
         (paragraph 32).

 7. In considering the best interests of the children, the  judge  observed
    that:-

         "The matter is finely balanced with significant  features  pointing
         to their best interests being to  live  in  the  country  of  their
         nationality, ethnic and cultural  heritage  background.   Even  the
         elder child is still relatively young and children  are  adaptable.
         They will have the support of their  parents  and,  I  have  found,
         there is some family so that there will be a network of support  in
         their integration" (paragraph 36).

 8. On the other hand, the judge also took the view that:-

         "I find that the best interests of the children, either together or
         individually, are on balance to remain in the UK  to  continue  the
         only life they have known and where the  older  two  children  have
         commenced education.  Life in the  UK  is  obviously  going  to  be
         preferable that the uncertainties and perhaps less comfortable life
         in Nigeria than that which they might look forward to  enjoying  in
         the UK" (paragraph 37).

 9. However, in asking the question, whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to return with their parents, the judge was of  the
    view  that  the  overwhelming  public  interest  rendered  the  removal
    reasonable (see paragraphs 39 to 41).

10. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

11. The Grounds of Application state that the judge has misapplied the law,
    and has come to the wrong conclusions with respect to the  position  of
    the children, given that they would not be safe in  Nigeria  and  would
    have no support network.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 17th  January
    2019, with the observation that:-

         "The judge gave entirely sound  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
         first appellant had not established there would be any  significant
         health difficulties and that the two adult appellants had very weak
         cases".

13. However, given that the Third Appellant (the youngest child) was over 7
    years of age, the judge  was  obliged  by  principles  set  out  in  MA
    (Pakistan) to consider whether there were strong  or  powerful  reasons
    for refusing to grant leave to remain.   The  judge  appeared  to  have
    started from the position that it was for the Appellants to prove  such
    strong reasons.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 3rd April 2019 the  Appellants  were  again
    unrepresented.  The First Appellant, POW, attended court  with  two  of
    her children, and submitted that the judge had ignored  the  fact  that
    the children would not be safe in Nigeria.  She, in effect, relied upon
    the Grounds of Application before the Upper Tribunal.  For his part, Mr
    McVeety  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to   the
    conclusions that he did.  He had set out the facts of the matter before
    him carefully.   He  had  applied  the  case  law  in  a  diligent  and
    conscientious manner.  It had been recognised by  the  judge  that  the
    best interests of the children lay in remaining in the UK,  given  that
    life in this country was the only life that they had  known  (paragraph
    37).  However, the judge had then applied the guidance in  the  leading
    cases, such as Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  and  observed  that  the  issue
    ultimately is one of "proportionality", such that the fact that  family
    life in this country had been built up on the  basis  of  circumstances
    which were "precarious" (see paragraph 49), meant that the overwhelming
    importance of immigration control, as a  public  interest  requirement,
    could not be overlooked.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I should set aside  the  decision.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion with some considerable  reluctance.   The  decision  by  the
    judge, as recognised by Dr Storey,  in  granting  permission,  was  one
    where he "gave entirely  sound  reasons"  for  coming  to  the  factual
    decisions that  he  did.   The  reference  to  the  case  law  is  also
    commendably accurate and well-placed.

16. However, the reason why permission was given was  that  the  judge  had
    failed to quote the matter of the basis that, the onus in showing  that
    there were strong or powerful reasons  to  refuse  to  grant  leave  to
    remain where a child was in the UK for over seven years, lay  not  upon
    the Appellant, but upon the Secretary of State.  The judge in this case
    has stated that:-

         "I find that this is a case of precarious family  life  as  far  as
         continuing it in the UK is concerned, and  that  therefore  a  very
         strong or compelling claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in immigration control" (paragraph 49).

17. There has been an  absence  of  a  consideration  of  the  Home  Office
    guidance in this respect.  This appears in the "Immigration-Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes  August  2015".
    The guidance that is given is to the effect that:-

         "the requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the date of the application, recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the  UK
         ...".

18. The guidance goes on to say that  in  these  circumstances,  where  the
    balance would be more in favour of  a  child  such  that  it  would  be
    generally unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK,  the
    position is that "strong reasons would be required in order to refuse a
    case with continuous UK residence for more than 7 years".




19. The Tribunal decision  in  SF  and  others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) is also instructive  because  here  the
    Tribunal held (at paragraphs  10  to  12)  that  in  the  interests  of
    consistent decision making:-

         "where there is  clear  guidance  which  covers  a  case  where  an
         assessment  has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  guidance   clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it".

20.  For these reasons only, I find that there is an error of law.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007), such that I  should
    set aside the decision  and  remake  the  decision.   In  remaking  the
    decision I direct that this matter be remitted back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge Pickup, pursuant
    to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

22. An anonymity direction is made.

23. The appeals are allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss

