
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11831/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Held Remotely at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|by UK Skype                                   |                              |
|On 13 April 2021                              |On 13 May 2021                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                Mr abdul rauf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsood, Counsel instructed by Julia & Rana
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies sent on 20 November 2019.  Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 18 June 2020.

 2. The hearing was held remotely and neither party objected to the hearing
    being held in this manner.  Both  parties  participated  by  Skype  for
    Business.  I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held
    because it  was  not  practicable  and  all  of  the  issues  could  be
    determined in a remote hearing.  Both parties confirmed at the  end  of
    the hearing that the hearing was fair.

Background

 3. The appellant is a 65-year-old national of Pakistan who claimed to have
    entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2000.  He subsequently  claimed
    asylum and his claim was refused on 19 March 2001.  An  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on  15  May  2001.   On  19  May  2010  the
    applicant made a human rights claim.  A second human rights  claim  was
    made on 3 April 2012 with further applications being made on 20 January
    2014, 17 March 2014 and 20 June 2014.  All of these  applications  were
    either rejected or refused with no right of appeal.  On 9  April  2019,
    the appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the
    basis of his private life in the United Kingdom pursuant to  Article  8
    ECHR.  The application was refused on 26 June 2019.

 4. The applicant claims that at the date of the application  he  had  been
    residing in the United Kingdom for approximately nineteen years and  he
    has established a private life in the United Kingdom in accordance with
    Article 8  ECHR.   He  asserts  that  his  removal  to  Pakistan  would
    constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  private  life
    because of  his  age  and  ill  health.   There  are  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Pakistan because he has lost touch with
    his family there.

The position of the respondent

 5. The respondent asserts that the appellant cannot meet  the  immigration
    rules in respect of long residence.  He has not  demonstrated  that  he
    has resided in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of  twenty
    years. In particular, he  has  not  presented  acceptable  evidence  to
    demonstrate that he was present in the United Kingdom between  2001  to
    2010.  Secondly, it is not accepted that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration to Pakistan  because  he  spent  the  vast
    majority of his life in Pakistan including his formative years,  speaks
    Urdu and has failed to demonstrate that he  has  lost  all  social  and
    family ties with his home country.   It  is  considered  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the appellant such as to warrant a grant of  leave  to
    remain outside of the immigration rules.

 6. In correspondence between the Secretary of State  and  the  appellant's
    MP, the respondent previously asserted  that  the  appellant  left  the
    United Kingdom voluntarily on 3 May 2006, flying to Islamabad.  In  the
    refusal decision it is said that even were the appellant not to be this
    person,  the  appellant  has  not  presented  sufficient  evidence   to
    demonstrate his presence in the  United  Kingdom  from  2001  to  2010.
    Supporting statements from  friends  were  considered  but  not  deemed
    significant enough to accept his presence in the UK during this period.
     Further, despite the fact that the appellant has a heart condition and
    has undergone several operations, it is considered that Pakistan has  a
    functioning healthcare system and that treatment is available  for  the
    appellant's condition in Pakistan and an Article 3 ECHR  medical  claim
    is not made out.  Any relationships with friends in the United  Kingdom
    can be maintained from Pakistan.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. It was not asserted by the appellant' representative that the appellant
    could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) because it  was
    accepted that the appellant had not lived continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least twenty  years.   The  judge  turned  to  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the immigration rules to determine whether there would be
    very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's   integration   into
    Pakistan. The judge referred to the tests  in  Kamara  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and SA  (Afghanistan)
    v SSHD EWCA Civ 53.  The judge found the appellant to be  not  entirely
    candid because he appeared reluctant to  volunteer  details  about  his
    personal circumstances and  there  were  some  inconsistencies  in  his
    evidence.  On this basis, the judge did not accept that  the  appellant
    had lost touch with his family in Pakistan.  The judge found  that  the
    appellant is 64, is in fairly good  health,  can  speak  Urdu  and  his
    private  life  is  overwhelmingly  with  friends  from  the   Pakistani
    diaspora.  The judge found that the appellant has not demonstrated that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in
    Pakistan.

 8. The judge then turned to  the  wider  Article  8  ECHR  proportionality
    assessment.  The judge noted that it  is  in  the  public  interest  to
    maintain effective immigration control. The  judge  took  into  account
    that the appellant understands some English and that he  has  not  been
    reliant on public funds although he has had access to  the  benefit  of
    substantial free NHS services. The judge found that the  appellant  may
    have worked but he has not paid taxes.  The  judge  found  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life formed when a person has  been
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The judge noted that  the  appellant
    has attempted to regularise his status but his applications  have  been
    refused on five occasions and he has never had any leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  The judge concluded that the  appellant's  private
    life in the United Kingdom is not so strong as to outweigh  the  public
    interest in immigration control.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that
    there were  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  such  that  the
    refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant.

 9. The judge found that the appellant has only  spent  ten  years  in  the
    United Kingdom between 2000 to 2001 and 2010 to the present.  The judge
    did not make any concrete finding on whether the appellant had left the
    United Kingdom and returned to Pakistan in 2006.

Grant of Permission

10. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on  the  basis  that  the
    judge failed to take  into  account  the  implicit  acceptance  by  the
    respondent that the appellant may  have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 2001 to 2006, if  she  was  correct  that  he  departed  on  an
    Emergency Travel Document in 2006. The judge also failed to  take  into
    account evidence in the appellant's bundle which cast serious doubt  on
    the fact that the appellant had been removed from the United Kingdom in
    2006.  She decided that all grounds were arguable.

Preliminary Issue - New Evidence

11. The appellant made  an  application  to  adduce  new  evidence  of  his
    residence in the United Kingdom between  2001  to  2010.  The  evidence
    consisted of dental records from between 2005 and  2021.  The  evidence
    was accompanied by a Rule 15(2A) notice.  It is said  that  the  reason
    the evidence was not submitted earlier is  because  the  appellant  has
    memory  problems  after  heart  surgery  and  because  of  the   strong
    medication he takes. He did not realise that  there  were  longstanding
    dental records until February 2021 when he visited his dentist.

12. Ms Cunha submitted that the respondent had concerns about the  evidence
    in any event  given  that  four  pages  were  missing  and  the  dental
    appointments from 2005 onwards were all said to  have  taken  place  at
    midnight.

13. When deciding whether to admit the evidence I had regard to Rule 15(2A)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which state:

         "15(2A)  In an asylum case or an immigration case

                  (a)  if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider
                      evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal,
                      that party must send or deliver a notice to the Upper
                      Tribunal and any other party -

                      (i)  indicating the nature of the evidence; and

                      (ii)     explaining why it was not submitted to the
                           First-tier Tribunal; and

                  (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that was
                      not before the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper
                      Tribunal must have regard to whether there has been
                      an unreasonable delay of producing that evidence."

14. The evidence was produced on 8 April 2021 shortly before the  error  of
    law hearing and eighteen months after the original  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which was heard on 19 November  2019.   Given  that
    the evidence is said to  cover  the  period  from  2005  onwards  which
    includes periods which are at issue in this appeal; that the  appellant
    has made five applications on the basis of his residence in the  United
    Kingdom and is represented by a solicitor; the fact that he has a  poor
    memory did not seem to me to be a reasonable explanation for  why  this
    evidence was not placed before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I do not admit the further evidence.  The appellant was represented  at
    his appeal and produced statements from himself and  his  witnesses  as
    well as other documents in relation to  his  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom  including  medical  records.    There   is   no   satisfactory
    explanation why this dental evidence could not have been adduced  prior
    to the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Further,  the  issue
    before me was whether the judge had materially  erred  in  law  on  the
    basis of the evidence before  her  and  since  this  evidence  was  not
    produced at the appeal it does not inform that issue.   Finally,  I  am
    not satisfied that the evidence would have made a  material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal because it does not cover the period  2001
    to 2005. Having considered the overriding objectives of  the  Procedure
    Rules, I am satisfied that it is fair and in the interests  of  justice
    to refuse to admit the evidence because  it  is  not  relevant  to  the
    lawfulness of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It  is  open  to
    the appellant to submit the new evidence in support of a fresh claim or
    application.

The Grounds of Challenge

16. The grounds of challenge are set out in the grounds to the  application
    and further clarified and  expanded  on  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument.  They are as follows:

      1) The judge has failed to resolve a material issue.  The judge failed
         to make a finding as to whether the appellant left the UK in  2006.
         There is a conflict in the evidence and a finding on this issue  is
         necessary to determine how long the appellant has lived in the UK.

      2) The finding that the  appellant  was  not  present  in  the  United
         Kingdom between 2001 to 2010  is  unreasoned  and  irrational.   No
         evidence was presented that  the  appellant  was  absent  from  the
         United Kingdom in this period and at most it was only open  to  the
         judge to find that there was insufficient evidence  before  her  to
         persuade her that the appellant was present during that period.  By
         finding that the appellant was not in the  United  Kingdom  between
         2001 and 2010 the judge has gone beyond this and made a finding not
         open to her on the evidence.

      3) The judge has failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  she
         rejected the evidence of the supporting witnesses.

Respondent's Position - Rule 24 Response

17. The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. It is said that  grounds
    1 and 2 complain about the judge's findings on the  appellant's  length
    of residence in the United Kingdom.  The burden of proof rests  on  the
    appellant to demonstrate that he meets the immigration  rules  and  the
    judge's self-direction  at  [7]  was  correct  in  this  respect.   The
    appellant  cannot  simultaneously  seek  to  take  advantage   of   the
    respondent's claim that he was encountered in 2006 to  demonstrate  his
    presence from 2001 to 2006 and yet at the same time claim this was  not
    him.  It is immaterial whether the respondent could not show  that  the
    appellant was encountered in 2006 in the airport because in  any  event
    the appellant has failed to demonstrate  his  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom  for  the  years  in  question  between  2001  and  2010.   The
    respondent considers that any errors would not  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal under  the  immigration  rules.
    As at the date of the hearing the appellant had not been here for  over
    twenty years and any further analysis under the rules or under a  wider
    application of Article 8 ECHR should have been conducted on  the  basis
    that the appellant did not meet the immigration rules.

Decision on the Error of Law

18. The problem for the appellant in this appeal is that the starting point
    both at the date of the application and the date of the promulgation of
    the judge's decision is that the appellant had not acquired  20  year's
    continuous residence  in  the  UK  and  could  not  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules. There is no challenge to  the  judge's  findings  in
    respect of 'very significant' obstacles and it is not asserted  by  the
    appellant that  the  judge's  Article  8  ECHR  balancing  exercise  is
    unlawful. In these circumstances it is difficult to see how  any  error
    could have been material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  Nevertheless,
    for the sake of completeness I will  consider  the  alleged  errors  in
    turn.

Ground 1

19. Previously, the appellant's representative argued  that  the  appellant
    should benefit from the 'legacy exercise'.  The  respondent's  position
    was that the appellant did not benefit from the exercise because he had
    been encountered at the airport leaving for  Islamabad  in  2006.   The
    appellant requested a copy of  his  Home  Office  file.  The  file  was
    reproduced in the appellant's bundle and was before the  judge.   There
    was evidence in the file that the respondent could not be sure that  it
    was in fact the appellant who boarded a plane to Islamabad in May 2006.
     This is because  the  appellant's  name  is  a  common  name  and  the
    references in the file include references to an Iraqi national  of  the
    same name born on the same date of  birth  as  the  appellant  but  who
    entered the United Kingdom many years  previously.   From  this  it  is
    apparent that the respondent herself has some doubt as  to  whether  it
    was the appellant who left the United Kingdom in 2006.

20. Mr Maqsood's submission is that the judge failed to resolve this  issue
    which is relevant to the length of time the appellant has lived in  the
    UK.

21. I have considered the wording of the Secretary of State's refusal.  The
    Secretary of State's refusal was on the basis that it was not  relevant
    whether the appellant left the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  because  the
    burden was on the appellant to demonstrate  that  he  had  been  living
    continuously in the United  Kingdom  between  2001  and  2010  and  the
    respondent was not satisfied there was sufficient evidence  before  her
    in this respect.

22. I am not satisfied that the judge needed to resolve this issue in order
    to lawfully determine the appeal.  It  was  for  the  judge  to  decide
    whether there was sufficient evidence before her to  satisfy  her  that
    the appellant had been continuously resident in the United Kingdom  for
    20 years. Even had I found this to be an error however,  I  would  have
    found that it was not material for the reasons set out below.

Ground 2

23. Moving on to Mr Maqsood's second ground, I am  in  agreement  that  the
    judge went further than finding that there was insufficient evidence to
    persuade her that the appellant had been present in the UK between 2001
    to 2010.

24. At [19], she states;

         "looked at in the round, I found as a fact and on balance that  the
         appellant was not in the United Kingdom between 2001 and 2010"

25. This finding is replicated in the judge's analysis of the wider Article
    8 ECHR proportionality exercise where she finds that the appellant  has
    only spent ten years in the United Kingdom from 2000 to 2001  and  from
    2010 to the present.  I am satisfied that this was a finding  that  was
    not  open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence  before  her.  There   was
    insufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to  demonstrate  that   the
    appellant had left the United Kingdom in 2001 or that he  had  returned
    in 2010.  The respondent has not made this  assertion  in  the  refusal
    letter and there was nothing to indicate in  the  documentary  evidence
    produced by the appellant including his  supporting  medical  evidence,
    witness statements or indeed his  own  Home  Office  file  which  would
    suggest that he had returned to Pakistan for a nine-year period.  I  am
    satisfied  that  this  finding  can  be  categorised  as  perverse  and
    constitutes an error on a point of law.  I turn to the  materiality  of
    the error below.

Ground 3

26. I turn to Ground 3.  Mr Maqsood's argument is that the  judge  has  not
    given satisfactory reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  two
    witnesses who attended the appeal to give evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  The two witnesses both claim to be family  friends  of  the
    appellant who had known him in Pakistan.  Both witnesses  had  provided
    statements in 2012 in support of the appellant's  application  of  that
    time and  both  witnesses  had  prepared  further  statements  for  the
    purposes of the appeal and attended the court to give  evidence.   Both
    witnesses are British citizens working in the United Kingdom  and  both
    claim that the appellant has been residing continuously in  the  United
    Kingdom between the period 2001 to 2010.   The  judge  dealt  with  the
    witnesses' evidence at [17] and [18] where it is said:

         "The appellant's  friends  adopted  their  witness  statements  and
         stated that they knew the appellant in Pakistan.   He  is  64-year-
         old.  They are respectively 35 and 41 years old.  Mr Rehman claimed
         to have known of him/knew him in Pakistan and met him here in  2003
         and to be a distant relative.

         Mr Zaman stated that  he  knew  the  appellant  in  Pakistan.   The
         witnesses asserted (as did numerous  testimonials  in  the  bundle)
         that he had never left the United Kingdom since 2000.   They  claim
         to have come from the same town/village in Pakistan but  there  was
         not proof of this to the required standard or of their jobs or that
         they  regularly  gave  the  appellant  financial  support  or  e.g.
         photographs of them with him in the seventeen years they claimed to
         have known him."

27. Mr Maqsood's submission  is  that  rejecting  the  witnesses'  evidence
    because they had not provided evidence that they had come from the same
    town or village or provided evidence of their jobs was not relevant  to
    the issue of whether they had known the appellant in the United Kingdom
    over the last seventeen years or so.  He submitted that the reasons for
    rejecting  the  witnesses'  evidence   were   not   adequate   in   the
    circumstances.  He also pointed to the fact that the respondent did not
    attend the appeal and did not cross-examine the witnesses.

28. Ms Cunha submitted that the judge found the appellant to be lacking  in
    credibility in general and gave adequate reasons for this and that this
    was sufficient to reject the evidence of the witnesses.

29. At [13]  the  judge  referred  to  the  appellant  being  reluctant  to
    volunteer details of his personal circumstances and to  inconsistencies
    in his evidence.  The inconsistencies related to the appellant claiming
    at different times that  he  had  either  three  or  four  children  in
    Pakistan and claiming that his wife had died but not  proving  this  to
    the relevant standard.  The judge also found at [14] that,

         "He claimed to have lost all contact with his family and  gave  the
         impression that he had abandoned them so they would reject  him  if
         he returned to Pakistan but as recently as 2014 (page 160)  he  was
         reported by a clinician  at  Croydon  Hospital  as  worrying  about
         having lost his job as a  dry  cleaner  and  about  his  family  in
         Pakistan."

30. Ms Cunha's submission is that the judge's finding  that  the  appellant
    was not a truthful witness is sustainable.

31. I have concerns about the manner in which the appellant's evidence  was
    treated.  The judge refers on more than one occasion to the appellant's
    evidence  in  his  witness  statements  and  his   oral   evidence   as
    "assertion".  At paragraph [15] she states,

         "Although the respondent appeared to accept that the claim that the
         appellant left the United Kingdom on 3  May  2006,  (page  60  GCID
         minute), could not be substantiated, it remains the case  that  the
         appellant has not shown other than by assertion (his witnesses also
         merely asserted this) that he was present  in  the  United  Kingdom
         between 2001 when his appeal rights were exhausted  and  2010  when
         previous solicitors applied on his behalf for  consideration  under
         the legacy scheme ..."  ( My emphasis)

32. I am not satisfied that the judge's characterisation of the appellant's
    and the witnesses' evidence as mere assertion indicates proper scrutiny
    of this evidence.  The witness statement evidence and oral evidence  is
    primary evidence and the judge must decide if she  accepts  or  rejects
    the evidence and give adequate reasons for doing so.




33. However, looking at the decision as a whole, there were  various  other
    factors to which the judge was entitled to give significant weight when
    finding that the appellant was not a truthful witness.  These  included
    the appellant's lack of transparency, his  reluctance  to  answer  some
    questions,  the  fact  that  there  was   a   significant   amount   of
    documentation in respect of him from 2010 onwards in  contrast  to  the
    period 2001 to 2010 despite the  fact  that  he  has  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully at all times, as well as an  obvious  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence in that in 2014 the appellant referred  to  being  in  contact
    with his family whereas in his application, he stated that he had  lost
    all contact with them since arriving in the  United  Kingdom  in  2000.
    This inconsistency would have been apparent to  the  appellant  himself
    prior to the hearing because he tendered this evidence, but he did  not
    deal with it.  In these circumstances, the judge was properly  able  to
    give less  weight  to  the  appellant's  own  evidence  and  has  given
    sustainable reasons for doing so.




34. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the judge has erred in  her  approach
    to the evidence of the witnesses. Even if the appellant was  found  not
    to be a truthful witness  in  particular  with  regard  to  his  family
    circumstances, the judge was still tasked with assessing the  witnesses
    evidence.  The witnesses both provided statements in 2012 and  in  2019
    as well as giving oral evidence. Their evidence  was  consistent.  They
    were not cross-examined.  It was not put to them  that  they  were  not
    telling the truth.


35. Mr Maqsood referred to  a  video  of  the  appellant  and  the  witness
    together being attached to the appeal  bundle  at  pages  346  to  348.
    However, neither an index for these pages, nor this evidence was in the
    judge's bundle and  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  this  evidence  was
    actually produced to the judge or that the judge erred  when  she  said
    there was no photographic evidence  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the witnesses.


36. I am not satisfied that the witnesses' failure to provide  evidence  of
    their employment in the United Kingdom or that they came from the  same
    village as the appellant are adequate reasons to reject the  witnesses'
    evidence  about  their  relationship  with  the  appellant  and   their
    knowledge of his residence in the UK.  There is  no  reference  to  the
    judge asking more  questions  of  them  nor  that  their  evidence  was
    challenged in any way at all, nor found to be inconsistent. I find that
    the judge has erred in her approach to the evidence  of  the  witnesses
    and has failed to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the  supporting
    witnesses' evidence.




37. In summary, I am not satisfied that it was an error for the  judge  not
    to make a concrete finding as to whether the appellant left the  United
    Kingdom in 2006, but I am satisfied that the judge has made  a  finding
    which was not open to her on the evidence (that the appellant left  the
    United  Kingdom  between  2001  and  2010)  and  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of the witnesses.

Materiality


38. These errors are immaterial to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  for  the
    following reasons.




39. In the original grounds of appeal, it is asserted that the judge failed
    to give proper weight to the exceptional  circumstances  of  this  case
    which are said to be his  strong  relationship  with  his  friends  and
    family in the United Kingdom, his good character,  his  involvement  in
    his community, his poor health and the length  of  time  he  has  lived
    outside Pakistan.  This ground was not explicitly  not  pursued  by  Mr
    Maqsood.




40. Mr Maqsood asserted that the failure to resolve the issue about whether
    the appellant  returned  to  Pakistan  in  2006  was  material  to  the
    assessment of proportionality because had the respondent  not  made  an
    error in this respect, the appellant  could  have  benefited  from  the
    legacy application.  Mr Maqsood was unable  to  demonstrate  that  this
    point  had  either  been  made  in  the  original  application  or   in
    submissions  before  the  Tribunal  and  in  circumstances  where  this
    argument was not raised at all before the First-tier  Tribunal  I  find
    that it is not relevant.  In any event, I  am  not  satisfied  for  the
    reasons set out above that the failure to resolve  this  issue  was  an
    error.


41. Had the judge not erred in finding  that  the  appellant  left  the  UK
    between 2001 and 2010 and accepted the appellant's witness's  evidence,
    the judge may have found that the appellant has been residing in the UK
    for the last 19 years. Mr Maqsood submitted that this would have had  a
    bearing on the outcome of the proportionality assessment.

42. I do not agree. At the date of the promulgation of the  decision,  even
    taking the case at its highest and accepting  that  the  appellant  had
    been continuously resident in the UK for a  period  of  19  years,  the
    appellant manifestly could not demonstrate that he had been residing in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of twenty  years.  He  could
    not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. This  was  conceded
    by his representative at the hearing.  Secondly, the  judge  has  given
    adequate and sustainable reasons as to  why  there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant  returning  to  Pakistan.   The
    judge referred to the correct legal test in relation to  the  appellant
    being 'enough of an insider'.  The judge  pointed  to  the  appellant's
    knowledge of the language and culture in Pakistan and  his  friendships
    and ties to the Pakistani diaspora in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    took into account the appellant's age and health and  was  entitled  on
    the basis of her sustainable negative credibility  assessment  to  find
    that the appellant does have family in Pakistan who can assist him.  It
    was not asserted that the appellant would be unable to  access  medical
    treatment in Pakistan.  It is not asserted in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    that the judge's approach to 276ADE(vi) or her findings in  respect  of
    the lack of very significant obstacles to the  appellant  returning  to
    Pakistan was erroneous.

43. In circumstances where the appellant could not meet  any  of  the  long
    residence requirements of the immigration rules, the judge was required
    to take into account  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control and  the  factors  at  s117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  judge  has  carried  out  this
    exercise, taking into account all of the relevant factors. Even had the
    judge accepted that the appellant had been  living  unlawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom for the previous 19 years, it would have been  incumbent
    on the judge  to  give  little  weight  to  a  private  life  that  was
    established when the appellant was  here  unlawfully.   The  judge  was
    entitled to give weight to the fact that the appellant entered  the  UK
    unlawfully, has remained in the UK unlawfully  at  all  times  and  has
    repeatedly made applications to remain in the United  Kingdom,  all  of
    which have been refused. The judge manifestly took  into  account  that
    the appellant has a heart condition for which  he  is  able  to  obtain
    treatment in Pakistan, that he speaks some  English  and  that  he  has
    benefited from receiving extensive  medical  treatment  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Even with 19 years residence, in these circumstances, the only
    rational outcome in this appeal was for the judge to have found that it
    is not unjustifiably  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan and  that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control outweighs the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.

44. On this basis, I find that although there have been errors on  a  point
    of law by the judge they are not material to the outcome of the appeal.

45. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

46. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        R J Owens                          Date 30 April 2021


Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

