
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11308/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 5 February 2020                   |On 9 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Rojay [H]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Karnik, instructed by Citywide Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr [H]'s appeal  against  a
decision to refuse his human rights claim and to deport him from the UK.

For the purposes of this decision, we shall refer to the Secretary of  State
as the respondent and Mr [H] as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions
as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 24 August  1997.  He  arrived
in the UK on 29 June 2001, at the age of three years,  to  join  his  mother
who had previously arrived  on  19  December  1998  as  a  visitor  and  had
overstayed. He was given six months leave to enter as a  visitor,  until  28
December  2001,  and  he  then  also  overstayed  his  visa.  Following   an
application made on 16 February 2004  the  appellant's  mother  was  granted
indefinite leave to remain, with the appellant being  granted  the  same  as
her dependant, on 6 February 2009.

From 20 May 2014 the appellant received  various  cautions  and  convictions
for possession, and possession with intent to  supply,  class  B  (cannabis)
and class A drugs, culminating in convictions in 2016 for  possession  of  a
controlled drug with intent to supply - class A, crack  cocaine,  for  which
he was sentenced on 18 November 2016 to 42 months' imprisonment in  a  young
offenders institution and possession of a controlled  drug  with  intent  to
supply - class A, heroin, for which he was sentenced on the same day  to  24
months' imprisonment in a young offenders institution, to run  concurrently.
In addition, on 6  February  2017  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  three
months' imprisonment in a young offenders institution, to run  concurrently,
for possession of a knife/ sharp pointed article in a public place and on  3
December 2018 he was sentenced  to  six  months'  to  run  concurrently  for
possessing an item without written authority in prison (a mobile phone).

Following the  sentencing  on  18  November  2016,  the  respondent  made  a
decision, on 30 November 2016, to deport the appellant and  invited  him  to
make representations in a section 120  notice  which  he  did,  in  a  human
rights claim. The respondent then made a  Deportation  Order  under  section
32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on 13 April 2017 and on 24 April 2017  made
a decision to refuse the appellant's  human  rights  claim.  The  claim  was
initially certified under section 94B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, but following the Supreme  Court  judgment  in  Kiarie  and
Byndloss, R (on the applications of) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2017] UKSC 42 the certification was withdrawn and the  appellant
was given an in-country right of appeal.

In refusing the appellant's human rights claim, in the decision of 24  April
2017, the respondent noted that he had  not  submitted  any  evidence  of  a
relationship with  a  settled  person  and  concluded  that  he  could  not,
therefore,  benefit  from  the  exception  to  deportation  on  family  life
grounds. The respondent considered that,  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
private life, he could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A  as  he
had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life,  he  was  not
socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK  and  there  were  no  very
significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Jamaica.  The   respondent
considered that there were no very compelling circumstances outweighing  the
public interest in the appellant's  deportation  and  that  his  deportation
would accordingly not be in breach of Article 8.

The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 17 June 2019. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Henderson, who heard evidence from six witnesses, namely the appellant,  his
partner, his mother, his friend and  his  friend's  mother  and  his  former
teacher. She noted and accepted the evidence that  the  appellant  had  been
with his partner for six years, since 2013, having met at school, that  they
had a daughter together in  August  2016  and  that  they  had  never  lived
together but intended to do  so  in  the  future.  In  the  absence  of  any
supporting evidence the judge was  unable  to  accept  the  claim  that  the
appellant's partner and child were British. Although she accepted that  they
had a genuine and subsisting relationship, she did not accept that it  would
be unduly harsh for them to live in the  UK  without  the  appellant,  given
that they had never lived together and  that  the  appellant's  relationship
with his daughter had only really developed in the last three  months  since
he was released from prison.  With  regard  to  paragraph  399A,  the  judge
accepted that the appellant had no  significant  connections  with  Jamaica,
having only one relative, an elderly and  frail  grandmother  there,  and  a
step-father who had applied for settlement in the UK.

The judge found that the appellant had been  lawfully  resident  in  the  UK
since obtaining ILR in 2009, which was 10 years  ago.  She  did  not  accept
that the test for 'most of  his  life'  should  be  applied  in  a  strictly
arithmetic way and she accepted that the appellant, who  was  21,  had  been
lawfully in the UK for most of his life. The judge also  accepted  that  the
appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK  and  found  that
he had been rehabilitated and would not re-offend, and she  concluded,  with
regard to the guidance in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v
Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
his integration in Jamaica.  The  judge  did  not  find  there  to  be  very
compelling circumstances over and above those  in  paragraph  399A  but  she
allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds, on the basis that the exception  to
deportation in paragraph  399A  and  section  117C(4)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  Secretary  of
State, on the grounds that the judge's finding on 399A(a) did not  meet  the
criteria which the Court of Appeal considered  applicable  in  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department v SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA  Civ  2112,  namely
that he had lived in the UK for "most of his life", and that the  judge  had
failed to refer to the case of Mwesezi v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1104  when  considering  very  significant
obstacles to integration under paragraph 399A(c) and had failed to  identify
anything that would amount to very significant obstacles to integration.

On 16 August 2019 Resident Judge Appleyard issued a notice of  intention  to
set aside the judge's decision under  Rule  35  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014,  in
relation to the finding on "most  of  his  life"  under  paragraph  399A(a).
However,  following  representations  made  on  behalf  of   the   appellant
objecting to such a course, he granted permission  on  that  and  all  other
grounds on 26 November 2019.

The matter  then  came  before  ourselves  for  a  panel  hearing  and  both
representatives made submissions, relying upon their skeleton arguments.


Hearing and submissions

Mr Lindsay  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her  assessment  of
paragraph 399A(a) and had wrongly found that the test should not be  applied
in an arithmetic way, when there was legal authority to say that  it  should
be. He submitted that, as a matter of public policy, the  relevant  date  to
consider the length of lawful residence was the date of the hearing  and  at
that time the appellant had not spent more than half of  his  life  lawfully
in the UK. The judge therefore made a material  misdirection  and  erred  in
law. Mr Lindsay submitted that the main substance of the  grounds,  however,
was the challenge to the judge's findings on 'very significant obstacles  to
integration'. The judge's finding at [57], that there were "no  familial  or
cultural  links",  was  perverse,  given  her  previous  finding  that   the
appellant had a grandmother and step-father in Jamaica. The judge  ought  to
have found that the appellant could establish a private life in Jamaica,  as
he was in good health and was capable of working.

Mr  Karnik  produced  a  spreadsheet  showing  the  appellant's  length   of
residence in the UK against the period of half  of  his  life,  whereby  his
length of residence fell short of half of his life  by  three  days  at  the
date the judge's decision was promulgated, but exceeded half of his life  by
four days at the time the  Secretary  of  State  made  her  application  for
permission. He submitted that the matter had now become academic and it  was
not relevant for the Secretary of State to pursue it. He relied on the  case
of SM (Pakistan) [2014] UKUT 64 in relation  to  matters  which  had  become
academic and submitted that this ground of appeal  should  never  have  been
brought. As for  the  judge's  finding  that  there  were  very  significant
obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  in  Jamaica,  her  decision  was
thorough  and  comprehensive  and  made  proper   references   to   relevant
authorities. She had not contradicted herself or made inconsistent  findings
and had properly applied the test in Kamara.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
failed to show that the judge's  findings  met  the  high  test  of  showing
perversity.

The legislative framework

The relevant immigration rules are as follows:

    "Deportation and Article 8


    A398. These rules apply where:


    (a)   a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that   his
    deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


    (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made  against
    him to be revoked.


    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and


    (a)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 4 years;


    (b)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


    (c)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because,  in  the  view  of  the
    Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
    a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,


    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.


    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -


    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


         (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
         years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration  decision;
         and in either case


             (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and


             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
             UK without the person who is to be deported; or


    (b)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK,
    and


         (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
         (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was
         not precarious; and


         (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
         country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


         (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
         UK without the person who is to be deported.


    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


    (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of  his
    life; and


    (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


    (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
    the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

Consideration and findings

We find significant merit in the submission made by Mr  Karnik  and  in  the
appellant's Rule 24 response, that the Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to
the judge's finding on "most of his life" is now academic.

We agree entirely with Mr Lindsay that the relevant  date  to  consider  the
appellant's length of residence in the UK in relation to  his  age  was  the
date of the hearing. The rules themselves do not provide for a date for  the
relevant calculation, as is  the  case  with  paragraph  276ADE(1)  in  non-
deportation cases, where the date of the application  is  specified  as  the
relevant time-line. It can therefore only be the case that, since this is  a
human rights appeal, the relevant date is the date of the hearing.  We  also
agree with Mr Lindsay that, in considering the appellant's  age  and  length
of residence at the date of the hearing, the judge was wrong to dismiss  the
concept of an arithmetic application of the rule, since  this  was  contrary
to legal authority. We refer in particular to  the  case  of  SC  (Jamaica),
where the Court of Appeal held at [53] that:

    "The starting point for the temporal question is the decision  of  this
    court in AS (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1284 per Moylan LJ at [39] where it was concluded  that  'most
    of his life' is a quantitative  not  a  qualitative  concept.  Everyone
    agrees that 'most' must connote more than half but no-one was  able  to
    characterise with any prospect of certainty  or  consistency  just  how
    much more than half that would be if the tribunal is to be expected  to
    engage in an evaluation that is  quantitative.  Having  regard  to  the
    difficulties that would be created by any  other  formulation,  I  have
    concluded that the plain meaning of 'most of his life' for this purpose
    has to be 'more than half'."

Accordingly, we concur with Mr Lindsay that the judge erred in  law  in  her
approach when assessing whether the requirements in  paragraph  399A(a)  had
been met and she erred by finding  that  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
resident in the UK for most of his life. However, we do  not  consider  that
to be a reason to set aside the judge's decision given  that  an  assessment
at the current time would conclude that the appellant  has  now  spent  more
than half his life in the UK and that he had done so by 29  July  2019  when
the Secretary of  State  made  her  application  for  permission.  That  was
according to the calculations undertaken by Mr Karnik, which Mr Lindsay  did
not dispute. We agree with the inclusion in that calculation of  the  period
spent by the appellant in the UK initially as a visitor, and  the  exclusion
of the period spent between the expiry of his leave on that  basis  and  the
grant of ILR, since both are consistent with the findings of  the  Court  of
Appeal in CI (Nigeria) v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [51] and [54]. Alternatively,  if  we  were  to  set
aside the judge's decision in that respect, we would have to re-make  it  by
concluding that the requirements in paragraph 399A(a) are now  met  for  the
same reasons.

No doubt it is for this reason that  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  main
substance of the challenge in the grounds was to  the  judge's  decision  on
'very significant obstacles to integration' in Jamaica. We do not,  however,
find that this ground of challenge has been made out. We note  that,  as  Mr
Karnik pointed out, the submissions made by  Mr  Lindsay  took  a  different
approach to the challenge as set out in the grounds of  appeal.  Mr  Lindsay
did not make any specific challenge, in  his  submissions,  to  the  judge's
reliance on Kamara and her lack of reference to the case of  Mwesezi  v  The
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1104,  which  was
the main focus of the challenge in the grounds of appeal. In any  event  the
decision in  Mwesezi  clearly  did  not  detract  from  the  principles  and
guidance in Kamara in any way. That is apparent from [26] of  Mwesezi  which
makes it clear that the decision in that case  was  specific  on  its  facts
and, from [25], that the issue of 'very significant obstacles'  was  not  in
fact part of the challenge before the Upper Tribunal.

Mr  Lindsay's  submission  was  that  the  judge  had   made   inconsistent,
conflicting and perverse findings: specifically that her finding,  at  [57],
that the appellant "has no familial or cultural  links  with  Jamaica",  was
inconsistent with her findings at [40] and [41] that he  had  a  grandmother
and step-father in  Jamaica.  However,  the  judge's  finding  at  [57]  was
plainly not made in ignorance of the evidence she had  just  summarised  and
it is clear to us that she in fact intended to say that  the  appellant  had
no substantial familial links, given that she was referring  back,  in  that
paragraph, to the finding previously made in that regard, which  appears  in
her  summary  at  [43],  that  the  appellant  "has  no  substantial  family
connections there". We agree with Mr Karnik that the  judge's  decision  was
made on the basis of a full and careful assessment of all the  evidence,  of
which there was a substantial amount, from  six  witnesses.  We  also  agree
with Mr Karnik that the  judge  properly  considered  the  evidence  in  the
context of the principles and guidance set out in  Kamara  and  that  it  is
relevant that the respondent's representative, when specifically invited  to
comment  upon  the  applicability  of  the  principles  in  Kamara,  had  no
submissions to make in response to the judge's observations, as recorded  at
[58] and [59]. We concur with Mr Karnik that the judge was entitled to  take
into account such a lack of challenge  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  when
making her decision.

Accordingly,  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  the  judge's
findings on the matter of 'very significant obstacles'  were  unsustainable,
we  consider  that  that  assertion  is  essentially  nothing  more  than  a
disagreement. Certainly,  we  find  nothing  approaching  the  threshold  of
perversity in the judge's findings. The judge's conclusion was based upon  a
comprehensive assessment  of  the  evidence  and  a  full  appreciation  and
application of the  relevant  legal  principles  and  caselaw  and  was,  we
conclude, properly open to her on the basis of that  evidence.  We  find  no
errors  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the  issue  of   'very   significant
obstacles'.

For all of these reasons we find no merit in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  The
judge was fully and properly entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  met
the requirements in paragraph 399A and section 117C(4)  and  benefited  from
the private life exception to deportation. She was  entitled  to  allow  the
appeal on the basis that she did. We find no errors of law  in  the  judge's
decision and we uphold the decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. We do not set aside the decision. The Secretary  of
State's appeal is accordingly dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, to allow Mr [H]'s appeal, stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  26 February
2020
