
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11449/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 July 2020                    |On 6 August 2020                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                        OSSAMA FAROUK HASHEM IBRAHIM

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






           Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 7
           April 2020 against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge O'Garro, promulgated  on  21  November  2019  following  a
           hearing at Hatton Cross on 21 October 2019.

        2. The appellant is an Egyptian national born on 10  January  1976.
           On 12 July 2010, he entered the UK as  a  tier  4  student  with
           valid leave until October 2013. He then obtained  further  leave
           until 28 December 2014 and the day  before  the  expiry  of  his
           leave applied to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  This  was
           refused on 2  April  2015  with  a  right  of  appeal  which  he
           exercised. The appeal was  dismissed  on  17  May  2016  and  he
           exhausted his appeal rights in November 2016.

        3. On 9 December 2016 the appellant applied for  further  leave  to
           remain based on his private life. This was  refused  on  5  July
           2018 without a right of appeal. That decision is not before  the
           Tribunal.

        4. On 13 July 2018 the appellant made a further human rights  claim
           which was refused on suitability grounds on the  basis  that  he
           had  used  deception  by  obtaining  a  false  English  language
           certificate from ETS in an application he had made for leave  to
           remain as a student in November 2013. This is the  decision  the
           appellant has now appealed.

        5. The appeal came before judge O'Garro (not O'Gara  as  stated  in
           the grant of permission and in the grounds) at Hatton  Cross  on
           31  October  2019.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
           appellant and considered the evidence. She  concluded  that  the
           respondent had not discharged the burden on her to show that the
           appellant  had  falsely  obtained  an  English   language   test
           certificate. She then proceeded to consider his article 8 claim.
           As the appellant was no longer in a relationship, she found that
           he could not meet the requirements of appendix FM. She  accepted
           that the appellant had established a  private  life  during  the
           time he had spent  here  and  considered  that  both  under  the
           immigration rules and on article 8 grounds. She found that there
           would not be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  to
           Egypt, that his stay had always been precarious and  that  there
           were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a  grant  of  leave
           outside the rules. The  appellant  had  expressed  the  fear  of
           return to Egypt because of the political situation but this  was
           not particularised or pursued at the hearing and the judge found
           that if he had a genuine fear, it was open to  him  to  make  an
           asylum application. Accordingly, she dismissed the appeal.

        6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  against  the  judge's
           decision. Two grounds were put forward but essentially they  are
           part of the same argument which is that the judge erred  in  not
           following the approach of the Court of Appeal in Khan and others
           [2018] EWCA Civ 1684. It is maintained that  having  found  that
           the appellant had not  used  deception  to  obtain  leave  on  a
           previous occasion  the  respondent  should  have  withdrawn  her
           decision and the appellant should have been given a period of at
           least 60 days leave to allow an application for further leave to
           be submitted.  Although the grounds do  not  specify  what  they
           maintain the judge should have done, it can be inferred that the
           appellant wanted her to allow the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
           historic injustice done to him.

           Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

        7. The matter was due to be listed for a hearing at Field House but
           due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the need  to  take  precautions
           against its spread, this did not occur and directions were  sent
           to the parties on 15 May 2020. They were asked  to  present  any
           objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers  and  to
           make any further submissions on the error of  law  issue  within
           certain time limits.

        8.  The  directions  specifically  sought  submissions   from   the
           appellant on the distinction to be drawn, if any, with Khan  and
           others (op cit) on which the appellant relied, arising from  the
           fact  that  those  cases  involved  judicial  reviews  and   not
           statutory appeals. The  appellant  was  also  asked  to  provide
           submissions as to the effect, if  any,  of  the  fact  that  the
           respondent's decision under appeal post-dated that judgment. The
           Tribunal indicated that it would also be assisted by a reference
           to the paragraph of the judgment which contained  the  direction
           said in the grounds to have been made by the Court of Appeal  as
           there appeared to be a conflict between what the grounds alleged
           and what was said in the judgement at paragraph 37. The Tribunal
           indicated that it would be  assisted  by  submissions  from  the
           respondent too as to the impact of the judgment as it applied to
           this case.

        9. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           I now consider the matter.

       10. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

       11. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. Neither party
           has raised any objection to the matter being considered  on  the
           papers. A full account of the facts are set out in those  papers
           and that the issue to be decided is a narrow one. There  are  no
           matters  arising   from   the   papers   which   would   require
           clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed  for
           that purpose. I have regard to the importance of the  matter  to
           the appellant and consider that a speedy determination  of  this
           matter is in his best interests. I am satisfied that I  am  able
           to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers  before
           me and I now proceed to do so.

           Submissions

       12.  The  appellant's  submissions  are  dated  29  May  2020.   The
           respondent replied on 8 June 2020. To date there appears to have
           been no further submissions from the appellant.

       13. The appellant addresses the Tribunal's direction on Khan in  his
           submissions.  That  case  concerned   three   applicants   whose
           applications for further leave were refused or whose  leave  was
           curtailed following a change in section 10  of  the  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999 which meant that the only way  they  had  to
           challenge a decision within  the  UK  was  by  way  of  judicial
           review. It is submitted that a compromise between the applicants
           and the respondent was reached. Individuals  whose  applications
           for further leave were refused or who had their leave  curtailed
           without a right of appeal could make a human rights claim to the
           respondent if they had a private or family life so as to  engage
           article 8. In the event that the human rights claim was refused,
           and subject  to  any  certification  under  section  94  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  the  individual
           would have an in country right of appeal where the ETS deception
           allegation would be considered in full by a fact-finding  First-
           tier Tribunal judge who was best suited for a  dispute  of  this
           nature. Khan acknowledged that judges were  not  bound  by  this
           compromise but the  judgment  endorsed  the  encouragement  that
           judges make findings of fact on the deception allegation.

       14. It is submitted that the appellant's case was not distinct  from
           Khan because his human rights claim was refused on the deception
           allegation and that in the light of the judgment that allegation
           should be considered by a fact-finding judge.  It  is  submitted
           that in December 2016 the appellant applied for leave to  remain
           on family and private life grounds and that his application  was
           refused on  suitability  grounds  without  a  right  of  appeal.
           Following Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 in July 2018, the appellant
           submitted further submissions and his application was refused on
           19 June 2019, again on suitability grounds, with an  in  country
           right of  appeal  that  led  to  the  current  proceedings.  The
           submissions  maintain  that  once  the  judge  found  that   the
           respondent  had  not  proved  deception  on  the  part  of   the
           appellant, the appeal should have been allowed. The Tribunal  is
           reminded of the directions given by the Court  of  Appeal  which
           are summarised as: (i)  if  the  applicants  are  successful  on
           appeal on  the  basis  that  they  did  not  commit  fraud,  the
           respondent will rescind her decisions; (ii) the respondent  will
           thereafter grant a period of at least 60 days' leave to allow an
           application for further leave to be submitted; (iii) when making
           any future decision on applications  for  leave  to  remain  the
           respondent will not hold against an applicant any  previous  gap
           in leave caused by any erroneous ETS deception decision.

       15. The appellant, therefore, argues that there has been a  historic
           injustice and that with in accordance with Ahsan  and  paragraph
           37 of Khan, he should be returned to the position he would  have
           been in prior to the deception allegation being  made.  In  this
           case, that would have meant his human rights  application  of  9
           December  2016  would  not  have  been  refused  on  suitability
           grounds. It is maintained that the appellant  has  suffered  and
           been prejudiced as a result of the earlier deception  allegation
           and that removal at this stage  is  therefore  unlawful.  It  is
           submitted that the judge erred in the  determination  should  be
           set aside. It is maintained that it is unnecessary to remit  the
           appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the  Upper
           Tribunal should set  aside  the  determination  and  remake  the
           decision. If the appeal is allowed  it  is  submitted  that  the
           respondent should grant the appellant's application of  December
           2016.

       16.  The  respondent's  submissions  do  not  address  the  specific
           directions made by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  which  appear
           within the body of more  standard  directions.  Possibly,  these
           were not noticed by the respondent.

       17. The respondent accepts that the judge gave adequate reasons  for
           finding that the deception allegation had not been made  out  by
           the Secretary of State and that she was, therefore,  correct  to
           proceed to a consideration of the article 8 claim. It  is  noted
           that the appellant was no longer in a relationship and that  the
           appeal was pursued on private life grounds only. It is submitted
           that it was open to the judge to find that there  would  not  be
           very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  on  return  to
           Egypt, that although he had been away for some nine years he had
           left as an adult and would be  familiar  with  the  culture  and
           society there. He also had a sister who would be able to  assist
           him in re-integrating, he was fit and  healthy  and  had  gained
           employable skills and  qualifications  whilst  in  the  UK.  The
           respondent submits that the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
           finding that article 8 could not be met  within  the  rules  and
           that there were no compelling or exceptional circumstances which
           would justify a grant of leave outside the rules.

           Discussion and conclusions

       18. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds  for  permission
           and the  submissions made by both parties.

       19. The first point to make is that the appellant did  not  rely  on
           Khan or Ahsan in support of his hearing  before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge. I have considered the Record of Proceedings  and
           the determination with care and this was not  a  matter  pursued
           before the  judge.  The  judgment  did  not  form  part  of  the
           appellant's bundle nor was it submitted  to  the  judge  at  the
           hearing. The judge cannot therefore be criticized for failing to
           take it into account. The appellant relied only on  his  private
           life claim and the issue of unfairness did not form part of it.

       20. Secondly, the Khan judgment is in respect of a  judicial  review
           applicant and is not binding on the First-tier Tribunal  as  the
           appellant's submissions themselves concede.

       21. Third, the appellant's case can be distinguished  from  Khan  in
           that the appellant did not have his leave curtailed and did  not
           make a  further  student  application  which  was  refused.  His
           December 2016 application was made on private life  grounds  and
           although it was refused,  the  appellant  then  made  a  further
           article 8 claim which was refused with an in  country  right  of
           appeal. Unlike the other applicants  in  Khan,  the  appellant's
           human rights claim was considered by the First-tier Tribunal and
           findings of fact were made on the deception allegation.

       22. Fourth, whilst the respondent's note (set out at paragraph 37 of
           Khan) indicated  that  the  effect  of  an  First-tier  Tribunal
           determination that there was no  deception  would  be  that  the
           refusal would be withdrawn and that the outstanding  application
           would be decided on the  basis  of  deception  not  having  been
           employed, the respondent did not agree to bind  herself  to  the
           same course of action in future applications.

       23. Even assuming this process were to be followed, the Tribunal has
           not been provided with a copy of the decision  of  5  July  2018
           made in response  to  the  application  of  December  2016  and,
           therefore, has no way of knowing whether  that  application  was
           refused partially or solely (or at all) because of  a  deception
           allegation. The present decision letter does not provide reasons
           for the refusal of that claim. Nor is there any  information  as
           to the basis of that claim so that  the  appellant's  submission
           that that application should have  been  granted  or  should  be
           granted following the "no deception" finding made by the  First-
           tier Tribunal in the present appeal is made  completely  out  of
           context.

       24. In any event, the appellant made a further  human  rights  claim
           and that was considered. I note  that  the  respondent  in  Khan
           undertook not to put applicants at a disadvantage in any  future
           application by virtue of a deception allegation and I also  note
           that although the appellant's claim was refused  on  suitability
           grounds, his private  life  claim  was  nevertheless  considered
           substantively. It is also relevant that the appellant's somewhat
           short  term  relationship  as  it  was  at  the  date   of   the
           application, had ended prior to the appeal hearing.

       25.  The  appellant  maintains  that  he  has  been  placed   at   a
           disadvantage by the deception allegation but  the  grounds  fail
           entirely to identify how his extremely  weak  application  could
           have succeeded or what disadvantage has been caused  given  that
           the facts of his case. His  family  life  claim  cannot  succeed
           because he has no  such  life  and  that  was  conceded  at  the
           hearing. His private life claim  which  is  unparticularized  is
           based on a precarious period of leave and indeed,  no  challenge
           is made to any of the judge's findings on  that  claim.  It  was
           open to the judge to find that the appellant had left  Egypt  as
           an adult, that he was fit and well and had gained qualifications
           and employable skills whilst he had been here which could be put
           to good use, that he remained familiar with Egyptian customs and
           culture and had a sister there would could help him to resume  a
           life there.   Even without  any  allegation  of  deception,  the
           appellant cannot show that he comes remotely near the  rules  to
           show any very significant obstacles to re-integration on  return
           to Egypt and does not qualify for leave on private life grounds.
           Furthermore, no exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  have
           been identified, either at the hearing or in the grounds,  which
           would warrant a grant of leave outside the rules.

       26. The appellant  indicated  that  he  feared  returning  to  Egypt
           because of the general political unrest and the  judge  properly
           found that it was open to him to make an asylum  application  if
           he wished to do so.




           Decision

       27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
           errors of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.




           Anonymity

       28. There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
           and I see no reason to make one.







      Signed




        R. Keki?

      Upper Tribunal Judge




      Date: 31 July 2020






