

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/11018/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision and Reasons           |
|                                          |promulgated                      |
|On 11 April 2018                          |  On 16 April 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                QUAN TRAN VAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown instructed by Qualified Legal Solutions.

For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Smith promulgated on the 28  February  2017  in
        which the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        respondent's refusal of an application for leave to remain  in  the
        United Kingdom on the basis of private and/or family life.
     2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam who  married  to  a  British
        national with whom he has a child, born on 21  July  2015,  who  is
        also a British citizen.
     3. The Judge,  having  analyse  the  evidence,  dismissed  the  appeal
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR and the Immigration Rules.  Even  though
        technically there is no ground  of  appeal  any  longer  under  the
        Rules, it is clear what the Judge was  considering  was  the  human
        rights aspect of the appeal of which the Rules form part.  At  [32]
        the Judge makes the following finding:

         "32.     The maintenance of immigration control is  in  the  public
             interest. Taking into account all the factors that I have  set
             out above and taking special care to treat the  L's  interests
             as a primary consideration I am satisfied that the decision to
             refuse the appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom  is
             a lawful and proportionate  decision.  The  decision  properly
             balances the rights of the appellant, and the rights of the GB
             and  L  as  protected  pursuant  to  article  8  against   the
             legitimate aim of the government  of  the  United  Kingdom  in
             maintaining a fair and robust system of  immigration  control.
             For the reasons that I have set out  above  I  have  concluded
             that, taking into account section  117B(6)  it  would  not  be
             unreasonable to expect L or GB to leave the United Kingdom.  I
             am satisfied that the decision to refuse the application is  a
             proportionate  and  therefore  lawful  interference  with  the
             rights of the appellant, his partner and child."

     4. The Judge was referring to the appellant's  British  Citizen  child
        when referring to "L" and to the appellant's partner who,  although
        born in Vietnam, is a British citizen, when referring to "GB".
     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which although  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal was granted  on
        a renewed application by the Upper  Tribunal.  The  judge  granting
        permission writes "I give permission on each  ground  but  my  main
        concern here is that the Judge's finding that it is  reasonable  to
        expect the Appellants British child to remove  to  Vietnam  is  not
        properly reasoned".
     6. The Secretary of State conceded the error in her Rule 24  reply  of
        the 17 November 2017 and invited the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
        the appeal afresh to  consider  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
        Immigration Rules or Article 8 ECHR.
     7. On the basis of the grounds and respondent's concession, I find the
        Judge erred in law in a manner material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal and set that decision aside.



Discussion



     8. The appellant's child is a qualifying child as a British  national.
        Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
        provides:

           117B Article8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
           cases:


           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
           the public interest.


           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-


                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.


           (4)    Little weight should be given to-


                (a)    a private life, or


                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.


           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-




                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and


                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom.

     9. In R (on the application of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper
        Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another  [2016]  EWCA
        Civ 705 it was held that when considering whether it was reasonable
        to remove a child from the  UK  under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
        Immigration  Rules  and  section  117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, a court  or  tribunal  should  not
        simply focus on the child but  should  have  regard  to  the  wider
        public  interest  considerations,   including   the   conduct   and
        immigration history of the parents. It was also  confirmed  however
        that if section 117B(6) applies then "there can be  no  doubt  that
        section 117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision  in  the
        sense that Parliament has  stipulated  that  where  the  conditions
        specified in the sub-section are  satisfied,  the  public  interest
        will not justify removal." It was additionally held, however,  that
        the fact that a child had been in the UK for seven years should  be
        given significant weight in the proportionality exercise because of
        its relevant to determining the nature and strength of the  child's
        best interests and as it established as a starting point that leave
        should be  granted  unless  there  were  powerful  reasons  to  the
        contrary. The Court  of  Session  has  approved  and  followed  the
        approach taken in MA (Pakistan) in the case of SA, SI, SI and TA  v
        SSHD [2017] CSOH 117.
    10. The respondents Appendix FM  guidance  has  also  been  noted.  The
        current version is dated February 2018.
    11. Before the Upper Tribunal it was accepted on the facts disclosed in
        the evidence that it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  either  the
        qualifying child or the appellants partner, also a British citizen,
        to leave the United Kingdom to return with the appellant to live in
        Vietnam.  That  evidence  includes  a  detailed  report   from   an
        Independent Social Worker concerning  the  best  interests  of  the
        child.
    12. In light of this recognition it was not necessary for there to be a
        further hearing before the Upper Tribunal, for if  the  removal  of
        the child in particular from the United Kingdom is  not  reasonable
        it cannot be said the decision will be found to  be  other  than  a
        disproportionate interference in the protected  rights  of  the  UK
        citizens, on the facts. It was not made out if the appellant's wife
        and child remain in the United Kingdom it will be proportionate  to
        expect him to leave the United Kingdom and return to Vietnam  which
        would have the effect of separating this family unit.
    13. The Upper Tribunal accordingly substitutes a decision to allow  the
        appeal pursuant to article 8 ECHR.


Decision

    14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 April 2018





