
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/11180/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th April 2019                   |On 29 April 2019                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Abdullahi [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth of Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Davison
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19th November 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 27th December  1997.   He
    arrived in the UK as a child in 2012  to  join  his  parents.   Several
    applications were then made to regularise his status in the UK  one  in
    2014 and two in 2015 all of which were unsuccessful.

 3. In January 2016 the appellant's father died.  His younger brother S had
    been born in the UK and was by  this  stage  a  British  citizen.   His
    mother was granted leave to remain in the UK as a parent of  a  British
    child in June 2018.

 4. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant would  face  significant
    difficulties on a return to Nigeria since he considered that there were
    family members there who would be able to support  him  and  that  they
    were in contact with him.  He said that since the appellant  had  lived
    in Nigeria until the age of 14 there would not  be   obstacles  to  his
    reintegration.  So far as his relationship with his younger sibling was
    concerned, the bond which he had developed with him,  although  strong,
    was established at a time when his status in the UK was precarious.

 5. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to take into account the best interests of  the  appellant's
    younger brother S.  Despite evidence from both the appellant and S,  he
    made no reference them in the determination.   It  had  been  submitted
    that the appellant had a parental relationship with his brother and  by
    failing to take into account that relationship the judge had  erred  in
    law.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer for the reasons stated
    in the grounds on 4th January 2019.

 8. At the hearing Ms Jones for the respondent accepted that the judge  had
    erred in law and that the decision would need to be remade.

 9. The decision of Judge Davison is set aside.  The judge erred in law  in
    that he failed to take into account a relevant consideration namely the
    submission that the appellant was in a quasi-parental relationship with
    his younger brother following the death of their father.

10. It was agreed between all parties that the decision could be remade and
    a brief period of time was given so that everyone could prepare for the
    hearing.

The Evidence

11. The appellant gave oral evidence.  He confirmed that  the  contents  of
    his witness statement were true.  He said that he would  not  have  any
    support from his family in Nigeria if he  were  to  be  returned.   His
    grandmother is very frail and his sister, who looks after  her,  has  a
    family of her own to look after and is not financially stable.   He  is
    not in touch with his two older brothers.  He  acknowledged  that  when
    his father died his body was taken back to Nigeria and he  thinks  that
    he was buried near his grandmother's house.  He denied speaking to  his
    siblings but said that he thought that his mother was in  contact  with
    them.

12. He said that he was very close to his younger brother S.  He gave him a
    great deal of support when their father died and this  has  made  their
    relationship very strong.  His brother phones him all of the  time  and
    he is the person who looks after him and makes sure that  he  is  okay.
    He wants his brother to be proud of him and to be a good  mentor.   His
    mother is very depressed and does not sleep and has chest pains and leg
    pains which makes it hard for her to look after S, who  is   undergoing
    counselling at school.

13. In his statement he gave details of the private life which he enjoys in
    the UK which includes his relationship with his girlfriend and his work
    with his mentor who is a designer and assists him with his photography.



14. S, who is now 11 years old, also  gave  evidence.   He  said  that  the
    appellant is like a father figure to him.  He helps him when he  is  in
    need and cares and supports him in his education.  When he is  sad  and
    upset, if it was not for him he would have no one to relate  to  or  to
    open up to.  He would feel lonely, distraught and heartbroken if he was
    not there.  Losing his father was the most painful  experience  he  has
    ever dealt with and his  older  brother  is  the  only  one  who  could
    understand him and comfort his mother.  His mother cares for them  both
    but his brother is the one he depends on.   He  wakes  him  up  in  the
    morning, helps him with his school subjects, makes  his  breakfast  and
    follows him to the train station, when he goes to school.  He helps him
    with his photography projects and to train for football and  helps  him
    when he is stressed out.  He behaves like a father.

15. The appellant's mother [MO] also  gave  evidence.   It  was  abundantly
    clear during the hearing that she struggles with depression.   She  was
    very tearful.  She said that she lost her husband two years ago and now
    she looks to her son who is the only one who is able to help  her.   He
    looks after S for her.  The school  calls  the  appellant  rather  than
    her because his English is better.

16. She accepted that she had two sons and  a  daughter  and  a  mother  in
    Nigeria and that she was in contact with them.  She sent money  to  her
    older sons and was clearly in  close  touch  with  her  daughter.   She
    herself works as a cleaner doing 21 to 23 hours a week.

17. The appellant's mentor also gave evidence.  Mr Golding is a  production
    designer for a creative agency and helps the appellant  by  giving  him
    work on  film  shoots  and  giving  him  a  chance  to  understand  the
    professional environment.   He  said  that  he  really  excelled  as  a
    photographer.  He knew the family reasonably  well  and  could  confirm
    that S really lent on the appellant giving him structure and support in
    his life.

Submissions

18. Ms Jones relied on the reasons for refusal letter and said it was clear
    that the appellant's mother was in contact with her family  in  Nigeria
    who would be able to support the appellant  on  return.   She  did  not
    accept the appellant's evidence that he had  little  contact  with  his
    Nigerian family.

19. She was not challenging the credibility of the evidence in relation  to
    S.  However she submitted that the evidence did not amount to a  quasi-
    parental relationship because S had a parent  namely  his  mother,  who
    would support S in the UK since she had shown herself able  to  support
    her children by sending them money to Nigeria. She observed that  there
    was no supportive evidence from the school.

20. Mr Smyth submitted that the evidence in this  case  was  all  one  way.
    There was compelling evidence  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  quasi-
    parental relationship with S, which had  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State.  He submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    untruthful in relation to the circumstances  which  he  would  face  in
    Nigeria.  It was not inconsistent with his mother's evidence.  She  was
    clearly in touch with the family but he said that he was not.

21. There was clear evidence from S that since the death  of  their  father
    the appellant had been indispensable to him both in terms of  practical
    and emotional support.  S's best interests were overwhelmingly that the
    appellant should be allowed to remain.  In this case  there  were  very
    few countervailing factors.  The appellant became 18 in  December  2016
    and made the present application in March 2017.  There were only  three
    months therefore when he was without  leave  as  an  adult  before  the
    application was made.  He was  not  someone  with  a  poor  immigration
    history.  He enjoyed a substantial private life here with a  girlfriend
    and mentor and had good career prospects.

Findings and Conclusions

22. It is not argued that the appellant can meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This case therefore turns on whether the  appellant
    should be allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8  principles  outside
    the Rules.

23. I find, like the previous judge, that the appellant sought to  distance
    himself from his relations in Nigeria.  It is clear that his mother  is
    in contact not only with her own very elderly mother but also her adult
    children there.  I do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  would  face
    significant obstacles to reintegrating into Nigeria  since  I  have  no
    doubt that whilst he may not be in much contact with  them  his  mother
    would ensure that his siblings gave him whatever help  they  were  able
    to.

24. This appeal turns on family life  and  in  particular  the  appellant's
    relationship with S.

25. In R (on the application of RK) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Section 117B(6)  parental  relationship)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
    00031, the Upper Tribunal found that

         "It is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  a  "parental
         responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.

         Whether a person who is not a biological parent is in  a  "parental
         relationship" with a child for the purposes of Section  117B(6)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  depends  on  the
         individual circumstances and whether the role that individual plays
         establishes that he or she  has  "stepped  into  the  shoes"  of  a
         parent.

         Applying that approach apart from the situation of  split  families
         where relationships between parents have broken down and an  actual
         or  de  facto  step-parent  exists  it  will  be  unusual  but  not
         impossible  for  more  than  two  parents  to  have   a   "parental
         relationship" with a child.  However the  relationships  between  a
         child and professional or voluntary carers or  family  friends  are
         not parental relationships."

26. Ms Jones did not seek to challenge the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's relationship with S.   She  submitted  that  this  did  not
    constitute a parental relationship because the mother remained  in  the
    house, and the evidence did not point to this relationship going beyond
    a strong sibling relationship.

27. I disagree.  The evidence from both the appellant and from S  was  very
    powerful.  It is quite clear that S has struggled since  the  death  of
    his father and looks to his older brother as a father figure.   Without
    wishing to diminish in any way the efforts which the appellant's mother
    has made in keeping this family together it  is  also  clear  that  she
    finds it a great struggle.  I have no doubt at  all  that  she  suffers
    from a number of physical ailments which may well  be  related  to  the
    depression which was manifest at the Tribunal.  She has done  her  very
    best in very difficult circumstances but she has needed the support  of
    her adult son not only for herself but also in bringing up her  younger
    son S.

28. The oral evidence is supported by the  evidence  from  the  independent
    social worker in her report dated 23 March 2017.  At paragraph 7.5  she
    writes that

         "S lost his father in  tragic  circumstances  and  from  my  family
         observations his older brother  has  become  the  surrogate  father
         figure in his life.   For  example  S  looks  to  his  brother  for
         confirmation that  everything  is  okay  and  Abdullahi  takes  and
         collects S from school in the same way that  his  father  had  done
         before his death.  It is important for  S's  social  and  emotional
         wellbeing that the bond and attachment that he has to  his  brother
         is maintained given that he has recently not lost not just a parent
         but a supportive male role model."

29. The appellant's girlfriend also states in her  witness  statement  that
    the appellant has become a father figure to his  little  brother.   Her
    mother also wrote to the Tribunal stating that the  appellant  holds  a
    big responsibility now  by  taking  care  of  his  mother  and  younger
    brother.

30. There is also a  letter  from  Francesca  Valerio,  the  Mentoring  and
    Volunteering Director at  Migrants  Organise  which  is  the  mentoring
    organisation supporting the appellant's family.   It  is  a  registered
    charity which has worked in  the  Ladbrook  Grove  area  for  over  two
    decades.  She writes

         "Abdullahi's presence in the family has  been  extremely  important
         especially after the death of his father to provide  the  emotional
         and every day support that his mother [MO] and his little brother S
         need.  Abdullahi has been helping  with  caring  for  S  full-time,
         taking him to school, helping him with his homework or  supervising
         him when their  mother  could  not  be  present.   Abdullahi  is  a
         positive and strong role model for  S  and  he  is  a  co-parenting
         presence in the house, especially since their mother [MO] has  been
         feeling very low after the death of their father and  sometimes  in
         need of solid support to educate S and respond to his needs."

31. This was supported by the oral evidence of  Charles  Golding  who  said
    that following the death of their father he had been put  in  a  unique
    position within the family, forcing him to grow up quickly and to  take
    on his father's role within the family unit looking out for his  little
    brother and supporting his mother.

32. There is therefore evidence from a wide variety of sources attesting to
    the strong relationship between the appellant and  S  and   I  conclude
    that this amounts to a quasi-parental relationship.

33. S is a qualifying child since he is  a  British  citizen.   No  one  is
    suggesting that it would be reasonable to expect S to leave the UK.

34. Taking the factors set  out  in  paragraph  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the  public  interest.   The  appellant  can
    speak English.  He is not a burden on the tax payer since his mother is
    working.  Little weight should be given to the private  life  which  he
    has established whilst being in the UK since his immigration status has
    always been precarious.

35. Paragraph 117B(6) states that in the case of a person who is not liable
    to deportation the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal in these circumstances.

36. In any event this is not  an  appellant  who  has  a  poor  immigration
    history.  All of the decisions which were taken prior to December  2016
    were when he was a minor.  There was then  a  period  of  three  months
    before he made the present application.  There are therefore  very  few
    countervailing factors against him, aside from  the  general  principle
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

37. That of course is a very significant factor. However set against  that,
    the best interests of S must be a primary consideration.  The  strength
    of the emotional ties between the appellant and his family amounts to a
    quasi parental relationship because of the  death  of  the  appellant's
    father  and  the  emotional  neediness  of  his  mother  following  her
    husband's death. S's  best  interests  are  manifestly  for  his  older
    brother, a father figure to him, to remain in the UK.

38. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 24 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
