
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11003/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th May 2019                               |On 23rd May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                            Baljinder Singh Saini
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faizza Abla, A1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application by Mr Saini for leave to remain was made on 23rd August
    2017.  His application was refused by the Secretary of State on 2nd May
    2018.  The matter came before Judge Widdup who heard the appeal on  6th
    and 13th December 2018.  Judge Widdup allowed the  appeal.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge Kebede on 1st  April  2019.   The  basis
    upon which it was granted was that

         "The respondent makes the point, with some arguable merit, that  if
         the appellant  had  incorrectly  deducted  expenses  from  his  tax
         returns, this should have been the same amount declared to UKVI and
         that the judge had arguably overlooked  that  requirements  of  the
         immigration rules  in  Appendix  A  when  determining  whether  the
         appellant had exercised deception.  The grounds are arguable."

 2. Mr Bramble stated that the  Respondent  has  missed  the  point.   Even
    though permission to appeal has been  granted,  in  Mr  Bramble's  view
    there is limited merit to what the Respondent is arguing.   Mr  Bramble
    pointed out that there is a difference between  the  functions  of  Her
    Majesty's Revenue & Customs and the Respondent's  obligations  and  the
    fact that there were no proceedings issued by Her Majesty's  Revenue  &
    Customs is not  the  salient  point.   Mr  Bramble  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had  given  an  innocent  explanation  which  the  Judge  had
    accepted regarding his tax returns.  In essence what happened was  that
    Mr Saini had included payments in the tax return for  the  wrong  year.
    An invoice had been raised on 31st March 2011 and there was a technical
    error as to  which  year  this  particular  invoice  should  have  been
    claimed.

 3. I am satisfied that Mr Bramble's concession was entirely correct.  Upon
    reading the decision, and in particular [54-61], it is quite clear that
    the Judge was entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  not  acted
    dishonestly in relation to the tax returns for 2010/11 and 2011/12.  It
    is unnecessary to recite that information here given the concession.

Notice of Decision

 4. There was no material error of law. The decision stands.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
22 May 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

The Appellant's original appeal has been allowed.  I  have  decided  not  to
make a fee award as the Tribunal has simply taken a different  view  to  the
explanation for the discrepancy than was provided where an  explanation  was
required


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
22 May 2019

