
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 2 November 2017                    |On 29 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                RANJIT SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Young, Wimbledon Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 28 March 1991.  He appealed
    the respondent's decision dated 6 November 2015 curtailing his leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his family life with Jyoti
    Singh and his private life.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    Tier Tribunal Amin on 20 January 2017.  The appeal was dismissed on all
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 10 February 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Paige on 6 September  2017.
    The permission states  that  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  are
    arguable and reference is made to the appellant's son  who  has  highly
    specialised medical needs which require weekly medical  oversight  with
    home visits, as well as  multiple  doctors  and  hospital  visits  each
    month.  The Judge found at paragraph 24 that there was  no  reason  why
    the child would not be able to access medical treatment in India.   The
    permission refers to paragraph 18 of the decision in  which  the  Judge
    states that there is medical evidence in  support  of  the  appellant's
    child's medical needs but at paragraph 24 he states  that  the  child's
    level of illness is  not  corroborated  by  medical  evidence  and  the
    appellant has not shown why the child  would  not  be  able  to  access
    medical treatment in India.  The grounds state that it is  unreasonable
    for the Judge to conclude that the appellant's son, who  is  a  British
    citizen, can be expected to relocate to India.  The grounds  go  on  to
    refer to the Judge applying the wrong test under the Immigration Rules.
     They state that the  Judge  has  placed  insufficient  weight  on  the
    evidence of the appellant and his wife and also  the  medical  evidence
    which goes to the issue of their son's needs.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response.  The Rule  24  response  states  that  the
    application was submitted late and there is nothing in  the  permission
    to extend time so the application cannot proceed.  The response goes on
    to state that the Judge was  entitled  to  consider  all  the  evidence
    before him and he was entitled to find, based on  that  evidence,  that
    there  is  nothing  preventing  the  child  returning  to  India.   The
    existence of a British child does not trump removal  of  the  appellant
    even though there is no removal decision for that child, nor is removal
    of the child being sought by the respondent.  The response goes  on  to
    state that the appellant's child was  not  born  at  the  date  of  the
    decision so there is no right of appeal against the decision under  the
    Immigration Rules  as  the  appellant  could  not  have  satisfied  the
    requirements of EX1 on the basis of his child.   Paragraph  15  of  the
    decision relates to the respondent's consideration of the appellant and
    his wife only.

 4. I put to the appellant's representative that perhaps the child  is  not
    British as the appellant's second wife,  who  is  the  mother  of  this
    child, has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom but is  not
    British.  There is however a British passport for the child on file.  I
    take it that it must have been found that the appellant's  second  wife
    is settled in the United Kingdom and was settled  when  the  child  was
    born and this is why the child has been granted a British passport.

 5. The representative submitted that the Judge used the wrong test,  being
    EX1(b) which is insurmountable obstacles instead  of  EX1(a)  which  is
    based on  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   Unreasonableness
    should have been used not insurmountable obstacles.

 6. I addressed the appellant's representative  on  the  Rule  24  response
    which deals with the child not being born at the date of  the  decision
    so there being no right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules, as  the  appellant  could  not  have  satisfied  the
    requirements of EX1 on the basis  of  his  child.   The  representative
    submitted that it was known that the appellant  was  going  to  have  a
    child and this issue was never raised  or  challenged.   She  submitted
    that this is a belated attempt by the respondent to raise a  new  issue
    and is unfair.

 7. The representative submitted that  the  Judge  has  used  the  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles at paragraphs 16, 19, 22, 23, 26  and  27  and
    this is the wrong test.

 8. The representative referred to the child being dependent on  an  oxygen
    supply and this was not disputed  on  the  date  of  the  hearing.   He
    requires specialist medical treatment  and  constant  monitoring.   The
    appellant helps his wife with translating when she goes to  the  doctor
    as she has poor English and in Dr Gupta's medical report it  is  stated
    that the appellant's wife could not manage without  her  husband  being
    there to translate.  She submitted that  the  Judge  did  not  properly
    consider the whole of Dr Gupta's letter and although it is stated  that
    in the future the child might not require constant oxygen he  needs  it
    just now.

 9. I was asked to find that the appellant's evidence  is  corroborated  by
    his wife and I was referred to the bundle for the first  hearing.   The
    representative submitted that had the Judge used the  correct  test  he
    would have come to a different conclusion.  She submitted that  because
    of this there is a material error of law in the Judge's decision.

10. She submitted that Article 8 also applies to the appellant's wife  who,
    if she has to go to India, will have no family  to  support  her.   She
    submitted that the fact that the child is British is  very  significant
    in this case.

11. The Presenting Officer made her submissions submitting that there is no
    appeal right and yet this was not raised until the Rule 24 response was
    submitted.  She submitted that the appeal should not  have  gone  ahead
    but in any case the Judge applied the wrong  criteria.   She  submitted
    that there are errors.

12. The appellant's representative asked me to grant the application.


13. The Presenting Officer submitted that as the whole case is based on  an
    error it requires to be reheard and  the  up-to-date  position  of  the
    child has to be taken into account.

Decision and Reasons

14. The child was not born at the date of decision.  There was therefore no
    right of appeal against the decision under the Immigration Rules, based
    on the child's health.  Clearly the appellant could not have  satisfied
    the requirements of EX1 on the basis  of  the  child  at  the  date  of
    application.

15. At paragraph 15 of the decision the Judge states that the appellant has
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife who is in  the  UK.
    He states that she is a British citizen but she is not.  She is settled
    in the UK.  The Judge  then  refers  to  insurmountable  obstacles  and
    EX1(a).  This is the wrong test.

16. The Judge applied the wrong criteria and the wrong standard of proof so
    there are clear material errors in his decision.  The appeal should not
    have gone ahead but as it has reached the stage it has, I  am  prepared
    to remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I find that there are errors of law throughout  Judge  Amin's  decision  and
that these are material.  I therefore find that the decision of  Judge  Amin
must be set aside.

I direct that this application is referred back to the First-Tier  Tribunal.
 It should not be heard by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Amin.







Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


