
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11725/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|On 26 April 2021                     |On 30 April 2021                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            NOOR UL HUDA QURESHI
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Shamim Sher, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Sols

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission from the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision on 26 June 2019 to refuse him leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Background

 2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom as a student on 19  April  2011
    with a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant visa, which  was  curtailed  to
    expire  on  15  June  2013.   He  was  successful  in  finding  another
    educational provider and was granted  further  leave  to  remain  valid
    until 26 January 2015.

 3. On 26 January 2015, the claimant applied for further leave to remain on
    the basis of private and family life.   That was refused and  certified
    under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (as amended).  The claimant remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

 4. The claimant met his wife, a British citizen, of  Vietnamese  heritage,
    in 2017.  On 5 April 2018, the claimant had made a private  and  family
    life application based on his relationship with the  sponsor,  who  was
    not yet his wife.   The respondent accepts that the marriage is genuine
    and subsisting.   The parties married on 2 August 2018:  theirs  is  an
    interfaith marriage since the claimant is Muslim, while the sponsor  is
    Christian and has not converted to Islam.   The claimant speaks English
    and Punjabi, while his wife speaks English and Vietnamese.

 5. The Secretary of State considered his application under  paragraphs  R-
    LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d) of Appendix FM (the  10-year  partner  route).
    She was not satisfied that there were insurmountable obstacles to  this
    couple continuing their family life in Pakistan if the claimant were to
    be removed.  She also  considered  under  GEN.3.2  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances for which leave to  remain  should  be  given
    outside the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) but concluded that no
    such circumstances  existed.    The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    claimant's application for leave to remain.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. First-tier Judge Abdar also found that the  claimant  could  not  bring
    himself within the Immigration Rules.

         "23. On the evidence and on balance, I find that the sponsor  would
         face some difficulties  in  joining  the  [claimant]  in  Pakistan,
         mainly owing  to  the  sponsor's  non-Pakistani  heritage,  medical
         diagnoses, Christian  faith  and  lack  of  Urdu  language  skills.
         However, an holistic view  of  the  evidence  before  me  does  not
         persuade me to find that there would be insurmountable obstacles to
         the [claimant] or the  sponsor  continuing  their  family  life  in
         Pakistan.  For these reasons, I find that the [claimant]  does  not
         meet the requirements of the Rules."

 7. He allowed the appeal on exceptionality grounds outside the Rules.  The
    Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 8. First-tier Judge Boyes granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  arguably  misunderstood  the  ratio
    decidendi of Chikwamba and  that  Article  8  ECHR  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power for judges to allow appeals.



Rule 24 Reply

 9. There has been no Rule 24 Reply from the claimant.

10. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

11. On 18 September 2020, following triage submissions, I  decided  to  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal decision and remake the decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. My decision was not communicated to the  respondent  by
    the Tribunal.  A remaking hearing was listed for 22 December 2020.   At
    the hearing on 22 December 2020, Mr Melvin came prepared for  an  error
    of law hearing while for the claimant,  Ms  Sher  had  prepared  for  a
    remaking hearing.

12. In the light of the decision  in  Joint  Council  for  the  Welfare  of
    Immigrants, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2010] EWHC 3524 (Admin) (17 December 2010), it  was  agreed
    that the hearing should be adjourned, to allow  for  oral  argument  on
    error of law and remaking, if appropriate, either on the day  or  at  a
    further hearing, in the ordinary way.

Upper Tribunal hearing

13.  On  21  December  2020,  a  document  headed   'Respondent's   written
    submissions/Rule 24 Reply' dated 21 December 2020 was received from  Mr
    Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State.   It was followed,  on  the
    same date, by a longer document from Mr Melvin  entitled  'Respondent's
    additional written submissions'.  The Secretary of  State  is  not  the
    respondent before the Upper Tribunal: she is the appellant.

14. For today's hearing, I received two documents both purporting to be the
    respondent's skeleton argument.  The document signed by  Mr  Melvin  is
    the Secretary of State's skeleton  argument  (and  thus,  that  of  the
    appellant before the Upper Tribunal).  The document signed by  Ms  Sher
    is the claimant's skeleton argument and he  is  indeed  the  respondent
    before the Upper Tribunal.

15. For the Secretary of State, despite the multiple submissions  on  file,
    the  issue  is  really  rather  narrow:  at  [11]-[12]  of  the  latest
    submissions, Mr Melvin said this:

         "11.  Having  found  that  the  [claimant]  could  not   meet   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, that there  are  no  serious
         obstacles to integration for the [claimant]  and  sponsor  enjoying
         their family life  in  Pakistan,  the  [First-tier  Judge]  without
         sufficient  reasoning  concludes   that   there   are   exceptional
         circumstances that warrant  allowing  the  appeal  outside  of  the
         Rules.

         12.  The [Secretary of State] seeks to argue that  the  [First-tier
         Judge] has misdirected himself to the importance of the statue, has
         failed  adequately  to  reason  his  decision  on   exceptionality,
         misunderstood the refusal notice and drawn a perverse conclusion on
         exceptionality."

16. For the claimant, Ms  Sher  noted  the  finding  of  no  insurmountable
    obstacles.  She argued that  the  judge  had  considered  all  relevant
    factors in the proportionality balancing exercise, relying on  GM  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    1630, arguing that the difficulties the  sponsor  would  experience  in
    living in Pakistan were among those which the  judge  was  required  to
    consider.  The appeal had been allowed 'exceptionally' on  that  basis.
    Her skeleton argument concluded:

         "7.  It is respectfully submitted that the judge considered all the
         evidence, including the oral evidence of  the  [claimant]  and  his
         wife, and applied the law correctly and that thus he  was  entitled
         to come to the conclusion that he reached.  There  is  no  material
         error of law disclosed in the Secretary of State's appeal.

         8.   With respect to the judge's reference to Chikwamba v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40,  it  is  submitted
         that  the  considers  this  in  respect  to  the  public   interest
         requirements that he is required to do.  Coming to  the  conclusion
         that little purpose is served by requiring the [claimant] to  leave
         the United Kingdom, face the difficulties that will entail for  the
         [claimant] and sponsor, only to apply for entry clearance  and  re-
         enter the United Kingdom in the same category  as  the  application
         that was refused.

         9.   The Tribunal is invited to dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
         appeal as there was no material error of law in the decision.   The
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal is a structured  and  carefully
         made decision. The First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to  allow  the
         appeal. "

17. In oral argument, Ms Sher observed  that  the  judge  had  referred  to
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended)  at  [13]  and  that  his  self-direction  was  correct.   She
    acknowledged that there was no reference to section 117B in the part of
    the decision relating to Article 8 outside the Rules, but asked  me  to
    infer that  the  judge  had  applied  it.   She  acknowledged  that  no
    exceptional circumstances were set out in that part  of  the  decision,
    but argued that on the facts, the judge's conclusion was open to him.

18. I did not call on Mr Melvin, as the Secretary of State's arguments were
    set out at length in the documents already mentioned,  as  well  as  in
    triage submissions by Ms Rhona Petterson.

Analysis

19. The First-tier Judge's reasoning on exceptionality and Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Rules was as follows:

         "26. There are a number of considerations  against  the  [claimant]
         that I must and do give due  weight  to,  starting  with  effective
         immigration  control, which is carried  out  via  the  Rules.   The
         [claimant does not meet the requirements of the  Rules  and  it  is
         trite law that I must give that consideration  significant  weight,
         which I do, in assessing proportionality.

         27.  The [claimant] and the sponsor's relationship  dates  back  to
         2017.  However, their relationship started when the claimant was in
         the United Kingdom unlawfully.  Accordingly,  I  tamper  [sic]  the
         weight I place on the relationship.

         28.  The [claimant's] English language skills  are  not  challenged
         and [he] is financially independent of the  state.   However,  both
         are neutral factors in the balance.

         29.  It is not only the [claimant's] but  I  must  also  take  into
         account  the  sponsor's  rights  under  Article  8;  Beoku-Betts  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39, which  I
         do by giving due deference to the sponsor's  rights  as  a  British
         citizen.

         30.  I take  my  findings  on  the  [claimant]  and  the  sponsor's
         background and relationship into consideration, together  with  the
         difficulties the sponsor will face in  joining  the  [claimant]  in
         Pakistan.  I also weigh in the [claimant's] favour the fact of  the
         [claimant's]  application  in  an   attempt   to   regularise   the
         [claimant's] status in the United Kingdom, albeit without giving it
         undue weight.

         31.  The respondent has not argued any, and I find no  barriers  to
         the [claimant] seeking entry  clearance  from  outside  the  United
         Kingdom.  The [claimant] would then meet the  requirements  of  the
         Rules, particularly as the only requirement  which  the  [claimant]
         does not currently meet is that of having extant leave, thus giving
         rise to consideration of EX.1, would not be applicable to  such  an
         application.  As such, I find that the Chikwamba principle  applies
         ... in that, in the circumstances,  little  purpose  is  served  by
         requiring the [claimant] to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  face  the
         difficulties that will entail for the [claimant] and  the  sponsor,
         only to apply for entry clearance and re-enter the  United  Kingdom
         in the same category as the application that was refused.

         32.  On the totality of the evidence and on balance, having carried
         out an holistic balancing exercise with due  weight  given  to  the
         mandated  and  important  public   interest   factors.    I   find,
         exceptionally, particularly in consideration of the above  and  the
         consequences for the [claimant] and the sponsor, the  balance  lies
         with the [claimant] and it would be  disproportionate  in  all  the
         circumstances to refuse the [claimant's] application."

20. I remind myself of the narrow circumstances in which it is  appropriate
    to interfere with a finding of fact by a First-tier Judge who has heard
    the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick
    and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed.

21. However, in this case, I am satisfied that the finding  of  exceptional
    circumstances is one with which the Upper Tribunal must interfere.  The
    reasoning above is confused, wrong in law, and the conclusion  one  the
    reasons for which I as the reviewing judge  cannot  understand  (see  R
    (Iran) at [90.3] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord
    Justice Chadwick and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed).

22. There are three principal areas of concern:

    1) The judge failed to apply section 117B of the 2002 Act correctly. It
       is not a question of tampering or tempering the weight placed  on  a
       relationship with a British citizen, when it was developed  entirely
       while the claimant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  By section
       117B(4)(b) of the 2002 Act, he is required to give that relationship
       little weight.




    2) The second point is that no exceptional circumstances are identified
       in the First-tier Judge's decision on Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
       Rules.  He relies on matters  which  have  already  been  considered
       within the Rules, which are a complete code,  save  for  exceptional
       circumstances.    There  is  nothing  exceptional  about  a  British
       citizen wife having difficulty adjusting to life in the  country  of
       her Pakistani spouse.   The sponsor's separation  anxiety  disorder,
       referred to at [20], was not considered to amount to  insurmountable
       obstacles  when  considering  Article  8  within  the  Rules.    Her
       medication is available in Pakistan, and as the judge states in that
       paragraph, she would have the claimant's support if she  joined  him
       in Pakistan.


    3) Finally, there is the Chikwamba question.  The judge's finding  that
       the claimant, who is a long-term overstayer, would be certain to  be
       re-admitted as his wife's spouse if he applied for  entry  clearance
       from outside the United Kingdom, is completely  unreasoned.    There
       was no evidence, for example, about the wife's income, or the effect
       that the claimant's poor immigration   history  would  have  on  the
       suitability requirements for entry clearance as a spouse.

23.  This  decision  cannot  be  sustained.   There  are   no   exceptional
    circumstances for the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

24. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  and  remake  it  by
    dismissing the claimant's appeal.

DECISION

25. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     26 April
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



