
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/11090/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 January 2018                        |  On 22 February 2018            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              Mka (bangladesh)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative, Haque & Houseman
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kevin  Moore  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  13  October  2017)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    to grant  him  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on compassionate or human rights grounds.  The First-
    tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider  that  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant's  anonymity  is  maintained  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.





The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 24 November  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for the  following
    reasons:

         (2) The grounds assert the Judge erred by  refusing  to  grant  the
         adjournment.

         (3) The grounds are arguable in light of the fact that the HOPO and
         the appellant agreed on the adjournment and the reasoning given  by
         the  Judge  for  continuing,  it  is  arguable,  could  be   better
         explained.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date of  birth  is  20
    January 1988.  He arrived in the UK on  14  February  2010  with  valid
    entry clearance as a student.  He was granted leave to remain  in  this
    capacity on two occasions, culminating in a  last  grant  of  leave  to
    remain which expired on 30 October 2015.

 4. On 27 April 2016 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the application for further leave to remain.  Firstly, he had sought  a
    variation of leave to enter or remain for a purpose not covered by  the
    Rules.  Secondly, he  had  not  accrued  10  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK, having only arrived in the UK on 11 February 2010.
     Thirdly, he did not satisfy the requirement of having no ties with the
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the  UK.   He
    had spent the majority of his  life  in  Bangladesh,  and  by  his  own
    admission his parents still lived in Bangladesh and he had returned  to
    visit them between 13 May 2014 and 13 June 2014.

 5. He advanced a medical claim under Articles 3 and 8  ECHR.   He  claimed
    that he had been treated for a cyst on his neck.  His condition was not
    life-threatening.  Whilst it was accepted that the  healthcare  systems
    in Bangladesh were unlikely to be equivalent, this did not entitle  him
    to remain in the UK.

 6. He also advanced a claim that his life would be endangered if  returned
    to Bangladesh, due to political vengeance  from  the  ruling  political
    party.  He claimed that, when he had returned  to  Bangladesh  for  one
    month in 2014, he had escaped being killed by sheer luck.  He  had  not
    provided any evidence to substantiate his claimed  fear.   He  had  not
    claimed asylum when he arrived here in 2010, and  he  had  not  claimed
    asylum following his return to the UK  in  June  2014.   His  visit  to
    Bangladesh in 2014 was not consistent with his claim to have a  genuine
    fear for his life.  If he wished to make a claim for asylum,  he  could
    do so by visiting the Asylum Screening Unit.

 7. Two days before the scheduled hearing  of  the  appellant's  appeal  at
    Taylor House on 13 October 2017,  the  appellant's  current  solicitors
    faxed the Tribunal with a request for an adjournment, as they had  only
    just been instructed by the appellant.   The  adjournment  request  was
    refused in writing.  At the outset of the hearing before  Judge  Moore,
    Mr Bhuiyan renewed the adjournment request.  He advanced two reasons.

 8. The first was that he had only been provided with the notice of hearing
    and a copy of the refusal letter, and so he had been unable to  prepare
    a bundle  in  order  to  assist  the  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  in  the
    interests of justice, the matter should be adjourned.   If  the  matter
    was not adjourned,  he  would  not  in  a  position  to  represent  the
    appellant in his absence.

 9. The second reason was that the appellant was absent.  Mr  Bhuiyan  said
    that a friend of the appellant had had  a  fall  last  night,  and  the
    appellant had to spend all night at the hospital with his  friend.   He
    had tried to telephone the appellant this morning, but the  appellant's
    mobile telephone was  switched  off.   This  was  the  reason  for  the
    appellant's absence.

10. As set out at page 3 of  the  Judge's  decision,  the  Judge  gave  the
    following reasons for refusing the adjournment request: (a) there  were
    no documents or evidence corroborating the appellant's  claim  that  he
    had to spend all night at the hospital due to  a  friend's  fall,  and,
    even if that was the case, there was no good reason as to why he  could
    not at least attend the hearing this morning;  (b)  the  appellant  had
    only two days before the hearing instructed new solicitors, and he  had
    given no good reason as to why the service  provided  by  his  previous
    solicitors was unsatisfactory - it appeared to be  the  case  that  the
    appellant had instructed at least  two  previous  firms  of  solicitors
    before deciding to instruct another firm of solicitors  two  days  ago;
    (c) the appellant had  had  ample  opportunity  to  provide  a  witness
    statement, and to instruct properly a firm of solicitors to provide  an
    appropriate appellant's bundle, but had not done so; and (e)  he  could
    not be satisfied that there was  any  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant might attend any future hearing if the matter was  adjourned,
    and in any event an adjournment was  not  warranted,  and  would  cause
    unwarranted delay.  In all the circumstances, he was satisfied that  it
    was in the interests of justice that the hearing should proceed.

11. The Judge having given this ruling, Mr  Bhuiyan  withdrew.   The  Judge
    went on to decide the appeal on the basis of  the  documents  which  he
    listed in paragraph [7]  of  his  decision:  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter; the notice of appeal with grounds of  appeal  and  accompanying
    documentation;  and  the  letter  dated  12  January  2015   from   SEB
    Solicitors, who were then acting on behalf of the appellant.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Bhuiyan developed the arguments  advanced  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He submitted that it  was  very  unusual
    for a Judge  to  refuse  to  grant  an  adjournment  where  both  legal
    representatives  were  in  agreement  that  an  adjournment  should  be
    granted.  He did not  take  issue  with  the  Judge's  account  of  the
    submissions made by  the  representatives  on  the  adjournment  issue,
    except that he had not recorded that the Home Office Presenting Officer
    (Ms Bisiriyu) had agreed to an adjournment because  she  also  was  not
    ready to proceed.  She only had the refusal letter.

13. Since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,  his  firm  had  obtained
    some papers from the previous solicitors, but they still did not have a
    respondent's bundle.  Ms  Everett  interjected  that  the  respondent's
    bundle only consisted of the refusal letter, the covering  letter  from
    the previous solicitors, and the application form.

14. Mr Bhuiyan acknowledged that no  evidence  had  been  filed  since  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the  appellant.   There
    was no witness statement from him on  the  merits,  and  there  was  no
    witness statement from him dealing with his  excuse  for  being  absent
    from the hearing.  Nonetheless, Mr Bhuiyan submitted that the appellant
    had been denied an opportunity to  be  heard,  and  he  had  thus  been
    deprived of a fair hearing.

15. Ms Everett pointed out that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  served  standard
    directions on the appellant and his solicitors, notifying them  of  the
    requirement to be prepared to proceed at  the  same  hearing  with  the
    remaking of the decision, in the event that an error of  law  was  made
    out.  Nonetheless, this direction had been ignored  and  the  appellant
    was not present in the Upper Tribunal to give evidence  in  support  of
    his appeal.  She submitted that this  vindicated  the  Judge's  concern
    that the appellant would not attend at  a  subsequent  hearing,  if  he
    granted him an adjournment.

Discussion

16. I consider that the Judge gave adequate reasons for refusing  to  grant
    an adjournment, and I disagree  that  his  reasoning  could  have  been
    better explained.  I consider that the Judge's reasoning is impeccable.

17. It may be that case that the Presenting Officer, in discussion with  Mr
    Bhuiyan before the hearing, agreed that an adjournment was the sensible
    course.  She only had the documents listed by the  Judge  at  paragraph
    [7] of his decision; and, as she told the  Judge,  she  had  only  just
    become aware of the appellant having changed his solicitors on multiple
    occasions.   Thus,  I  infer  that  Ms  Bisiriyu   had   a   reasonable
    apprehension that there might be material documents that were missing.

18. However, as it turns out, there was nothing material that was  missing.
    As  regards  the  Presenting  Officer's  stance,   whatever   she   had
    provisionally agreed with Mr Bhuiyan, this  did  not  bind  the  Judge.
    Moreover, the stance which the Judge records her as taking  before  him
    was a neutral one, rather than one in which she encouraged the Judge to
    agree that an adjournment would be in the interests  of  justice.   She
    said that she was ready to proceed, whilst being aware of the potential
    for the appellant to appeal any decision if the matter was to proceed.

19. The fact  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  refusing  the
    adjournment is  not  determinative  of  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant has been the victim of procedural unfairness.  It was open to
    the appellant to bring forward evidence to show that he was deprived of
    a fair hearing.  However, he has failed to grasp  this  opportunity.  I
    infer that this is because the Judge's findings on the  merits  of  his
    appeal are unanswerable.

20. In conclusion, the appellant has not persuaded me that the decision  to
    refuse an adjournment was wrong, or that material  unfairness  resulted
    from the hearing of his appeal proceeding in his absence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 30 January 2018


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

