
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11503/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 September 2018                          |On 9 November 2018           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                               MR NEEAJ KUMAR
                      (anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan, Counsel for Lincoln Lawrence Solicitors,
Isleworth
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 4 August 1982.  He appealed
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 22  September  2017  refusing
    him leave to remain based on his family life with his wife,  a  British
    citizen.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Solly on 19 March 2018 and was dismissed on all grounds in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 April 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  2  July
    2018.  The permission  states  that  it  is  arguable  that  compelling
    circumstances existed which enabled the Judge to  proceed  to  consider
    whether there would be breach of Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    permission refers to there being no voice  recording  supplied  by  the
    Home Office of the appellant's speaking test.  The  appellant  was  not
    represented at  the  First-tier  hearing  and  had  not  requested  the
    recording.  At paragraph 42 of the decision the Judge  finds  that  the
    appellant undertook a 10 to 15 minute test at the college but given the
    overwhelming pattern of results from the college  that  day  the  Judge
    finds that this oral test might not be the one submitted to  ETS.   The
    permission also states that the Judge found the appellant did not  take
    part knowingly in deceit when everything is  taken  into  account.   It
    states that at paragraph 44 of the decision the Judge states  that  she
    was not  in  a  position  to  make  any  positive  findings  about  the
    appellant's oral  English  language  skills  on  21  March  2012.   The
    permission states that it is arguably unclear  whether  the  Judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant would have passed the  test  in  question.
    At  paragraph  50  of  the  decision  the  Judge  states   that   false
    information,  representations  or  documents  were  submitted  by   the
    appellant's test centre but the permission states that as the appellant
    was unrepresented it is arguable that with the adducing  of  additional
    evidence on the day of hearing on  the  part  of  the  respondent,  the
    shifting of the evidential burden, the distinctions  enshrined  in  the
    Immigration Rules appertaining to  deceit  and  the  effect  of  deceit
    irrespective of the knowledge of the appellant, the consequences of not
    seeking the recording and the cumulative effect  of  these  factors  in
    relation to the existence or  otherwise  of  compelling  circumstances,
    means that the appellant was placed at a  disadvantage  and  unfairness
    may have arisen.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file and this  response  also  raises  a
    complaint with the Judge's decision.  This is that the Judge finds  the
    appellant to be credible regarding having personally attended and taken
    an oral TOEIC test at an ETS affiliated institution on the  basis  that
    he  gave  consistent  oral  evidence  on  this  point,  but  the  Judge
    completely ignores the widely known fact that  individuals  did  indeed
    attend these test centres but stood to one side while a proxy took  the
    test for them. Knowledge of the examination room, route to the building
    etc is therefore of very little probative value.  The  response  states
    that when the Judge makes her positive  credibility  findings  he  then
    speculates that the college, unbeknownst to  the  appellant,  submitted
    the recording of a proxy rather than the recording  of  the  appellant.
    The response states that  this  conclusion  is  not  supported  by  any
    evidence and is essentially perverse.  The response goes  on  to  state
    that given the clear evidence of an invalidated ETS test and  the  lack
    of substance in the appellant's response to it the Judge was  bound  to
    find that deception had been proven on the  balance  of  probabilities.
    The response then refers to the permission stating that there may  have
    been unfairness in the conduct of  the  hearing  and  stating  that  at
    paragraphs 4 to 10 of the decision the Judge was assiduous in  ensuring
    that the appellant had a fair hearing.  The Judge observed at paragraph
    46 that the appellant had never asked for the  recording  and  declined
    the opportunity to adjourn on the day to better prepare his case, which
    could have included provision of the recording.  With regard to Article
    8 the response states that it is accepted that greater depth and detail
    would have been preferable but although this is an  error  of  law,  it
    cannot be a material one given the strength of the public  interest  at
    play  when  deception  is  established  and  the  lack  of   compelling
    circumstances put  forward  by  the  appellant  to  argue  that  public
    interest was outweighed.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the appellant submitted that he is relying on  the  grounds
    of application.

 5. I was referred to the fact that this appellant was not  represented  at
    the First-Tier hearing.  Counsel referred to the 5000 word dissertation
    written by the appellant as part of his Masters  Degree  and  submitted
    that no record of the speaking test was produced at  the  hearing.   He
    submitted that at the same time as the appellant was doing the test  he
    was also doing a post-graduate diploma.   There  therefore  would  have
    been no necessity for him to get a proxy to carry out his English test.
     He submitted that credibility must go in the appellant's favour.

 6. I was referred to  paragraphs  29  and  44  of  the  decision.  Counsel
    submitted that there is a contradiction.  At  paragraph  44  the  Judge
    states that she is not in a position  to  make  any  positive  findings
    about the appellant's oral English language skills on  21  March  2012.
    At paragraph 29 the Judge refers to the appellant attaining  a  Masters
    Degree in July 2014 on a course that was only taught in English.

 7. Counsel submitted that when the appellant made his Tier  1  application
    the problems with the ETS were not raised. It was only in 2017 that the
    appellant realised that there was any  problem  with  this.   His  most
    recent application was refused because it was found that the  appellant
    is not suitable under Section S-LTR2.2 because of the problems with the
    English test.  He submitted that this appellant now has a British  wife
    who has a child in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that it  is  clear
    from the decision that the Judge believes the appellant who, six  years
    later, has described exactly what happened when he went for the test.

 8.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  Judge  then  found  that   there   were
    difficulties because of the look up tool and suitability and  the  fact
    that the ETS look up tool demonstrates an invalid test.   He  submitted
    that the appellant's wife is a broker in the city and has  a  child  at
    secondary school and they are both British.

 9. Counsel then asked me to consider the Rule 24 response submitting  that
    this appellant has waited four years since he applied for  leave  as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  He submitted that because of the length  of  time
    this was taking the appellant withdrew his  application  and  submitted
    the application we are  now  dealing  with.   He  submitted  that  this
    appellant was let down on the day of the hearing by his  representative
    but went ahead because he thought things were straightforward.

10. Counsel submitted that the Judge does not find that the appellant was a
    party to any fraud and submitted that the Judge believed this appellant
    and was entitled to do so and that to refuse the appeal based  on  what
    was before the Judge must be an error of law.

11. The Presenting Officer made his submissions  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  He submitted that  the  Judge  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible but it was open to her to consider  the  evidence  before  her
    including the look up tool, and she  based  her  decision  on  all  the
    evidence  before  her.   He  submitted  that  the  day  the   appellant
    supposedly did his English test, the college where he sat the test  had
    a 91% fail rate and 9% questionable  test  results,  and  he  submitted
    therefore, that this appellant must have received a false  certificate.
    He submitted that the Judge has properly considered all of the evidence
    in particular at paragraph  48  when  she  refers  to  suitability  and
    paragraph S-LTR.2.2 which states that whether or not to the appellant's
    knowledge, false information, representations or  documents  have  been
    submitted in relation to the application and there has been  a  failure
    to disclose  material  facts  relating  to  the  application  then  the
    applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of  suitability.   He
    submitted that paragraph 48 makes it clear that this appellant  is  not
    suitable and the Judge was correct to dismiss the appeal.

12. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph  44  of  the  decision  in
    which the Judge states that she is  not  in  a  position  to  make  any
    positive findings as to the appellant's oral English language skills on
    21 March 2012 and he submitted that this must be an accurate  statement
    as the hearing was in 2018.  She has considered whether  the  appellant
    knew about the deceit and she then considers all the evidence  provided
    by the respondent including Professor French's statement.  At paragraph
    46 the Judge states that the appellant did not ask for the recording so
    she does not accept that  the  failure  to  provide  the  recording  is
    material.  The appellant at no time expressed  the  wish  to  test  the
    recording.  He submitted that the Judge's decision was open to  her  in
    law  and  he  submitted  that  her   credibility   findings   are   not
    contradictory.

13. He submitted that there is now an issue about the appellant's  marriage
    and whether it is genuine.  He made reference to  a  domestic  incident
    and submitted that this  adds  weight  to  the  Judge's  overwhelmingly
    negative findings.

14. Counsel for the  appellant  submitted  that  the  Judge  does  consider
    suitability at paragraphs 48 and 49 of the decision and the only reason
    the Judge dismissed the appeal is the question of the ETS testing.   He
    submitted that based on what was before the  Judge  and  based  on  the
    terms of her decision her conclusion is wrong.   She  clearly  believes
    the appellant is telling the truth, accepts that he did  not  knowingly
    contribute to a scam and surely a de novo hearing must be  the  way  to
    deal with this appeal.

15. I was referred to the refusal letter in which  the  appellant's  wife's
    British child is mentioned  and  I  was  referred  to  the  appellant's
    application form which refers to the present civil marriage and goes on
    to refer to his wife's son aged 11.  He submitted that  this  child  is
    now at secondary school and is British and his mother is also  British,
    although they were both born in India.

16. He submitted that  this  appellant  is  now  exempt  from  the  English
    language requirement as he has a Masters Degree and passed every module
    in this degree.  He then wrote a 5000-word dissertation and I was asked
    to find that based on all the evidence before the Judge there must be a
    material error of law in her decision.  I was asked to  set  aside  the
    decision and remit the claim to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Decision and Reasons

17. The terms of the Rules make it clear that if deception  has  been  used
    with or without the  appellant's  knowledge,  that  appellant  must  be
    deemed not to be suitable in a future application.

18. I accept that the appellant  was  not  represented  at  the  First-Tier
    hearing but he was given the choice of going ahead with the hearing  or
    adjourning the claim to enable him to obtain a recording  of  the  oral
    test and to enable him to consider the documents which were lodged late
    by the respondent.  I find that the Judge was correct  to  include  the
    respondent's evidence and that there was no unfairness as the appellant
    was given an opportunity to have the case adjourned because of the late
    documents from the respondent and because there was no recording of the
    test.  It is true that the appellant at no time asked for  a  recording
    of the test but he was given the opportunity to adjourn the hearing and
    obtain one.  The Judge makes reference early on in the decision to  the
    generic report from Professor French and some of the documents referred
    to in his report which were before her.  The Judge  states  that  these
    were relevant to the ETS testing generally and linked  the  appellant's
    test score to  the  look  up  tool  and  provided  evidence  about  the
    appellant's speaking test on 21 March 2012.  The Judge found  that  the
    documents which were received late were relevant to the issues and  the
    look up tool and they should have been  made  available  earlier.   She
    allowed this supplementary bundle to be admitted in  evidence  but  she
    then asked the appellant if he needed time to study them  and  she  was
    prepared to grant an adjournment.  The appellant took a short break  to
    discuss the matter with his wife and then  stated  that  he  wished  to
    proceed.  At paragraph 10 the Judge states that the appellant was  very
    clear in wishing to proceed with the hearing.  There was no  unfairness
    relating to the acceptance of the late bundle  or  the  fact  that  the
    recording was not available to the appellant.  He had not requested the
    recording and he made it absolutely clear that he wanted the hearing to
    go ahead.

19. The issue in the application is  the  appellant's  suitability  on  the
    basis that a TOEIC certificate from a test undertaken on 21 March  2012
    was obtained fraudulently.  At paragraph 27 the  Judge  refers  to  the
    appellant, after he found out about the problems with the test results,
    not going to the college and not making any enquiries with them.

20. The Judge goes on to consider the appellant's studies and why  he  took
    the test where he did. She notes that his wife did not know him at  the
    time of the test.  She then refers to  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    respondent which states that  101  tests  undertaken  at  the  European
    College for Higher Education on 21 March  2012  showed  that  91%  were
    invalid and 9% were questionable.  The appellant's test was found to be
    invalid.  The judge observed the witness statements by Peter Millington
    and Rebecca Collings  and  the  litigation  about  the  ETS  method  of
    identifying fraud in the testing process.  She refers to  the  evidence
    of Dr Harrison and Professor French.  She goes on to deal with the  ETS
    look up tool which demonstrates an invalid test.

21. At paragraph 38 the Judge states that the  respondent  has  established
    the initial evidential burden of furnishing proof of deception which is
    on the Secretary of State.

22. The Judge then goes on to deal with the appellant's evidence about what
    exactly he did when he took the test and she  accepts  the  appellant's
    reasons for taking  the  test  at  the  European  College.   The  Judge
    believes that the appellant did not take part  knowingly  in  deception
    and she notes that when his MA ended he was then exempt from a separate
    ETS test.  I do not find that paragraphs 29 and 44 are a contradiction.
     She makes some positive findings at paragraph 29 but at  paragraph  44
    she states accurately that she was  not  in  a  position  to  make  any
    positive findings  regarding  the  appellant's  oral  English  language
    skills on 21 March 2012.

23. At paragraph 48 she quotes S-LTR.2.2. This makes it clear that if false
    information is submitted whether or not in the  appellant's  knowledge,
    this affects suitability.  At paragraph 49 she states: "I consider  the
    ETS testing for 21 March 2012 to be  so  overwhelmingly  negative"  and
    either with or without the appellant's knowledge of deception she finds
    that the appellant is not suitable.

24. With regard to Article 8 the Judge deals with this from  paragraphs  52
    to 54.  She gives satisfactory  reasons  for  finding  that  Article  8
    within the Rules cannot be satisfied and that  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules fails for want of evidence and argument. Article  8  outside  the
    Rules was not raised before the Judge.

25. The Judge  has  given  a  very  clear  and  concise  decision  and  has
    considered all of the evidence before her and weighed  it  up  and  has
    found that for well explained reasons the appeal has to be dismissed.

26. There is no material error of law in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and the decision to dismiss the appeal promulgated on 17 April
    2018 must stand.

27. Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed                                  Date 31 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


