
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/11457/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 January 2019                   |On 14 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Anderson
Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Handley, promulgated on 11 July 2018.

 2. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act called for the FtT to consider  whether
    the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, and whether it would be reasonable to expect any such
    child to leave the UK.

 3. Mr Govan conceded that the first ground of appeal shows  that  although
    the judge finds that the  appellant  has  "limited  contact"  with  his
    children, he makes no clear finding on whether he  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his "qualifying  child",  and  no
    finding on whether it would be reasonable to expect that child to go to
    Pakistan.

 4. The second  ground,  absence  of  any  clear  finding  about  the  best
    interests of the children, is also well taken.

 5. The outcome is as agreed between the parties.

 6. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The
    member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Handley.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      31 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




