
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/11108/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30th April 2018                         |On 3rd May 2018                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                  JAGAT PUN
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nepal  born  on  5  November  1991.  He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malcolm,
    dated on 28 February 2018, dismissing his appeal against deportation on
    human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  on
    20 March 2018 on the following grounds: "The appellant seeks permission
    to appeal against this decision on the grounds that the judge  made  an
    arguable error of law in dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.
    It is argued that in doing so the judge failed to properly consider the
    decisions regarding 'righting the  historical  wrong'  in  relation  to
    dependents of ex-Gurkha soldiers. The grounds in relation to  this  are
    without merit because the appellant was  granted  entry  clearance  and
    subsequently  indefinite  leave  to  remain  because  he  was  such   a
    dependent. The second limb of the grounds  seeking  permission  are  in
    relation to the deportation and the judge's  failure  to  consider  the
    probation reports and the fact that the appellant was now drug free led
    to an error of law in relation to his consideration of  paragraphs  398
    and 399. It is arguable that in considering the  appellant's  offending
    history the judge has failed to consider the  provisions  of  paragraph
    398 and 399 which form part of the  respondent's  decision.  The  judge
    limited  himself  to  consideration  only  of  section   117   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as (amended). The  failure
    to consider this limb has led to an arguable error of law be made."

Submissions

3.   Mr Khalid submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  the  probation
    report and the evidence of the witness, Krishna Rai, in  his  findings.
    The Appellant was no longer a risk to the public. The judge  failed  to
    consider future risk in assessing proportionality. Further, there  were
    compelling circumstances  in  this  case.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    exceptions to deportation did not apply.  However,  the  Appellant  had
    established family and private life. Paragraph 138 of the decision  did
    not deal with historic injustice. There was no specific reference to it
    or to the application of the principles in Gurung [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8.
    The Appellant would have come  to  UK  sooner,  but  for  the  historic
    injustice. Had his father been granted  settlement  on  discharge,  the
    Appellant  would  have  been  born  in  the  UK  and  acquired  British
    citizenship. He had picked up his drug habit in  the  UK,  but  was  no
    longer  offending.  The  proportionality  assessment  required  a  more
    detailed consideration of the Appellant's particular circumstances. The
    judge failed to  deal  with  the  historic  wrong  in  the  context  of
    proportionality.

4.   Mr Bramble submitted that permission  had  not  been  granted  on  this
    ground. Judge  Bird  stated  that  the  grounds  relating  to  historic
    injustice were without merit. In any  event,  the  judge  did  consider
    historic injustice. This not an entry  clearance  application  and  the
    historic injustice had been resolved in the grant of  indefinite  leave
    to enter in 2010. The judge took into account that  the  Appellant  was
    drug free [98 and 125] and the evidence of Krishna  Rai  [113]  in  his
    findings. He was fully aware of the Appellant's circumstances. He dealt
    with historic injustice [138 and 139]. The judge had taken into account
    all public interest factors and was entitled to come to the findings he
    did. There was nothing more the judge could  have  done.  The  decision
    should be upheld.

5.   During the course of Mr Bramble's submissions, I indicated  that  there
    was no  probation  report  on  the  court  file.  It  was  not  in  the
    Appellant's bundle. Mr Bramble submitted that there was no mention of a
    probation report in the submissions made by Mr Ahmed,  the  Appellant's
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal. There was  no  reference
    to a probation report in any of  the  material  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr Khalid submitted  that  he  had  been  told  there  was  a
    probation report, but he did not have one in his papers.  He  submitted
    that the judge could have made enquiries of both parties  to  find  out
    about sentencing remarks and pre-sentence  reports.  The  judge  should
    have enquired about evidence which was capable  of  supporting  Krishna
    Rai's evidence. The judge should have taken steps to ensure he had  all
    relevant material to ensure a fair hearing and comply with Article 6.

6.   Mr Khalid submitted that the UK was the best place  for  Appellant.  He
    was not cured by his rehabilitation in Nepal [97]. The judge did not go
    further and consider the risk of relapse in Nepal.  The  Appellant  was
    remorseful [92] and had changed his attitude. The judge failed to  take
    into account all relevant matters. He failed to make specific reference
    to the historic wrong. The Appellant should be permitted to  remain  in
    the UK. He was being denied the  opportunity  to  continue  his  family
    life, which  had  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.

7.    Mr  Khalid  submitted  that,  but  for  the  historic  injustice,  the
    Appellant would have been settled in the UK and could have applied  for
    British citizenship, such that he  could  not  be  deported.  His  drug
    problem was 'home grown'.  The  judge  could  have  done  more  in  his
    proportionality assessment. In order to show  compliance  with  Gurung,
    the judge needed to show he had taken into account  the  importance  of
    the historic injustice. In Ghising (Gurkhas/BOC's -  historic  wrong  -
    weight)  [2013]  UKUT   567   (IAC),   the   Tribunal,   in   assessing
    proportionality, found in favour of the appellant. In  this  case,  the
    prevention of crime was also relevant, but the judge did  not  consider
    all the material. In the interests  of  justice,  the  case  should  be
    remitted. The Appellant had no one to return to in Nepal.

Discussion and Conclusion

8.   The Appellant came to the UK in September 2011 as a  dependent  of  his
    father  who  was  granted  settlement  as  an  ex-Gurkha  soldier.  The
    Appellant lived with his  mother  and  father,  who  have  some  health
    problems and his brother until May 2017. He has two older brothers  who
    still live in Nepal. The Appellant returned to Nepal on two  occasions:
    with his brother to visit friends and for ten months in 2015/2016  when
    his father made arrangements to send him to a rehabilitation centre  to
    deal with his addiction issues.

9.   The Appellant has 10 previous convictions for 15  offences.  His  first
    conviction, on 12 April 2013, was for failing to attend or  remain  for
    the duration of a follow-up assessment following a  test  for  class  A
    drugs.  In  August  2015  he  was  convicted  of   possessing   heroin.
    Thereafter, he has nine convictions for shoplifting. The Appellant  was
    warned in October 2016 and March 2017 that his offending behaviour  may
    lead to deportation. His  last  conviction  was  on  30  May  2017  for
    shoplifting and battery. He was sentenced to 56  days  imprisonment.  A
    deportation order was signed on 17 July 2017 and his human rights claim
    was refused on 20 September 2017.

10.  The judge made the following findings, which are not  in  dispute:  The
    Appellant's parents lived independently and would be able  to  continue
    to do so [109]. The Appellant has  not  been  caring  for  his  parents
    [112]. The Appellant's father may have some difficulties supporting him
    on return to Nepal [119]. The Appellant is 26 years old,  he  does  not
    have any health problems and he will be able  to  maintain  himself  on
    return [120]. Some degree of assistance would be available to him  from
    his brothers in Nepal  [121].  There  would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to re-integration [125]. The Appellant has family and private
    life in the UK [131]. He is a persistent offender and foreign  criminal
    [132]. The deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public  interest
    [133].

11.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  was  a  persistent  offender  and
    therefore a foreign criminal to whom section 117C applied. There was no
    challenge to this finding in the grounds of appeal. Section 117C is  in
    similar terms to paragraphs 398  and  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Although permission was granted on the basis that the judge  failed  to
    consider paragraph 398 and 399, it was accepted by Mr Khalid  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the exceptions set out therein.  There  was
    no error of law in respect of the judge's application of  section  117A
    to 117D of the 2002 Act or the failure to refer to paragraphs  398  and
    399 of the Immigration Rules.

12.  In relation to the grant  of  permission,  I  give  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt and find that, although the judge considered there
    was no  merit  in  the  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  historic
    injustice, he did not specifically refuse permission on that ground.

13.  There was no probation report on the court file and none  was  produced
    before me. The judge cannot be criticised  for  failing  to  take  into
    account material which was not before him. I am not persuaded  that  it
    was incumbent on the judge to seek out material which might corroborate
    the evidence of a witness. The probation report has not  been  produced
    and there was no mention of it in the Appellant's  documents  submitted
    in support of the appeal nor in the submissions made by the Appellant's
    representative at the hearing. The judge was not obliged to  conduct  a
    fishing expedition to seek out evidence which might exist.  The  burden
    is on the Appellant to provide sufficient evidence to support his case.
    If there was evidence which supported  the  testimony  of  the  witness
    Krishna Rai, then it was for the Appellant to submit that evidence.

14.  In any event, the judge took into account the evidence of  Krishna  Rai
    which he set out at [55 and 56]. The judge found  at  [113]:  "Evidence
    was also provided of the appellant's change of attitude as supported by
    the evidence of Mr Rai. It is clear that the appellant earnestly wishes
    to remain in the UK and whilst  they  may  well  be  a  change  in  his
    attitude I did not find the appellant to be a  particularly  impressive
    witness." I find that the judge  took  into  account  the  evidence  of
    Krishna Rai in his findings on Article 8.

15.  The judge also took into account the risk of re-offending having  found
    at [98 and 125] that the Appellant's drug  addiction  was  successfully
    treated. He also considered whether the Appellant needed to  remain  in
    the UK to maintain this position.

16.  The judge made the following findings on the historic injustice:

         "102.    Emphasis was placed on the historic injustice and the need
             for the appellant to remain in the UK to maintain  the  family
             unit."

         ...

         138. I accept that the position of the appellant being the child of
             an ex-Ghurkha soldier does place a different emphasis  on  the
             element of family life however  this  I  consider  has  to  be
             weighed against other public interest considerations."

         139. I do not consider the appellant's position as the child of  an
             ex Gurkha soldier is determinative in tipping the  balance  in
             favour of the appellant  when  considering  the  appeal  under
             Article 8."

17.  The judge's approach was consistent with Ghising in which the  Tribunal
    held: "It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  (and  BOC)
    cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (i) their  family  life
    engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows they would have  come
    to the United Kingdom with their father, but  for  the  injustice  that
    prevented the latter from settling here earlier. If the Respondent  can
    point to matters over and above the public interest  in  maintaining  a
    firm immigration policy, which  argue  in  favour  of  removal  or  the
    refusal of leave to enter, these  matters  must  be  given  appropriate
    weight  in  the  balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad
    immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may still  be  sufficient
    to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side of the
    balance."

18.  I find that the judge did take into account the historic injustice  and
    the weight to be attached to it. He balanced it against the Appellant's
    criminal behaviour, a legitimate  public  interest  consideration.  The
    judge took into account all  relevant  factors  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality, including the  emotional  effect  on  the  Appellant's
    family in the UK. His finding that Appellant's right to family did  not
    outweigh the public interest was open to him  on  the  evidence  before
    him.

19.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law in the  decision  of
    28 February 2018 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




