

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11635/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 December 2017                         |On 18 January 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                               MRS SAIRA BIBI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  in  1986.   She  appeals
      against a decision of the respondent  made  on  10  November  2015  to
      refuse her claim for leave to remain based on her private  and  family
      life.  She had arrived in the UK in January 2010 with entry  clearance
      as a Tier 4 Student with  leave  until  30  December  2011.   She  was
      granted further leave under Tier 1 (Post Study) until  1  March  2014.
      An application for leave on compassionate grounds on 27 February  2014
      was refused.  The current application was made on 19 August 2015.

   2. The  application  was  refused  under  the  partner  route,  it  being
      considered  that  having  provided  an  Islamic  Sharia  law  marriage
      certificate which is not recognised under UK law, she did not meet the
      definition of a partner as defined in GEN.1.2 of Appendix  FM  of  the
      Rules.


   3. The respondent also considered that it had not been shown  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and her  partner  continuing
      family life together in Pakistan.


    4. The application also failed under the private life route.


    5. She appealed.


       First tier hearing


   6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 3 February 2017  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Quinn dismissed the appeal.  His findings are at  paragraph
      23ff.  He noted that the appellant has been unlawfully in the UK since
      February 2014.


   7. He found that she had not shown that  there  would  be  insurmountable
      obstacles to her returning to Pakistan.  She had  spent  most  of  her
      life there, spoke the language and was integrated there.  Indeed,  she
      would be  in  a  better  position  than  previously  because  she  had
      completed a course of education in the UK.


   8. Further, her partner had family in Pakistan and they owned a  property
      where they could live.  Her partner had visited there.


   9. There is now a child born in 2016, a British citizen.  The judge found
      that it was open to the appellant to leave her child with her  partner
      and return to Pakistan and seek entry clearance or to take  her  child
      to Pakistan and build her life there.  Her partner could visit or keep
      in touch by modern means of communication.


  10. The judge noted, further, the appellant's  disregard  for  immigration
      control and that she had got married when she should not have been  in
      the UK.


  11. Turning to the child  the  judge  considered  that  it  would  not  be
      unreasonable to expect him to return to Pakistan with his mother.   He
      is young and has not put down roots here.  He has a  British  passport
      and could thus choose to return to the UK in due course if he wished.


  12. She sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  a  judge  on  6
      September 2017. He stated:


      ...' 2.  The judge found that  the  appellant  could  be  expected  to
      return to Pakistan with her child and  to  apply  for  re  entry  from
      there. The judge did not address the claimed danger that the appellant
      said she would face from family members who disapproved of the union.


           3. The grounds argue that the judge failed to consider article  8
      given that the appellant is the mother of a British citizen child.


          4. There is no reference to the case of SF which  deals  with  the
      guidance that applies in circumstances where it is proposed to  remove
      the parent of a British citizen child.'
      ...


      Error of law hearing


  13. At the error of law hearing before me the appellant did  not  seek  to
      argue that the judge did not address the danger that  she  might  face
      from family members who disapproved of the union.


  14.  Her  submission  was  that  the  judge  failed   to   give   adequate
      consideration to the fact that the child  is  a  British  citizen.  It
      would not be good for her to  go  to  live  in  Pakistan.   Also,  her
      partner is settled here and has work.  It would be  hard  for  him  to
      support his family in Pakistan.


  15. Mr Nath's position was that the judge's findings and conclusions  were
      open to him for the reasons he gave.


      Consideration


  16. In considering this matter in its assessment  of  proportionality  the
      Tribunal was bound by terms of statute, namely, section 117B(6) of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:-


           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where


   a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
                     with a qualifying child, and


   b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
                     Kingdom.


  17. By virtue of s117D of the same Act, a British child is a  'qualifying'
      child in the context of s117B(6).  It is accepted that the appellant's
      child is British.

  18. There is no challenge to the Tribunal's assessment that there  are  no
      insurmountable obstacles  to  the  partner  moving  to  Pakistan  (his
      country of origin) or in the family life being re-established there.


  19. There is no dispute that there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship. The only remaining question was therefore whether it  is
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  In  such  cases,  the
      Tribunal  is  required  to  weigh  the  public   interest   into   its
      consideration of whether the child might  reasonably  be  expected  to
      leave the country with the parent who is facing removal.  This  is  in
      effect the approach that the Tribunal has taken in this case.


  20. The respondent has published policy on this matter.  At Section 11.2.3
      of the Immigration Directorate Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix
      FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:
      10  Year  Routes'  (August  2015)  under  the  heading  'Would  it  be
      unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK?'  the
      following answers are given to caseworkers:


      'Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take
      a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British
      citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force that
      British child to leave  the EU, regardless of the age of that child.
      This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.


      Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent  or
      primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case  must
      always be assessed on the basis  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
      expect a British citizen child to leave the UK  with  that  parent  or
      primary carer.


      In such cases it will usually be appropriate to  grant  leave  to  the
      parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK  with  the
      child, provided there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship.'


      (emphasis added)


  21. It should be noted that the terms 'parent'  and  'primary  carer'  are
      distinguished and separated by an  'or'.  The  clear  impact  of  that
      policy statement is that where a parent of a British citizen child  is
      being required to leave the EU, the case must always  be  assessed  on
      the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect the British  citizen
      child to leave the EU with that parent.


  22. It is unclear  whether  that  policy  statement  was  brought  to  the
      Tribunal's attention.  If it was not, that is an unfortunate omission:
      UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.  I am nevertheless  satisfied  that
      it is a matter of which the Tribunal might reasonably be  expected  to
      be aware, given that it is guidance that has  been  expressly  adopted
      and endorsed on a number of occasions by the Court of Appeal (see  for
      instance MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705) and Upper Tribunal (PD and
      Others [2016] UKUT 108.   This  section  in  particular  has  recently
      received some attention from the  Vice  President  in  SF  and  Others
      (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120.


  23. It follows that the Tribunal erred in its approach to the significance
      of the child's British nationality.


  24. What is the significance of that guidance?   This  case  involves  the
      family life of the appellant, her partner and their very young  child.
      It would plainly be contrary to the best interests of the child -  and
      absent any criminality disproportionate  -  to  separate  that  family
      unit.  Realistically, there are therefore  only  two  options;  expect
      father and child to go to Pakistan with the appellant, or allow her to
      remain in accordance with the principles in  s117B(6).   Applying  the
      terms of the policy, which I take to represent the  respondent's  case
      on where the balance should be struck, I find that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect this child  to  leave  this  country.   There  is
      accordingly no public interest in  the  appellant's  removal  and  her
      appeal must be allowed.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  a  material
error in approach.  It is set aside.

The decision is remade as follows:  the appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order made.



Signed                                             Date : 16 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





