
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11584/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2017                          |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                  Dayo [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod of Counsel, instructed by Pride
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Khan promulgated on 28 February 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  [  ]  1975.   He  has
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated  17  November  2015
    refusing him leave to remain.  Such decision was  considered  to  be  a
    decision on a human rights claim attracting a right of appeal on  human
    rights grounds.


3.   I am grateful to both representatives before me today for  the  helpful
    manner with which the case has been  dealt,  and  the  indication  that
    there is common ground as to its disposal.  In such circumstances I  do
    not propose to rehearse the  Appellant's  immigration  history  or  the
    history of his human rights claim in any particular detail.  Suffice to
    say that his case focused on his relationship with  his  two  children,
    presently aged 11 and 9.


4.   The Respondent's decision as indicated in  the  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') of 17 November 2015 was in significant part premised on
    the lack of status of the children  and  their  mother  in  the  United
    Kingdom: see for example and in particular paragraph 18 of the RFRL.


5.   Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the  Appellant  gave  evidence  to
    the effect that he assumed that his wife had now been given  some  type
    of status on the basis of the circumstances of  the  children,  but  he
    acknowledged that he did not know if that was  correct:  see  paragraph
    19.  He had asked his daughter about the matter in 2014, and whether or
    not she had been given a passport; she had told him that her mother had
    not said anything.  He thought, however, that in 2015 his daughter  had
    told him that she had gone for "a biometric" (paragraph 19).


6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not prepared to accept on  the  basis
    of this evidence that the Appellant's  children  or  their  mother  had
    secured any sort of status in the United Kingdom.  Notwithstanding,  it
    is recorded that Counsel had made submissions to the  effect  that  the
    Appellant's daughter had been in the United Kingdom for more  than  ten
    years and would be eligible for registration as a British citizen.   At
    paragraphs 25 and 26 the Judge considered that the Appellant  had  been
    an evasive witness and found that he had "simply not tried to find  out
    about his wife and children's immigration status or perhaps he is aware
    of it and does not wish to disclose it in evidence".  Indeed, the Judge
    went further and at  paragraph  30  opined  that  it  was  his  "strong
    instinct" that any application made by the children  and  their  mother
    had been refused.


7.   Be that as it may, at paragraph 30 the Judge in  any  event  identified
    that it was for the Appellant to prove his case  in  this  regard,  and
    stated there was no evidence before him as to the wife  and  children's
    immigration status.  (In context - bearing in mind that the  Judge  had
    already set out in his Decision the Appellant's oral testimony in  this
    regard - I take this to mean that the Judge meant  that  there  was  no
    supporting documentary evidence.)  At  paragraph  32  the  Judge  again
    refers to there being a lack of evidence as to the  children's  status,
    and comments that he "can only make a decision on the  evidence  before
    [him]".


8.   In such circumstances the appeal of  the  Appellant  was  dismissed  by
    Judge Khan.


9.   Permission to appeal was sought, and  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly on 12 September 2017.  The grant of permission - and indeed
    the grounds upon which permission was sought - focused on the issue  of
    the status of the children.


10.  The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated  28  September  2017.
    It states in material part:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal, a review of the CID database reveals that the
         appellant's eldest child was naturalised as a British citizen on 18
         October 2016, and that her mother and brother have limited leave to
         remain in the UK.


         The Tribunal is invited to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a hearing de novo."


11.  18 October 2016 is, of course, a date that post-dates the  Respondent's
    decision of 17 November 2015 but pre-dates  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Khan on 2 February 2017.


12.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  confirmed  that  the  Respondent's  position  was
    indeed as set out in the Rule 24 response.  She acknowledged  that  the
    Respondent conceded that an error of law had been made insofar  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  proceeded  on  a  mistake  of  fact  so
    fundamental  that  it  constituted  a   material   error.    In   those
    circumstances I am content to accept that there was such an  error  and
    that the appeal should be dealt  with  by  way  of  setting  aside  the
    decision of Judge Khan with a view to the decision in the appeal  being
    remade before the First-tier Tribunal by a  different  Judge  with  all
    issues at large.


13.  In this context, bearing in mind the chronology referred to  above,  it
    follows that the RFRL of 17 November 2015 has been overtaken by events.
     The reasons advanced in the RFRL are themselves now wrongly  premised,
    albeit they might have been applicable  at  the  time  the  letter  was
    written.


14.  In those circumstances the Respondent should now give consideration  to
    the Appellant's case in light of the acknowledged fact of the status of
    his children and their mother.  In doing  so  the  Respondent  will  no
    doubt wish to have regard to the evidence that has been filed in  these
    proceedings in respect of the contact that the Appellant says  that  he
    enjoys with his children.


15.  In the event that the Respondent wishes to  maintain  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant leave to remain,  new  reasons  will  have  to  be
    offered to replace the now redundant reasons in  the  RFRL:  this  will
    enable the Appellant, and the Tribunal in turn, to understand the basis
    of any outstanding issues on the part of the Respondent.  Any such  new
    reasons should be filed and served with the First-tier Tribunal as  far
    in advance of the resumed hearing as possible, and in any event  within
    fourteen days of the new hearing.


16.  In the event that the Respondent reaches a  favourable  reconsideration
    of  the  Appellant's  application  in  light  of  the  new  information
    regarding the status of his children  the  parties  should  inform  the
    Tribunal so that the hearing date may be vacated.


Notice of Decision & Directions

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


18.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan.


19.  Further to paragraph  18,  the  Respondent  is  to  provide  a  written
    statement of any reasons for maintaining her decision  of  17  November
    2015 in light of the newly acknowledged  statuses  of  the  Appellant's
    former partner and their children. (See further paragraph 15 above.)


20.  The Appellant is to file and serve any further evidence upon  which  he
    wishes to  rely  whether  in  response  to  further  reasons  from  the
    Respondent or generally, at least 7 days before the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


21.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represent a corrected transcript of ex tempore  reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing


Signed:                                 Date: 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
