
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11165/2017
                                                               HU/11171/2017
                                                               HU/11179/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 March 2019                          |On 21 March 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                          m O P E (first appellant)
                         m A J E (second appellant)
                        m O-O E C E (third appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Mustafa, Counsel instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria who  form  a  family  unit,  the
    first appellant born on 18 November 1976, the  second  appellant  on  2
    February 1983 and the third appellant on 6 September 2009.   The  first
    two appellants are husband and wife and the third  appellant  is  their
    minor child.   The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 9 September 2017 to refuse
    their application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 18 July 2018, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Chohan dismissed the appellants' appeals.  The appellants appealed with
    permission on the grounds that it was argued that the judge  failed  to
    identify what  the  powerful  reasons  were  for  the  removal  of  the
    qualifying child (MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705  and  MT
    and ET (Child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT
    00088).

 2. At the hearing before me,  it  was  Mr  Mustafa's  submission  that  no
    powerful reasons were provided and that the only  reason  provided  for
    dismissal of the appeal was  the  immigration  status  of  the  adults,
    whereas it was confirmed by the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 that
    that could not be part of the reasonableness  assessment.   Mr  Mustafa
    confirmed that he did not have any specific submissions in relation  to
    the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal  President  in  JG  (S117B(6)
    "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 0072.

 3. Mr Mustafa submitted that it was incorrect of  the  judge  at  [17]  to
    state as he had that the appellants had remained without leave  whereas
    they had made applications to regularise their leave  which  the  judge
    had not taken into account and that they had a  right  of  appeal  when
    trying to regularise their status.  He also submitted  that  the  minor
    child would be 10 in September 2019,  although  he  accepted  that  the
    child was 8 at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 4. Mr Walker submitted that although the judge may not  have  focussed  on
    the attempts by the adult appellants to regularise their status and  at
    [13] may not have provided additional information in  relation  to  the
    qualifying child and the powerful reasons why the child  should  leave,
    those errors were not material.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. In a decision which addressed all the relevant issues, the Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal at  [13]  and  [14]  considered  the  life  of  the
    qualifying child, accepting that he will have  established  friendships
    with his peers and was at primary school but taking into  account  that
    much of his private life would still to a significant degree be  linked
    to his parents. There was no error in that approach.

 6. The judge was of the view that  there  was  no  reason  why,  with  the
    support of his parents, the third appellant could not adapt to life  in
    Nigeria and took into consideration that the parents were familiar with
    the culture, customs and language of Nigeria and with parental  support
    would be able to integrate into Nigerian society.  Although  the  judge
    considered that the third appellant was now 8 years  of  age,  he  also
    took into consideration that the third appellant was  young  enough  to
    adapt and integrate.  Although the judge took into  consideration  that
    he may well experience some  difficulties  and  hardship,  it  was  his
    ultimate conclusion with the support of his parents he would be able to
    settle down.  The judge also took into consideration that there was  no
    adequate evidence that the first two appellants and the third appellant
    could not integrate into Nigeria other than the oral  evidence  of  the
    first two appellants.  The judge  therefore  found  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to relocate to Nigeria.  The judge also,
    in conclusion, found that the best  interests  of  the  child  were  in
    returning  to  Nigeria  with  his  parents.   The   judge   took   into
    consideration in his general assessment that the adult  appellants  had
    immediate family in Nigeria and the judge could see no reason why  they
    could not support the appellants initially if required.

 7. There is no material error in the judge's clear  findings  that  it  is
    reasonable for this child  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  his  parents.
    Although the judge may not have specifically set out  in  his  findings
    the efforts by the appellants to regularise their status (although,  at
    [2], the judge notes that  the  appellants  made  applications  to  the
    respondent which indicates that he had all the relevant facts in  mind)
    there is no material error in his ultimate finding that the  appellants
    did not have leave to remain and that in terms of the public  interest,
    their status in the UK was 'precarious'.

 8. The judge had in mind the powerful reasons test and the judge  properly
    directed himself, at [13], as to  that  test.   Although  KO  (Nigeria)
    makes it clear  that  the  immigration  status  or  other  difficulties
    experienced by the adults  are  not  a  consideration  in  relation  to
    reasonableness the Supreme Court also confirmed that any  consideration
    of reasonableness must be conducted in the "real world" where  it  must
    be considered where the adult appellants will be.

 9. I have taken into consideration that the Tribunal must hypothesise that
    the child in question would leave the United Kingdom even  if  that  is
    not likely to be the case and ask whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to do so.  That is exactly what the judge did,  including  at
    [14], although I am not satisfied that this is a case where it  is  not
    likely that the child will leave.  Neither of the adult appellants have
    leave to remain in the UK and the entire family can return to  Nigeria.



10. Although the judge did not have  the  benefit  of  KO  (Nigeria)  which
    postdates the decision of the  Tribunal,  the  approach  of  the  judge
    mirrors that recommended and the First-tier Tribunal posed the  central
    question  of  reasonableness.   In  determining  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the United Kingdom, one must have
    regard to the fact that one or both of  the  child's  parents  will  no
    longer be in the United Kingdom, because they will have been removed by
    the respondent under immigration powers.  That is  the  extent  of  the
    real world consideration which in effect is  what  Judge  Chohan  found
    when he considered at [17] that public interest requirements meant that
    the appeal fell to be dismissed and it would not be a  disproportionate
    interference.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellants' appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson








