
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11289/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 1 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     HN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, counsel instructed by Bureau 4 Migrant
Advice & Policy
For the Respondent:  Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  CA
    Parker, promulgated on  31  October  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 21 April 2017.



Anonymity

   2. A direction was made previously, and is reiterated below.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  20  February  2003  with
    limited leave. His attempts to extend that leave,  out  of  time,  were
    unsuccessful and on 25 January 2007 he was  served  with  form  IS151A.
    Shortly thereafter he applied for asylum. On 18 May 2007, the appellant
    was convicted of  three  counts  of  possession  of  a  false  identity
    document with intent and sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment  with  a
    recommendation  for  deportation.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim  was
    refused and his appeal against that decision as well as a  decision  to
    make a deportation order was dismissed in 2008. The  deportation  order
    was signed on 23 June 2008 but not signed as the appellant absconded.

 4. The appellant next came to light on 15 July  2011  in  the  context  of
    making representations relying on family life.  On  28  May  2012,  the
    respondent refused to revoke the  deportation  order.  The  appellant's
    appeal against that decision was allowed, to the  limited  extent  that
    the respondent was to properly consider the provisions of section 55 of
    the UK Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  After  a  three-
    year delay and an enquiry by the appellant's Member of Parliament,  the
    respondent decided, on 22 October 2015, to refuse the appellant's human
    rights claim.

 5. In refusing the human rights  claim,  the  respondent  noted  that  the
    appellant claimed family life with his British spouse as  well  as  two
    British children and a step-child. Owing to  the  appellant's  12-month
    prison  sentence,  the  respondent   considered   the   exceptions   to
    deportation set out in paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It was not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughter, R, from a  previous
    relationship. It was accepted that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his son, A but not accepted that it  would
    be unduly harsh for him to live in Morocco or to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom without  the  appellant.  It  was  further  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  but
    that it would not be unduly harsh for her to live in Morocco or  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

 6. As for paragraph 399A of the Rules, it was  noted  that  the  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom aged 39 and had overstayed. The Secretary of
    State did not, therefore, accept that the appellant met the  family  or
    private life exceptions to deportation. The respondent did  not  accept
    that there were very compelling circumstances such that  the  appellant
    should not be deported and specifically, it was not accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  step-son,
    Y.





The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, only the  appellant  and
    his nephew AN attended and gave evidence.  Counsel  for  the  appellant
    advised the judge that the appellant's wife was not present because she
    had to collect a child from school that afternoon. Judge  Parker  noted
    the absence of the appellant's wife and offered to put the hearing back
    in the list to enable her to attend as she lived nearby. That offer was
    declined by the appellant  because  his  wife  was  worried  about  the
    consequences  of  attending  the  hearing.  Those   same   consequences
    prevented the provision of an up to date  witness  statement  from  the
    wife. The judge concluded the appellant had failed to establish that he
    enjoyed a genuine  and  subsisting  relationships  with  his  wife  and
    children and thus there was no evidential basis for a consideration  of
    whether there may be an exception to deportation.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal were twofold. Firstly, it  was  argued  that  the
    judge was not entitled to go  behind  the  "findings"  reached  by  the
    respondent in the decision letter and secondly that the judge failed to
    make any finding as to the public interest in deporting the  appellant,
    after consideration of part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

10. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 4  May  2017,  indicated
    that the appeal was opposed; that it was open to the judge to  consider
    issues based on documentary and oral evidence at the  hearing  and  the
    grounds failed to establish how, if this was an error, this would  make
    a material difference to the outcome.

The hearing

11. Mr Collins informed me that the appellant was present  with  his  wife,
    child and step-son. He did not seek to fully rely  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal, which he described as going too far, but  emphasised  that  the
    respondent had accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his wife and his child  from  that  relationship.  Mr
    Collins accepted that minimal up-to-date evidence was before the First-
    tier Tribunal but that the appellant had provided a statement in  which
    he said that he visited V every 2 months; resided with his wife, A  and
    Y and treated Y as his own son given that Y's biological father had  no
    contact with him. While conceding that the judge  was  not  obliged  to
    accept the respondent's view of the relationships, Mr Collins submitted
    that the judge had written off the entire claim because  the  wife  did
    not attend the hearing. It would have been open to the  judge  to  give
    limited or minimal weight to  the  appellant's  evidence.  Furthermore,
    once the judge considered there to be no family life, she had given  no
    further consideration to a case which deserved more.

12. Mr Jarvis had little to add to the Rule 24 response and argued that the
    judge made no procedural error in addressing the issue  of  the  wife's
    non-attendance.

13. In closing, Mr Collins stated that he would not advance the proposition
    that the judge  behaved  inappropriately,  on  the  contrary  she  gave
    counsel the chance to call the wife. He accepted that the appellant did
    not have the strongest private life claim  and  that  the  relationship
    with the wife was the strongest point but had been developed  when  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom precariously and his wife was  also
    from Morocco. Nonetheless, he argued that the  balancing  exercise  had
    gone awry in this case.

14. At the end of the hearing I advised the parties that the judge made  no
    material error of law and I was upholding her decision.

Decision on error of law

15. As accepted by Mr Collins, and as set out at [8-10] of the decision and
    reasons, the judge was scrupulously fair in the process  she  followed.
    The judge, being aware of the consequences of the absence of  the  wife
    and the dated witness statement before  her,  gave  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to  give  instructions  to  his  counsel  as  well  as  the
    opportunity for the wife to attend.  The  appellant  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment  and  stated  he  wished  to  proceed  without  his  wife's
    attendance.

16. At [33] the judge explained that she drew an adverse inference from the
    failure of the wife to attend and gave reasons  for  that.  Essentially
    she did not accept the explanation put forward by the appellant for her
    non-attendance. There is no challenge to that finding.  Mr  Collins  is
    not right to say that the judge wrote off the appellant's  written  and
    oral evidence as to the relationship with his wife and the children. At
    [35], the judge acknowledges that there was  evidence  of  genuine  and
    subsisting relationships as of 2012; she considers  the  evidence  from
    the appellant, his witness and the statement from Y  and  records  that
    she "placed some weight upon" them.  The  judge  nonetheless  concluded
    that the evidence before her was insufficient to establish the  claimed
    relationships at the time of the hearing. This was a finding  that  she
    was entitled to make, given the scant evidence before her.

17. The second ground does not advance the appellant's claim further, given
    that he plainly  cannot  meet  Exception  1  given  his  overwhelmingly
    unlawful residence in the United Kingdom which falls considerably short
    of half of his life and his failure to show that  Exception  2  applied
    regarding his wife or the children.  Thus,  owing  to  the  content  of
    section 117C (3) of the 2002 Act,  the  public  interest  required  the
    appellant's deportation.

Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:  T Kamara                                Date 19 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

