
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11583/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2019                     |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                               muhammed usama
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. Z. Rahman, Counsel instructed by IMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 23 October 2018  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before me  to  be
    remade.


The hearing


 2. The appeal was listed for  14  February  2019.   On  that  occasion,  I
    adjourned the hearing as the Appellant's wife was  not  in  attendance,
    and neither was his mother-in-law.  The appeal came before me again  on
    26 March 2010.  The  Appellant's  wife  and  her  mother  were  not  in
    attendance, but the reasons for this will emerge  in  the  body  of  my
    decision.


 3. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant.   Both  representatives  made
    oral submissions.  I reserved my decision.

 4. I have taken into account the documents contained  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle (166 pages) and the Respondent's bundle (to G6).

 5. It was submitted by Ms. Rahman that the Appellant met the  requirements
    of paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM in relation  to  family  life,  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in relation to his private life.

Burden and standard of proof

 6. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show that, at the date  of
    the hearing, the decision is a breach of his rights  to  a  family  and
    private life under Article 8  ECHR.   The  standard  of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities.


Decision and Reasons


Appendix FM


 7. I find that the Appellant is no longer  in  a  subsisting  relationship
    with his wife.  I accept  that  the  Appellant  may  be  hoping  for  a
    reconciliation but, on the evidence before me, as at the  date  of  the
    hearing, I find that the relationship is no longer subsisting.


 8. As I have set out above, the appeal was adjourned on 14  February  2019
    because the Appellant's wife and her mother were not in attendance.  It
    was submitted at the time that  it  was  anticipated  that  they  would
    attend if the hearing were adjourned to a later date.

 9. The Appellant gave evidence that the relationship with his wife was not
    very good. They had been arguing.  They had had  problems  on  and  off
    during the course of their relationship and, over the  last  couple  of
    months, things had got worse.  The Appellant gave evidence that he  was
    no longer living with his wife.  He  has  moved  to  her  grandfather's
    house.  Her grandfather is also related to the Appellant as  an  uncle.
    He moved from the marital home in February, some six weeks prior to the
    hearing.

10. The Appellant gave evidence that he had had no contact whatsoever  with
    his wife since he left the marital home in February.  He gave  evidence
    that his uncles and his wife's  grandfather  had  advised  him  not  to
    contact her but to give her some space.

11. When asked about the future of his  relationship,  the  Appellant  said
    that he believed it would get better.  However, he also  gave  evidence
    that the main problem had been his mother-in-law.  He said that, had he
    and his wife been living separately, things would have been  different.



12. I find that his wife and her mother are well aware of the  consequences
    of the Appellant's appeal being refused.  This much is clear  from  the
    statements which they  provided  for  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Appellant was asked whether his wife was  aware  of  the
    hearing.  He gave evidence that he did not know whether she  was  aware
    of it, but it was likely that she was.  He said that his  mother-in-law
    was aware of the hearing, just as she had been aware of the hearing  on
    14 February 2019.

13. The Appellant gave evidence that his wife is unlikely to go against her
    mother's wishes.  He said that the emotional  attachment  between  them
    was very high.  His mother-in-law always took his wife's side, and made
    matters worse.  He gave evidence that it was his mother-in-law who told
    him to move to his wife's grandfather's house.

14. Although the Appellant gave evidence that he was not sure  whether  his
    wife knew of the consequences of the Appellant losing  this  appeal,  I
    find that the signed  witness  statement  indicates  that  she  is.   I
    therefore find that the fact that  neither  his  wife  nor  her  mother
    attended the hearing is a clear indication that they consider that  the
    relationship is over.  It is clear from their witness  statements  that
    they understand the difficulty of the relationship being maintained  if
    the Appellant returned to Pakistan.

15. Although the Appellant gave evidence that he had reason to believe that
    his wife was hoping for a reconciliation, he  has  not  spoken  to  her
    since February.  She is not supporting his appeal.  Although this is  a
    matter which may cause the Appellant some unhappiness, and he is  still
    married to his wife, I find that their relationship is not  subsisting,
    given that they have had absolutely no contact with  each  other  since
    February.

16. I therefore find that paragraph EX.1 cannot apply to the Appellant.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

17.  I  have  carefully  considered  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Pakistan.   Although  the
    Appellant has not been to Pakistan since he was 13 years old  when  his
    family moved to Saudi Arabia,  I  find  that  his  parents,  his  three
    brothers and his sister are living in Kashmir, Pakistan.  I  find  that
    the Appellant is in contact with his family in Pakistan.


18. In addition to his immediate family, the Appellant gave  evidence  that
    his wife's grandfather, his uncle, with whom he lives, is currently  in
    Pakistan.  He also has a home in Kashmir.  I find  that  the  Appellant
    has both immediate and extended family in Pakistan with whom he  is  in
    contact.  I find that the Appellant has strong family ties to Pakistan.



19. It was submitted that the Appellant would not be able to stay with  his
    parents because there was not enough space for him in  the  house.   It
    was also  submitted  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  support  him
    financially.

20. I have evidence from the Appellant's family in Pakistan which indicates
    that the Appellant's parents, together with his three brothers, live in
    one house together with their  families.   I  have  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's sister also lives in Kashmir in a  three  bedroomed  house.
    Her husband works in Malaysia, and she lives there with  her  children.
    I have evidence that the Appellant's uncle, his wife's grandfather, has
    a home in Kashmir.  I find on the balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    Appellant's family members will be able to accommodate him.

21. In terms of financial support, I find that the Appellant is financially
    supported by his relatives in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  said
    that he could ask, but that they would be very  unlikely  to  give  him
    money were he to return to Pakistan, as the reason that they  give  him
    money is that they are hoping that the relationship with his wife  will
    improve.  However, I find that no satisfactory reason was given for why
    they would not continue to financially support him, even on an  ad  hoc
    basis, were  he  to  return  to  Pakistan,  at  least  until  he  finds
    employment.  As was submitted by Ms. Everett, the amount of money  that
    they give him in the United Kingdom would go much further in  Pakistan.
    It would be cheaper for them to support him financially there.

22. I find that the Appellant will not be destitute, as was submitted,  but
    that he will have the support of family members in  Pakistan  and  also
    support  from  the  United  Kingdom.   I  find  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities that the Appellant will be supported by family members on
    return to Pakistan.

23. I find that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in order to study.
     He has gained ACCA qualifications in accountancy.  When asked in cross-
    examination, the Appellant said that he could use this qualification in
    Pakistan, albeit that he had obtained it  in  2015.   However,  it  was
    submitted  that  these  were  not  transferrable  qualifications.    No
    evidence was provided to support this.   The Appellant said that he had
    asked a friend about job opportunities and had been told  that  he  had
    less chance of obtaining a job due to his lack of experience.   I  find
    that the  Appellant  has  obtained  a  highly  respectable  accountancy
    qualification  which  will  assist  him  in  obtaining  employment   in
    Pakistan.  I appreciate that he may not  be  aware  of  the  employment
    market in Pakistan, but he has  many  family  members  and  friends  in
    Pakistan who will be able to assist him.

24. I find that the Appellant speaks Urdu.  Although the Appellant has  not
    been to Pakistan for some time, I find  that  he  spent  his  childhood
    there.  I find that  he  has  not  lost  all  cultural  connections  to
    Pakistan.   I have no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  any  health
    problems.

25. I find, taking into account all of the evidence, that the Appellant has
    failed  to  show  that  he  meets   the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

Article 8 outside the immigration rules

26. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 in  accordance
    with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I find that the Appellant does
    not have a family life with his wife as I find  that  the  relationship
    has broken down.  No evidence was provided to suggest  that  he  has  a
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 with any other family members
    in the United Kingdom.  I find that  the  Appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for almost ten years.  I find that he  has  built  up  a
    private life during this time sufficient to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8.  I find that the decision would interfere with  his  private
    life.


27. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  not  be  significant  and  that  it  would  be
    proportionate.

28. In my assessment of proportionality, I have taken into account  all  of
    my findings above.  In assessing the public interest I have taken  into
    account section 19 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
     Section 117B(1) provides that the maintenance of effective immigration
    controls is in the public interest.  There is a strong public  interest
    in refusing leave to remain to those who do not meet  the  requirements
    of the immigration rules.

29. The Appellant speaks English (section 117B(2)).  The Appellant  is  not
    financially independent but relies  on  family  members  for  financial
    support (117B(3)).

30. In relation to his private life under sections 117B(4) and (5), I  find
    that the Appellant has never been here unlawfully.  He has  always  had
    leave to remain.  Section 117B(4) provides that little weight is to  be
    given to a private life established when  a  person's  leave  has  been
    precarious.  The Appellant came to the United  Kingdom  as  a  student.
    There was no expectation that he  would  be  granted  leave  to  remain
    permanently.  It was submitted that he had been  here  for  almost  ten
    years lawfully, but he has not been here for the period required  under
    the immigration rules.  While a  period  of  ten  years  is  a  lengthy
    period, I have found above that he has not shown that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan, and I find
    that his private life could continue in Pakistan.

31. Section 117(6) is not relevant.

32. As part of my consideration of his private life, I have considered  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife,  and  the   likelihood   of
    reconciliation.  I have found above that he does not have a family life
    with his wife.  I have set out above that the evidence before  me  does
    not indicate that there is any prospect of  reconciliation,  especially
    given the fact that the Appellant's wife and  mother-in-law  are  aware
    that, if this  appeal  is  dismissed,  and  the  Appellant  returns  to
    Pakistan, the likelihood is that the relationship  will  not  continue.
    The Appellant's wife has provided statements in the past in support  of
    the Appellant's appeal, but she has shown no indication that she wishes
    to support the Appellant's appeal now.  I find that, although it may be
    with some sadness for the Appellant, this relationship is over and that
    there is no prospect of reconciliation.  Had his  wife  or  her  mother
    considered that there was a prospect of  reconciliation,  I  find  they
    would have supported the Appellant's appeal, even if  the  relationship
    was going through a difficult period.


33. Further, although the Appellant said  that  he  took  advice  from  his
    uncles and his wife's grandfather, for example in  relation  to  giving
    his wife some space, and although he said that the only reason  he  was
    financially supported by his  uncles  was  because  they  hoped  for  a
    reconciliation between the Appellant and his wife, neither  the  uncles
    nor his wife's grandfather attended the hearing or provided any written
    evidence in support.  Although his wife's grandfather is  in  Pakistan,
    he could have provided written evidence.  The Appellant's evidence  was
    that his uncles had spoken to his mother-in-law on the day prior to the
    hearing.  No reason was given for why they could not have attended  the
    hearing to give evidence in support of the Appellant's appeal.

34. The Appellant also gave evidence that his mother-in-law had  given  the
    Appellant's uncles an update about his wife's health when they saw  her
    on the day prior to the hearing.  He said that she had been referred to
    hospital in Oxford, and that she had mental health problems.   However,
    I have no recent medical evidence.  The Appellant said that his mother-
    in-law had refused to provide updated medical evidence,  and  told  his
    uncles that the Appellant should have approached her directly.  I  have
    no  evidence  from  his  uncles  to  corroborate  this.   Further,  the
    Appellant's wife is an adult, and  could  have  provided  the  evidence
    herself, had she wished to.  I have no evidence to suggest that she  is
    currently so unwell that she would have been  unable  to  provide  this
    evidence.

35. It was submitted that all of the Appellant's social ties  were  in  the
    United Kingdom, but I have no evidence of these beyond his  family.   I
    find  that  he  can  maintain  friendships  using  modern  methods   of
    communication.  The Appellant is not working.  He has  studied  in  the
    United Kingdom, but his studies are at an end.  He will be returning to
    Pakistan with the benefit of the education and  qualifications  he  has
    gained here.

36. I find, taking all of the above into account, and  placing  significant
    weight on the fact that I have found that the Appellant does  not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules, that the balance comes  down
    in favour of the public interest in maintaining  effective  immigration
    control.  I find that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  the
    decision is a breach of his rights to a family or  private  life  under
    Article 8 ECHR, or indeed any  other  rights  protected  by  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision


37. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


38. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 9 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 9 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

