









Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11249/2017

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2018                         |On 6th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              Ms Rose Okoronkwo

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent :   Mr E Eluwa, of Finsbury Law Solicitors.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [SSHD] against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert
    promulgated on  the  26th  July  2018  whereby  the  judge  allowed  Ms
    Okoronkwo's appeal against the  decision  of  the  SSHD  to  refuse  Ms
    Okoronkwo's human rights appeal.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on 7th September  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The grounds of appeal raise amongst other things the following  issues:
    -

    a) The  judge  found  that  the  respondent  was  unable  to  meet  the
       eligibility requirements under the immigration rules under  Appendix
       FM as a parent.  The judge however went on find that the  respondent
       satisfied the requirements of paragraph EX.1. In light of  the  case
       of Sabir (App FM -EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063 the judge
       misdirected himself in finding that the respondent could succeed  as
       meeting paragraph EX 1.

    b) It is also arguable that the  judge  erred  in  treating  the  adult
       nephew of the respondent as a child under section 117B (vi).

Factual background

 5. The respondent's claim is based upon her relationship with her  British
    citizen nephew. The nephew, Christopher Oguh, was born on 29th December
    1999. At the time of the hearing before Judge Herbert,  Mr  Christopher
    Oguh was therefore over 18 years and an adult.

 6. Mr Christopher Oguh was born in Nigeria and had lived in  Nigeria  with
    the respondent until 2012. The mother of Christopher Oguh had  been  in
    the relationship with Mr Oguh senior and became pregnant. When Mr  Oguh
    senior refused to marry her, she allegedly walked away from him and  Mr
    Christopher Oguh. Thereafter she had nothing to do with the  upbringing
    of Mr Christopher Oguh. It is  not  entirely  clear  as  to  when,  but
    thereafter Mr Oguh senior came to the United Kingdom and has been  here
    a significant period of time and is settled  here.  Responsibility  for
    the upbringing of Mr Christopher Oguh fell to  Mr  Oguh's  sister,  the
    respondent.

 7. In March 2012 Mr Christopher Oguh was granted a visa to enter the UK to
    join his father, the brother of the respondent,  Mr  Oguh  senior.  The
    basis for Mr Christopher Oguh coming to the United  Kingdom  must  have
    been under the Immigration Rules paragraph 297, which would require  Mr
    Oguh to have sole parental responsibility. As the  basis  for  granting
    entry was not put before the Tribunal I put such considerations aside.

 8. At the time of Christopher  Oguh's  entry  to  the  UK  the  respondent
    accompanied him. She entered on a visit visa. On the  7th  August  2012
    she returned to Nigeria.

 9. Once the respondent had returned to Nigeria,  it  is  claimed  that  Mr
    Christopher Oguh suffered serious emotional problems because  of  being
    separated from the respondent. So the respondent returned to the UK  on
    the 29th November 2012. Mr Christopher  Oguh  would  have  been  12  or
    thereabouts at the time. It is to be noted that the respondent at  that
    stage was alleged to have 2 children of her own,  although  their  ages
    are not specified, and it was  claimed  that  she  was  working  for  a
    Government Ministry in Nigeria. The respondent re-entered the UK  on  a
    visit visa.

10. The respondent has been residing in the UK since that date. In order to
    enter the United Kingdom in November 2012 the  respondent  had  made  a
    further application for a visit visa. The  visa,  a  multi-entry  visit
    visa valid for two years between November 2012 and November 2014,  only
    permitted the respondent to enter for a period of six months at any one
    time and as a visitor. Despite the fact that Christopher  Oguh  was  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and it was  to  deal  with  his  emotional
    problems caused by  separation,  it  is  claimed  that  the  respondent
    intended to return to Nigeria.

11. The respondent remained in the UK beyond the six  months  permitted  by
    the terms of the visa. The present application under appeal was made by
    the respondent on 4 October 2016 on the basis of human rights.

12. In allowing the appeal Judge Herbert allowed it not only under  Article
    8 but also under the  Immigration  Rules.  Clearly  given  the  current
    appeal structure and grounds of appeal it is not possible for an appeal
    to be allowed under the Immigration Rules. Whilst whether an individual
    does meet the requirements of the rules will be a significant factor in
    assessing whether or not the decision is proportionately justified  for
    the purposes of Article 8, it does not alter the fact that  the  appeal
    is not being allowed under the Immigration Rules. However as the  judge
    has allowed it also on the basis of Article 8 any error with regard  to
    the rules may make no material difference.

13. However central to the judge's consideration of  the  appeal  were  his
    findings with regard to the Immigration Rules. In  seeking  to  examine
    the  respondent's  position  under  the  Immigration   Rules   and   in
    determining whether or not there was a  parental  relationship  between
    the respondent and Mr Christopher Oguh the judge has  relied  upon  the
    case of RK v SSHD (Section 117B) (6) "parental relationship" 2016  UKUT
    31.

14. In respect of the case I would firstly draw attention to paragraphs  43
    and 44 of the decision:-

         43.      I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that, in effect, an
         individual must "step into the shoes  of  a  parent"  in  order  to
         establish a "parental relationship". If the role they play, whether
         as a relative or friend of the family, is as a caring  relative  or
         friend but not so as to take on the role of a parent then it cannot
         be said that they have a "parental relationship" with the child. It
         is perhaps obvious to state that "carers" are not per se "parents."
         A child may have carers who do not step into  the  shoes  of  their
         parents but look after the child for specific periods of time  (for
         example whilst the parents are at work) or even  longer  term  (for
         example where the parents are travelling abroad for  a  holiday  or
         family visit). Those carers may be  professionally  employed;  they
         may be relatives; or they may be friends. In all  those  cases,  it
         may properly be said that there is an element of dependency between
         the child and his or her carers. However, that alone would not,  in
         my judgment, give rise to a "parental relationship."

         44.      If a non-biological parent ("third party")  caring  for  a
         child claims such a relationship, its existence  will  depend  upon
         all the circumstances including whether or  not  there  are  others
         (usually the biologically parents) who  have  such  a  relationship
         with the child also. It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a  person
         will be able to establish they have taken on the role of  a  parent
         when the biological parents continue to be involved in the  child's
         life as the child's parents as in a case such as the present  where
         the children and parents continue to live and function together  as
         a family. It will be difficult, if not impossible, to  say  that  a
         third party has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.

15. Here throughout the period that Mr Christopher Oguh  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom the biological father has been present and  living  with
    him. It is also to be noted that there was a break albeit of just short
    of four months, between 7 August 2012 and 29 November  2012,  when  the
    respondent was back in  Nigeria.  To  that  extent  the  judge  had  to
    determine whether or not, as set out in paragraph 46 of  the  decision,
    the father of the  child  had  relinquished  legal  or  even  de  facto
    responsibility for the child and if so to  what  degree.  It  does  not
    appear that the judge has made  a  finding  that  Mr  Oguh  Senior  has
    relinquished de facto responsibility for the child.

16. At paragraph 23 and 24  the  decision  Judge  Herbert  found  that  the
    respondent did not meet the criteria under the provisions  of  Appendix
    FM- E-LTRPt.2.2. Thereafter the judge goes on in paragraph 25  to  find
    that the respondent does not meet the requirements of Ex.1.

17. The judge then makes reference in paragraph 26 to the  10  year  parent
    route and claims that under the 10 year  parent  route  the  respondent
    must meet the requirements of "Appendix EX.1 of Appendix  FM".  I  have
    some difficulty in establishing exactly what the judges  referring  to.
    There are provisions within the Immigration Rules under appendix FM  in
    respect of partners as to 5 year and 10 year routes but not in  respect
    of parents.

18. However an examination of paragraph EX.1 (aa) means that the  provision
    only applies where the child is under the age of 18 or  was  under  the
    age of 18 when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis  that
    this paragraph applied. The respondent has  never  been  granted  leave
    under the paragraph. In the circumstances the paragraph does not apply.
    Further Mr Christopher Oguh was not at the date of the hearing  and  is
    not under the age of 18.

19. It appears that the judge was applying Ex.1 as a free  standing  right.
    That clearly has been held to be wrong in the case  of  Sabir  (App  FM
    -Ex.1 not freestanding) 2014 UKUT 00063.

20. Further as stated the judge refers to a 10 year parent and a  five-year
    parent route. In Appendix FM -E-ILTRP [in respect of applications as  a
    partner] under E-ILTRP.1.3 there are reference to 5 year  and  10  year
    routes but those are not applicable to a parent.  The  judge  seems  to
    have imported criteria from other parts of  the  rules  which  are  not
    applicable in the present circumstances. That may have made no material
    difference if findings  with  regard  to  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    distinct from and do not influence the findings in respect  of  article
    8.

21. However it is unclear to what extent the judge's misapplication of  the
    rules has influenced his decision with regard to Article 8.

22. The judge within paragraph 31 continues to refer to Mr Christopher Oguh
    as a child. At the time of the hearing and materially at the  time  for
    assessing the Article 8 rights of the parties, Christopher Oguh was not
    a child. At that stage in order to assess the article 8 rights  it  was
    necessary to consider the criteria set down in Kugathas 2003 INLR  170,
    2003 EWCA Civ 31. The judge has made no assessment of the  factors  set
    out in the case law.

23. The judge in paragraph 36 and 37 refers to the respondent  having  been
    granted a two years Visitors Visa from November 2005 to November  2007,
    then a five-year Visit Visa until November 2012  and  thereafter  again
    from 15 November 2012 to 15th of November 2014. The judge suggest  that
    the respondent has been in the United Kingdom therefore  a  significant
    period of time perfectly lawfully. That totally ignores the  fact  that
    the respondent at any one period of time was only entitled to be in the
    United Kingdom for six months as  a  "visitor"  and  not  as  a  person
    residing in the United Kingdom. Again the judge has  misunderstood  the
    nature of the right of the respondent. The respondent had not  been  in
    the United Kingdom lawfully.

24. In the circumstances there are clear errors of law in the way that  the
    judge has assessed the article 8 rights of the parties. It is  material
    that Mr Christopher Oguh was an adult at the time of  the  hearing.  It
    was material that the father of Mr Christopher Oguh  was  still  living
    with him. It was material that the respondent had ceased to be lawfully
    in the United Kingdom and paragraph 117B was therefore  applicable.  In
    the circumstances there are  clear  errors  of  law  which  render  the
    decision unsustainable.

25. I set the decision aside and direct that the matter be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before a  judge  other  than
    Judge Herbert. I do not preserve any findings of fact.

    Notice of Decision

26. I allow the appeal by the SSHD.

27. I set the decision aside and direct that this matter be  remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal and that the appeal be heard afresh

28. I do not make an anonymity direction






Signed

Date 30th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

