
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11609/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 20 February 2020                 |On 09 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr HENRY IHEANYICHUKWU EBOH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Swain, counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Trevaskis, promulgated on 18 September 2019. Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 2 January 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 September 2008  with
    leave to enter as a student. He was granted further leave to remain  as
    a student until 28 February 2011 and as  a  Tier  1  post-study  worker
    until 11 February 2013. The respondent was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 skilled worker until 14 May 2016.  He made three in-
    time applications for further leave to remain under Tier 2  which  were
    refused on 1 April 2016, 7 May 2016 and  29  November  2016.  The  last
    decision attracted only an out of country appeal as the claim was  said
    to be clearly unfounded and the certificate  was  not  challenged.  The
    respondent's lawful leave  endured  for  8  years  and  2  months.  The
    respondent made further submissions on  19  December  2017  which  were
    rejected. Lastly, on 21 January 2019 he applied for indefinite leave to
    remain, claiming 10 years' continuous long residence.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application for indefinite leave  to
    remain in a  letter  dated  21  June  2019  which  explained  that  the
    respondent's lawful leave expired on 20 April  2016  and  that  he  had
    accrued only 7 years and 6 months continuous leave.   The  respondent's
    family life with his partner and three children then aged 5,  3  and  1
    was considered, however they were not qualifying family  members  under
    the  Rules  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances.  It   was
    considered that the respondent would be able to re-integrate into  life
    in Nigeria.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was conceded that the
    respondent could not  meet  the  long  residence  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules nor those in  Appendix  FM.  Nonetheless,  the  judge
    concluded that the respondent would face very significant obstacles  to
    re-integration in Nigeria for reasons which included the risk that  his
    daughter would  be  subjected  to  FGM  and  that  the  respondent  was
    expressing suicidal thoughts. In the alternative, the judge found  that
    the best interests of the children were to remain with their parents in
    the United Kingdom and that  the  respondent  qualified  for  leave  on
    private life grounds. The appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge erred in his  finding  that
    there   were   very   significant   obstacles   to   the   respondent's
    reintegration. It was  said  that  there  was  a  lack  of  exceptional
    features, a dearth of reasoning and a lack of evidence to  support  the
    findings regarding FGM and the respondent's mental health.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.



The hearing

 8. Mr Tufan make the following points, succinctly.  At [45] the judge made
    a series of findings which were mere assertions. There  was  inadequate
    analysis of the facts. For instance, he asked me to note that there was
    an education system in Nigeria, at least in  urban  centres.  Mr  Tufan
    made  no  response  to  my  query  as  to  whether   the   respondent's
    representative at  the  hearing  had  challenged  any  of  the  matters
    subsequently relied upon by the judge. He concluded by saying that  the
    judge's findings could not be sustained.

 9. Mr Swain relied upon his skeleton argument dated 19 February  2020,  as
    well as his previous skeleton  argument  and  the  307-page  bundle  of
    supporting evidence, both of which were before the First-tier Tribunal.
    He argued that this appeal concerned the Secretary of State not  liking
    a decision which was open to the judge to make. It suffices to say that
    he took me to the evidence which related to each of the  factors  taken
    into consideration by the judge in reaching his conclusion  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to the integration of  the  respondent,
    his wife and three children, in Nigeria. He  further  argued  that  the
    judge did not misdirect himself as to the law and that he took  account
    of the case law and the public interest considerations.

10. In response, Mr Tufan argued that there had been a complete  dearth  of
    reasoning and that it was possible that another judge might come  to  a
    differing conclusion.

11. At the end of the hearing, I stated that while the judge's reasons were
    briefly expressed, there appeared to have  been  no  challenge  to  the
    substantial evidence advanced and as such those reasons were  adequate.
    I upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  its  entirety.  My
    reasons are given below.

Decision on error of law

12. In VV (grounds of  appeal)  Lithuania  [2016]  UKUT  00053  (IAC),  the
    following guidance was given regarding reasons challenges:

         "(1) An application for permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  of
         inadequacy of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
         must  generally  demonstrate  by  reference  to  the  material  and
         arguments placed before that Tribunal that (a) the matter  involved
         a substantial issue between the parties at first instance  and  (b)
         that the Tribunal either failed to deal with that matter at all, or
         gave reasons on that point which are so unclear that they may  well
         conceal an error of law."

13. It was not the Secretary of State's case that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to deal with any particular matter or that the  judge's  reasons
    lacked clarity. On the contrary, Mr Tufan argued  that  the  judge  had
    made a series of assertions unsupported by evidence.

14. The judge listed six factors which he accepted amounted,  cumulatively,
    to  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.  The  core  of   the
    respondent's case was that his eldest child would be subjected to  FGM.
    Contrary to what was argued on behalf of the Secretary of  State  there
    was evidence supporting this aspect of the claim before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That evidence consisted of a letter from  the  Government  of
    Imo State referred to at [14] of the decision and which can be found in
    the material before the judge.  The Secretary of State was  represented
    by counsel at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and  there  is
    no indication that any issue was taken as to the authenticity  of  this
    document. The said letter confirmed that the respondent and his  family
    have been banished from their village and community because  they  have
    not allowed their eldest daughter to be subject to  FGM.  An  affidavit
    from the respondent's mother confirming this aspect of the claim, among
    others, was also enclosed in  the  bundle.  The  authenticity  of  that
    document was not challenged at the hearing. The issue of FGM  was  also
    considered by the independent social worker  who  prepared  a  detailed
    report, who concluded that this issue contributed to there being a high
    risk of significant emotional and physical harm to the eldest child.

15. The judge was criticised for  characterising  the  respondent's  mental
    health as an obstacle to integration, it being said that there  was  no
    evidence to support this. While there was no psychiatric report  before
    the judge, there was other evidence available.

16. The respondent provided a comprehensive written statement in  which  he
    described himself as suffering from depression and  the  social  worker
    records that he had thoughts of hanging  himself  at  the  prospect  of
    returning to Nigeria. The respondent's  mental  state  relates  to  his
    fears about the safety of his family in Nigeria, with reference to  the
    risk of kidnapping. Evidence of the prevalence of kidnapping was before
    the judge in the form of several news articles. One  article  from  the
    Guardian described kidnaps as increasingly  rampant  and  occurring  in
    various parts of Nigeria. It was open  to  the  judge  to  decide  what
    weight to  accord  to  that  evidence  and  once  more,  there  was  no
    submission on behalf of the Secretary of State that  the  judge  should
    reject this evidence.

17. The judge took into consideration that  the  children  were  unable  to
    speak Ibo and I accept that given their young ages, this  was  unlikely
    to present a long-term significant obstacle to reintegration by itself.
    Nonetheless this was just one of a series of reasons.

18. Mr Tufan submitted that education was available in  Nigeria,  in  urban
    areas and therefore the judge was not entitled to take this issue  into
    account.  Nonetheless,  the  evidence  before   the   judge   indicated
    difficulty with children obtaining an education in their local area.  A
    letter from the Community Government Council which was before the judge
    referred to dilapidated schools, rampant strikes and children not going
    to school because  of  these  circumstances.   As  for  education  more
    generally in Nigeria, the judge was referred  to  a  BBC  report  of  a
    Unicef campaign highlighting that Nigeria had  the  largest  number  of
    children in the world not being educated. At the time of  the  article,
    the figure was 10.5 million.

19. The respondent, in his witness statement explained how he and his  wife
    were destitute and reliant on a loan from a friend, advanced  with  the
    expectation of repayment should the appeal succeed. This is relevant to
    another of the factors taken into  consideration  by  the  judge,  that
    being that the respondent and his family would be homeless in  Nigeria.
    Again, there was supporting evidence of this matter in the form of  the
    affidavit from the respondent's mother. That affidavit  explained  that
    the respondent's unemployed brother, his  wife  and  six  children  had
    taken over the family home in Nigeria, which was  already  occupied  by
    the respondent's mother and  that  there  would  be  no  room  in  that
    accommodation for the respondent, his wife and three children.  In  his
    statement,   the   respondent   described   that    accommodation    as
    "dilapidated." The respondent's account that  he  would  be  likely  to
    "face difficulties" in obtaining employment  because  of  his  age  was
    found to be another obstacle to reintegration. The appellant  was  aged
    47 at the time of the hearing. Evidence  was  before  the  judge  of  a
    series of graduate or professional vacancies in Nigeria  which  invited
    applicants aged either between 25-35 or 30-45.

20. The grounds contend that there was a lack of analysis or  reference  to
    Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A  -  compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) That argument is  unsustainable.  The  judge
    took into consideration Treebhawon at [35] of the decision and  reasons
    and directed himself appropriately. There was no need for  him  to  say
    more than he did or to elaborate on the  meaning  of  very  significant
    obstacles.

21. While the reasons were briefly expressed and  another  judge  may  have
    reached a different conclusion, the  judge  referred  to  all  relevant
    authorities and demonstrated that he was aware of the strength  of  the
    public interest in removal [34].

22. In considering the proportionality of the  respondent's  decision,  the
    judge had regard to the public interest considerations in  section  117
    of the 2002 Act.

23. At [54-55] the judge  took  into  consideration  that  the  appellant's
    presence in the United Kingdom was either precarious  or  unlawful  and
    reiterated that the human rights appeal was allowed on the  basis  that
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules  were  met.
    There was no error in the judge's application of the Razgar steps.

24. The grounds  amount  to  disagreement  that  the  judge  detected  very
    significant obstacles to integration and  also  argue  that  the  judge
    found no exceptional features in the appellant's  situation.  The  task
    for the judge was as described by Underhill LJ in Parveen  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 932 at [9]:

         "It is fair enough to observe that  the  words  "very  significant"
         connote an "elevated" threshold, and I have no difficulty with  the
         observation that the test will not be met by "mere inconvenience or
         upheaval". But I am not sure that saying that  "mere"  hardship  or
         difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,  will  not  "generally"
         suffice adds anything of substance. The task of  the  Secretary  of
         State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is simply to  assess  the
         obstacles  to  integration  relied  on,  whether  characterised  as
         hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they
         regard them as "very significant". "

25. The First-tier Tribunal judge  considered  that  the  removal  of  this
    family in circumstances where they were banished from their  home  area
    and any potential family support unless they accepted that their eldest
    child  would  undergo  FGM,  combined  with   the   troubling   country
    conditions, their economic circumstances and  the  respondent's  mental
    state amounted to very significant obstacles to integration. While this
    could be seen as a generous decision, it was one which was open to  the
    judge on the evidence before him.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Date: 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

