
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11449/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Determination Promulgated            |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 24th November 2016                |On 25th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               MR GABER MORSY
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person, assisted by his step-
                    daughter, Ms K Hewitt
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Appellant,  permission
    having been granted by a Judge  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  on  10th
    August  2016.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  and  Reasons  under
    challenge is a decision of Judge Kempton promulgated on 9th March 2016.
    She decided the appeal on the papers in accordance with the Appellant's
    request, he having paid the fee for a paper consideration  rather  than
    for an oral hearing.

 2. The Appellant, born on 27th  November  1972  and  a  citizen  of  Egypt
    originally came to the UK as a  spouse  on  12th  April  2011.  He  was
    refused further leave to remain, we understand on financial grounds and
    became appeal rights exhausted on 27th March 2015.  He was then  issued
    with a notice as a person liable to be removed from  the  UK.  On  24th
    August 2015 he made an application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    his family and private life in the UK. He is the spouse  of  a  British
    citizen  and  while  the  Secretary  of  State  acknowledged  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting  considered  that  he  did  not
    qualify under paragraph R-LTRP of Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules
    because he did not come within Ex.1 ,  there  being  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to his enjoying family life in Egypt.

 3. The Secretary of  State  also  considered  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and concluded that he did not meet  the  requirements
    of that paragraph either.

 4. Judge Kempton set out the reasons for the refusal  in  some  detail  at
    paragraph 6 of her judgment and noted that the Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal indicated that he wished to be with his wife because  she  needs
    him and that he is her carer. He said that he wished to live  a  normal
    life and not live in fear of deportation at any time. His wife was in a
    critical health situation. He had arrived in the UK legally but  as  he
    had insufficient money he was unable to apply for indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

 5. At paragraph 8 the judge expressed her regret that  the  Appellant  had
    opted for a paper appeal and was without a representative. There was  a
    dearth of documentary evidence to  assist  the  Judge  and  no  witness
    statements. The Judge noted at paragraph 10 that whilst  it  was  clear
    that the Appellant's wife had a poor spell of ill-health  she  did  not
    know, on the basis of the evidence provided, how  her  health  affected
    her at the date of her consideration of  the  case  or  what  help  she
    requires from  others,  in  particular  the  Appellant.  There  was  no
    statement from the wife indicating the care provided by  the  Appellant
    and no evidence about the issue of the couple relocating  to  Egypt  or
    evidence of other ties that his wife had in the UK.

 6. Judge Kempton dismissed the appeal.

 7. The Appellant, still unrepresented, applied for permission  to  appeal.
    He did so providing further details as to his wife's  state  of  health
    and clarifying the situation  with  regard  to  carer's  allowance  and
    benefits.

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  considered  the  application  for
    permission to appeal noted that the  grounds  comprised  statements  of
    material fact not previously placed before the Respondent or before any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. The Judge also noted that the conduct of the
    proceedings by Judge Kempton  was,  on  the  face  of  it,  proper,  in
    accordance with the Procedure Rules and evidence led.  The  Judge  also
    noted that the Appellant had chosen a paper  hearing  and  made  little
    effort attempt to present evidence.  The  Judge  also  noted  that  the
    Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal was predicated  on  the
    finding that there was no evidence to justify a conclusion  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to married life between the Appellant and
    his  British  wife  continuing  in  Egypt   and   no   disproportionate
    interference to  private  and  family  life  should  the  Appellant  be
    removed.

 9. The Judge should have stopped at that point and refused  permission  to
    appeal. However, astonishingly, the Judge went on to consider  that  if
    the  new  evidence  showed  that  there  were  in  fact  insurmountable
    obstacles, there may be an injustice in  the  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant and found that it was "fairly arguable that the Appellant has
    suffered procedural unfairness and has not  had  adequate  opportunity,
    given his lack of means and advice, to present his case."

10. A judgment of the First-tier Tribunal can  only  be  set  aside  if  it
    contains an error of law  which  if  not  made  might  have  led  to  a
    different outcome. The Judge must  have  done  something  wrong  either
    procedurally or in the way in which she dealt with the evidence or have
    been mistaken as to material facts before it can be said that  she  has
    made an error of law. The Judge who granted  permission  in  this  case
    made clear himself that the Judge had made no error of law. In granting
    permission to appeal, wrongly, the Judge has only achieved  the  giving
    of false hope to this Appellant. It  is  abundantly  clear  that  Judge
    Kempton made no error of law in her  Decision  and  Reasons.  She  made
    proper findings on the basis of the wholly inadequate evidence adduced.
    It has never been an error of law for a Judge  to  fail  to  take  into
    account evidence that was not before her.

11. This is an example of a case where permission to  appeal  should  never
    have been granted. Doing so has merely added delay and given false hope
    to the Appellant.

12. If the Appellant has evidence to indicate that his  application  should
    succeed then he should make a fresh application  to  the  Secretary  of
    State enclosing all relevant evidence.  We and the  Appellant  had  the
    advantage of Ms Hewitt who had attended to assist  him.   We  explained
    all this to her and are confident that she fully understood.

13. The First-tier Tribunal's decision containing no error of law, material
    or otherwise, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                 Dated 24th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


