
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11464/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On             the              14th              February              2018
               On the 26th February 2018

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                         MR HASSAN ABDULLAHI MOHAMUD
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Lawson (Solicitor)
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated on the 9th May 2017, in which he
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal
         to allow the Appellant Entry Clearance into the United Kingdom as a
         spouse, on Human Rights grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR.

      2.  Judge Herwald found that the Respondent  had  simply  opined  that
         "The issuing body confirmed to this office that the documents  were
         forged and did not emanate from them", but found that he could  not
         rely upon that and without further information he was not  prepared
         to find that the Appellant or  Sponsor  had  practiced  forgery  in
         respect of the marriage certificate produced by  them  and  further
         found that the parties were telling the truth  about  the  original
         marriage certificate being genuine and that a subsequent  copy  had
         been obtained by Mrs Saruro Hassan  Osman,.   Judge  Herwald  found
         that he was  driven  to  find  that  the  ECO  had  access  to  the
         subsequent marriage certificate and found  that  he  was  satisfied
         that the Appellant's wife went back to Somalia and that  they  went
         through the "rigmarole of obtaining the second certificate,  in  an
         effort to satisfy the British authorities".  Judge  Herwald  stated
         at [16(d)] that "Had that been all, then I would have  been  driven
         to allow the appeal, and  note  further  that  the  respondent  was
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities that photographs had been
         taken on her visit by the Sponsor to the Appellant".

      3. However, Judge Herwald went on to find that  "Nevertheless,  during
         the hearing, it became apparent that there is insufficient evidence
         to satisfy me that this is a valid marriage."  He  found  that  the
         Sponsor had stated that she was divorced, possibly in 2007, but had
         said that "I am not sure if I can get the papers, they might be  in
         my house".  Judge Herwald found that he was not  persuaded  to  the
         relevant standard that the Sponsor, who had  been  married  before,
         was indeed divorced or that she was free to marry at  the  relevant
         time claimed.  Furthermore, he found that  the  Sponsor  was  asked
         whether or not her husband had been married before and that she had
         said that he had been married and that "His wife has  died  and  he
         has one daughter".  Judge Herwald found that the Sponsor was unable
         to produce any evidence of the death of his first wife,  which  led
         him to the conclusion that he could not accept  that  there  was  a
         valid marriage and that therefore he found that the requirements of
         the Immigration Rules were not met and on that  basis,  the  appeal
         should not be allowed on  Article  8  grounds,  as  there  were  no
         compelling circumstances to justify leave being granted outside the
         Rules.

      4. Within the Grounds of Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge erred by introducing matters which were  not  before
         the Court, namely whether or not the Sponsor was divorced from  her
         previous marriage and if she was free to  remarry.   It  is  argued
         that additionally  the  Judge  questioned  evidence  regarding  the
         Appellant's previous marriage and that it was not for the Judge  to
         question whether a marriage can take place in Kenya  and  that  the
         relevant authorities would have ensured that both parties were free
         to marry and that otherwise  they  would  not  have  conducted  the
         marriage in the absence of any  evidence  to  suggest  that  either
         party was not free to marry and that the Judge was wrong to  direct
         himself to the conclusion he came to.  It was further  argued  that
         even if the Judge took the view that he did and believed  that  the
         Sponsor or Appellant were not free to remarry, that as this was not
         an issue prior to the hearing  and  had  not  been  raised  by  the
         Respondent the Judge should have given the Appellant an opportunity
         to produce such documents within a certain time period and that  it
         was procedurally unfair for the Judge not  to  give  the  Appellant
         such an opportunity.

      5. Permission to appeal in this case has been  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Chamberlain who found that it was an arguable  error
         of law of the Judge to dismiss the appeal  in  circumstances  where
         the reasons why the application had been refused by the  Respondent
         had been satisfied, as found by the Judge and when  he  had  simply
         gone on to consider an issue which  had  not  been  raised  by  the
         Respondent,  without  giving  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  an
         opportunity to provide evidence to address it.

      6. At the appeal hearing before me, Mr McVeety apologised to the Upper
         Tribunal  for  the  lack  of  a  Rule  24  Reply  setting  out  the
         Respondent's response to the Grounds of Appeal.  However, he freely
         accepted that the issue as to whether or not either the Sponsor  or
         the Appellant were free to marry had not  been  a  concern  of  the
         Respondent either prior to or at the appeal hearing and  that  that
         issue had not been canvassed with the parties at the appeal hearing
         as a potential reason for Judge  Herwald  wanting  to  dismiss  the
         appeal. Mr McVeety stated that it appeared that Judge  Herwald  had
         simply addressed his mind to that issue after the  appeal  hearing.
         He stated that the issue before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
         the bona fides of the documentation.  He told me that Ms Young  who
         had been the Home Office Presenting Officer at the original  appeal
         hearing had not made any submissions in respect of whether  or  not
         either party was free to marry.

      7. Mr McVeety further quite candidly conceded that it could  not  have
         been anticipated by either side that the Judge would have made  the
         findings that  he  made  in  respect  of  the  parties  not  having
         established that they were free to marry or that it would  in  fact
         be an issue in the case.

      8.  In such circumstances Mr McVeety,  quite  properly  in  accordance
         with his duty to the court, conceded  that  if  Judge  Herwald  had
         considered that to be an issue in the case which might  potentially
         lead him to dismiss the appeal, that what he should have  done  was
         to adjourn the case part heard, in order to allow the Appellant and
         Sponsor to obtain documentation to satisfy his  concerns  and  that
         the Judge had procedurally erred by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  a
         basis that had not been raised by the Respondent, and in respect of
         which he had not given the Appellant and Sponsor an opportunity  to
         address that issue by obtaining further evidence to deal with it.

      9. Mr McVeety conceded that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Herwald should be set aside, and further  quite  properly  conceded
         that he had now seen documentation establishing  that  the  Sponsor
         had been divorced prior to her marriage to the Appellant, and  that
         the Respondent was not taking issue  with  the  evidence  that  the
         Appellant's previous wife had died, prior to his  marriage  to  the
         Sponsor.  Mr McVeety said that as the  Respondent's  only  concerns
         had been address by Judge Herwald, the decision should be remade by
         this  court,  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  Human  Rights
         grounds, the provisions of the Immigration Rules having  been  met,
         and there being no evidence of  criminality  on  the  part  of  the
         Appellant or the Sponsor.

     10. In light of the concessions quite properly made by  Mr  McVeety  in
         compliance with his duty to the court, I do find that the  decision
         of Judge Herwald does contain a material error of law, in  that  it
         was procedurally unfair for him to have dismissed the appeal on the
         basis that had not been previously  raised  by  the  Respondent  or
         sought to be relied upon by the Respondent at the  appeal  hearing,
         in  circumstances  where  he  had  not  given  the   Appellant   an
         opportunity to effectively deal with what was a  new  issue  before
         the court, that had never previously been raised.  What  he  should
         have done, as properly stated by Mr McVeety,  was  to  adjourn  the
         case in order to allow any further documentation to  be  obtain  in
         respect of his concerns regarding the parties' freedom to marry.

     11.  I therefore do set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Herwald,  but
         preserve the unchallenged findings that  the  marriage  certificate
         presented was genuine and that the marriage had taken place  before
         the sponsor arrived in the UK. In light of the concession now  made
         by Mr McVeety that the decision should be made by me, allowing  the
         appeal on Human Rights grounds under Article 8, I do find  that  in
         light of the preserved findings from the decision of Judge  Herwald
         that the marriage certificate presented was genuine, and  that  the
         marriage had taken place before the Sponsor arrived in the UK, that
         the provision of the Immigration Rules were met and  that  in  such
         circumstances in the absence of any criminality  being  alleged  on
         the  part  of  the   Appellant,   the   decision   reached   is   a
         disproportionate interference  with  the  Appellant's  right  to  a
         family life with his wife in the UK, such that the decision  is  in
         breach of the Appellant's Human Rights in  respect  of  his  family
         life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

     12. In reaching this  decision  I  have  fully  taken  account  of  the
         provisions of section 117 A-D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

     13. I therefore remake the decision allowing the appeal on Human Rights
         grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herwald  was  made  following  a
procedural irregularity and therefore does contain a material error of  law,
and is set aside;

I remake the decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  Human  Rights
grounds under Article 8;

No Anonymity Order was made by Judge Herwald,  and  no  application  for  an
Anonymity Order was  made  before  me.   I  therefore  do  not  consider  it
appropriate for there to be any Anonymity Order in this case.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 15th February 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT

Fee Award

The Appellant having succeeded in his appeal, any fee paid by him should  be
refunded to him in its entirety.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 15th February 2018
