
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11741/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2020                  |On 11 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              MD TOWHIDUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes instructed by Morgan Hill Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties, and neither party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Bunting ("the judge") promulgated on 2 January
    2020.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is highly relevant to this appeal.
    It was summarised by the judge in paragraphs 2-10 of the decision.  The
    accuracy of the judge's summary has not been questioned/challenged by
    either party.  I set it out in full:

         "2.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a Tier 4 visa
             (following a previous unsuccessful appeal against a previous
             refusal) on 4 September 2009.  This leave was valid until 31
             December 2012.

         3.   On 5 January 2013 he applied for further leave to remain as a
             Tier 4 General Student.  This was granted on 5 March 2013 and
             was valid until 9 October 2014.

         4.   The appellant applied for further leave in the same category
             on 8 October 2014.  This was refused, with a right of appeal,
             on 17 February 2015.

         5.   An appeal was duly lodged on 3 March 2015.  The First-tier
             Tribunal dismissed his appeal on 18 April 2016.  Permission to
             appeal was refused on 22 September 2016 and, by the Upper
             Tribunal, on 18 October 2016, when he became appeal rights
             exhausted.

         6.   The appellant applied for leave to remain outside the
             Immigration Rules on 16 November 2016.  This was refused on 2
             September 2017 with no right of appeal.

         7.   There was a further application for leave to remain on the
             basis of his private life on 28 July 2017 (the appellant
             describes this as a variation of the 16 November 2016
             application).  This was refused on 5 June 2018 with a right of
             appeal (that was not exercised).

         8.   On 08 April 2018 there was a further application for leave to
             remain that was voided.

         9.   The appellant made this application on 29 May 2018.  This was
             refused on 19 June 2019 with a right of appeal.

         10.  An appeal was lodged on 1 July 2019".

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant argued that he had
    accrued ten years of continuous lawful residence in the UK and
    therefore satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276B of the
    Immigration Rules.  He maintained that the "gap" in his lawful
    residence between 18 October 2016 (when his application for permission
    to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal) and his application for
    further leave on 16 November 2016 could be "cured", if not by reference
    to paragraph 276B(v) of the Immigration Rules then by the application
    of the Home Office policy - long residence, version 16.0, published on
    28 October 2019 ("the long residence policy").

 4. He also argued that there were very significant obstacles to his
    integration into Bangladesh, such that he met the conditions of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and that his removal
    from the UK would be disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. Applying the Court of Appeal judgment in R (Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA
    Civ 1070, the judge found that the appellant did not meet the
    requirements of paragraph 276B.

 6. The judge also found that because the appellant could not succeed under
    the Rules, the long residence policy could not assist him.  At
    paragraph 56 the judge stated

         "The appellant prays in aid the terms of the long residence v16.0.
         I consider that I am bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal
         and the Upper Tribunal and must follow those decisions, regardless
         of the terms of the policy."

 7. The judge also found that there would not be very significant obstacles
    to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh and that his removal would
    not be disproportionate.  Amongst other things, the judge found that
    the appellant's private life was formed at a time when his immigration
    status was precarious and therefore attached little weight to it.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge fell into error by failing
    to give sufficient reasons for rejecting the appellant's argument that
    he was able to benefit from the long residence policy.

 9. The grounds refer to an example given in the long residence policy of
    when it might be appropriate to grant an application when there has
    been a gap in lawful residence.  The example states as follows:

         Example 2:

         An applicant has three gaps in their lawful residence due to
         submitting three separate applications out of time.  These were 9,
         a 17 and 24 days out of time.


         |Question |Would you grant the application in this case?              |
|Answer   |Grant the application as the Rules allow for a period of   |
|         |overstaying of 28 days or less when that period ends before|
|         |24 November 2016.                                          |


10. The grounds submit that the appellant's argument before the First-tier
    Tribunal was that his immigration history was "on all fours" with the
    above example.

11. The grounds also contend that the judge failed to properly consider
    that the appellant was entitled to have his application and appeal
    decided in line with the long residence policy.

12. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

13. After permission to appeal was granted, the Court of Appeal judgment in
    Hoque v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 was promulgated. This judgment was
    referred to in the appellant's skeleton argument and by both parties in
    oral submissions before me at the hearing.

14. In Hoque, the Court of Appeal considered how paragraph 276B should be
    interpreted and understood.  The court drew a distinction between two
    kinds of overstaying: overstaying between two periods of leave
    (referred to as "book ended overstaying"); and current overstaying
    (referred to as "open ended overstaying").  The Court found that,
    whilst "book ended overstaying" of a sufficiently short duration should
    be disregarded when determining if there has been continuous lawful
    residence, "open ended overstaying" should not.

15. It was common ground that I am bound by the decision in Hoque.

16. Mr Symes, in his skeleton argument and oral submissions, argued that
    although the appellant cannot meet the conditions of Rule 276B as
    interpreted in Hoque, he was entitled to rely on the long residence
    policy, which is more generous to him.  Mr Symes argued that the
    appellant had in fact relied on the terms of the long residence policy,
    as set out in his witness statement.  He referred to Example 2 of the
    policy, which is reproduced above.

17. Mr Symes relied on the Court of Appeal decision Nadarajah [2005] EWCA
    Civ 136 to support his contention as to the weight that should be given
    to the long residence policy.  In that judgment, Laws LJ stated at 68:

         "Where a public authority has issued a promise or adopted a
         practice which represents how it proposes to act in a given area,
         the law will require the promise or practice to be honoured unless
         there is good reason not to do so.  What is the principle behind
         this proposition?  It is not far to seek.  It is said to be
         grounded in fairness, and no doubt in general terms that is so.  I
         would prefer to express it rather more broadly as a requirement of
         good administration, by which public bodies ought to deal
         straightforwardly and consistently with the public".

18. Mr Symes also argued that the judge should have taken into
    consideration, in the assessment of proportionality under Article 8,
    that the Immigration Rules on lawful continuous residence are ambiguous
    and unclear, as highlighted by Underhill LJ in Hoque, and is apparent
    from the fact that so many different Court of Appeal judges have
    reached a different view on what paragraph 276B means.

Analysis

19. It is plain, and was not in dispute, that the appellant does not meet
    the conditions of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  This is
    because, as Mr Symes acknowledged, I am obliged to follow the Court of
    Appeal judgment in Hoque, where it was found that, in assessing whether
    a person has had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence in the
    UK, a period of overstaying cannot be disregarded unless it was between
    periods of lawful leave (i.e. book ended overstaying).  In the
    appellant's case, his leave ended on 18 October 2016 and there has been
    no subsequent period of leave.

20. I now turn to consider the long residence policy.

21. I agree with Mr Symes that it was erroneous for the judge to treat the
    long residence policy as irrelevant.  If a policy exists which is more
    generous to an appellant than the Rules, that is relevant to the
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR.  See SF and others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC).

22. However, I agree with Mr Kotas that applying the long residence policy
    to the appellant's circumstances does not lead to the conclusion that
    he accrued 10 years' continuous lawful leave. The section of the long
    residence policy that Mr Symes relies on starts at page 16, under the
    heading "Breaks in lawful residence".  Under this heading is the sub-
    heading "Gaps in lawful residence".  Under this, it is stated that an
    application may be granted where the applicant "has short gaps in
    lawful residence".  On the following page, within the same section,
    there is a subheading "Examples of gaps in lawful residence".  It is
    under this heading that the example cited by the appellant in his
    witness statement and in his grounds of appeal is given.

23. I have underlined words "breaks" and "gaps" in the above paragraph to
    highlight what is plain from reading this section of the long residence
    policy, which is that it is concerned with gaps/breaks in lawful
    residence (that is, a gap/break in otherwise continuous lawful
    residence), not with a situation where a person's lawful residence has
    ended and no subsequent leave has been granted. The example relied upon
    by the appellant, which is in this section of the long residence
    policy, is plainly only concerned with such gaps in residence. The
    appellant was therefore mistaken to argue that this example was "on all
    fours" with his circumstances. Mr Symes argued that this part of the
    long residence policy is ambiguous and unclear. However, in my view it
    is not. The repeated use of the term "gaps" leaves the reader in no
    doubt that the issue addressed by the policy is where there is a gap
    between two periods of lawful residence.

24. I am fortified in my view by noting that Underhill LJ in paragraph 38
    of Hoque interpreted (an earlier version of) the long residence policy
    in the same way.  He stated:

         "There is some further support for my conclusion in the Home
         Office's guidance on long residence.  We were shown version 15,
         which was issued on 3 April 2017.  This contains a section headed
         Breaks in lawful residence: I cannot give a page or paragraph
         reference because, unhelpfully, neither the pages nor the
         paragraphs are numbered.  The first chunk of text reads:

         Gaps in lawful residence

         You may grant the application if an applicant

           . has short gaps in lawful residence through making previous
             applications out of time when no more than 28 calendar days
             where those gaps end before 24 November 2016;

           . has short gaps in lawful residence on or after 24 November
             2016 but leave was granted in accordance with paragraph 39E of
             the Immigration Rules;

           . meets all the other requirements for law residence.

         Those bullets are clearly intended to reflect element (C) in
         subparagraph (v) (as also does the text which follows, which
         addresses how to calculate the period of overstaying), though it
         may be questionable how accurately it does so; and some examples of
         how that works in practice are given on the following pages.  This
         passage is significant for our purposes because it appears under
         the heading "Breaks in lawful residence" which refers to the
         requirement of continuous lawful residence.  Clearly the Home
         Office itself thought that element (C) qualified subparagraph
         (i)(a).  Ms Giovannetti told us that the terms of the guidance (as
         one would expect) reflect the approach which the Home Office takes
         in practice".

25. My conclusion, therefore, is as follows:




      a) The judge fell into error by treating the long residence policy as
         irrelevant. This is because if the long residence policy was more
         generous to the appellant than the Immigration Rules that would be
         relevant to the question of whether there was a public interest in
         his removal under article 8 ECHR.




      b) However, this error was not material because the section of the
         long residence policy relied upon by the appellant is not more
         generous to him than the Immigration Rules, as it is only concerned
         with applicants who have a gap/break in lawful residence, not
         those, like the appellant, whose lawful leave ended and were not
         subsequently granted further leave.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Daniel Sheridan                     |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated: 3 December 2020              |


