
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/11364/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 15 February 2018                       |On 8 March 2018                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER- Paris

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HAMZA DIF ALLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms S Hussain of RH & Co, solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  we
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J C Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on  4
August 2017 which allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's
refusal to grant entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 20 August 1980 and is a  national  of  Algeria.
On 23 October 2015 the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for
entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen under appendix FM of  the
Immigration Rules.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge J C Grant-Hutchison ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  6  September
2017 Resident Judge Martin gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The respondent seeks permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grant-Hutchison) who, in  a
      decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  4  August  2017,  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal against the entry clearance  officer's  refusal  to
      grant him leave to enter the UK on human rights grounds.


      2. It is arguable, as asserted in the grounds that the Judge has erred
      in consideration of paragraph S-EC.1.5 of appendix FM which  does  not
      require a criminal conviction and is referring to  past  conduct,  not
      likely future conduct.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the respondent, Ms O'Brien moved the grounds of appeal. She  told
us that the Judge had misdirected herself both  in  fact  and  in  law.  She
conceded  that  at  [16]  of  the  decision  the  Judge   acknowledges   the
appellant's poor immigration history, but told us that  at  [17]  the  Judge
was wrong to focus on the absence of criminal convictions  rather  than  the
appellant's conduct. The absence of a conviction is relevant  to  S-EC  1.4,
when the Judge should have been considering S-EC 1.5.

(b) Ms O'Brien told us that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
appellant's conduct. Ms O'Brien told us that the decision does  not  contain
an article 8 proportionality assessment and reminded us that the  Judge  has
allowed this appeal under the immigration rules, when, in  fact,  it  is  an
appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds only. She urged us to find that there is  a
material error of law and to set the decision aside

6. For the appellant Ms Hussain told us that the sole ground of appeal is  a
failure to give adequate weight to material matters. She told us  that  even
if that is established, it does not amount to a material error of  law.  She
told us that the decision does not contain errors,  material  or  otherwise,
and that the decision contains a fair  and  balanced  consideration  of  the
appellant's case. She  told  us  that  the  Judge  manifestly  balanced  the
positive aspects of the evidence against the  appellant's  poor  immigration
history (set out in detail at [15] of  the  decision).  At  [16]  the  Judge
considers  the  appellant's   past   conduct   against   positive   features
demonstrating change in his overall outlook since meeting  the  sponsor.  Ms
Hussain told us that at the end of [18] the Judge was clearly  referring  to
is S-EC1 .5, and that, there, the Judge takes  account  of  the  absence  of
evidence to suggest that his future actions will bring him  to  the  adverse
attention of the authorities. She urged us to allow the  decision  to  stand
and to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

7. At [15]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  sets  out  the  appellant's  poor
immigration history, recording the appellant's illegal entry to  the  UK  in
2009, his use of a false identity, and his illegal stay in Northern  Ireland
until he was encountered by immigration officers on 19 September  2012.  The
Judge records the appellant's failure to attend interviews  to  support  his
application for leave to remain in the  UK  and  his  refusal  to  reply  to
correspondence from the Home Office throughout 2013 and 2014.

8. At [16] the Judge balances that  poor  immigration  history  against  the
positive influence the Judge finds the sponsor has  had  on  the  appellant.
The Judge clearly finds that the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and
sponsor has brought a Copernican  change  in  the  appellant's  attitude  to
immigration law, leading to a  responsible  maturity  in  his  conduct.  The
Judge finds that  the  appellant  has  made  no  attempt  to  enter  the  UK
illegally in the two  years  since  he  and  the  sponsor  decided  to  live
together, and that the sponsor voluntarily returned to Algeria  to  make  an
application for entry clearance from there.

9. At [19] the Judge makes a finding which starkly contradicts the  findings
which favour the appellant at [16]. It is there that the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant's immigration history did not end with  an  attempt  to  enter
the UK with a false passport  in  September  2012.  It  is  clear  from  the
Judge's findings at [19] that the appellant relocated  to  the  Republic  of
Ireland in 2013, and then, in  December  2013,  (to  be  reunited  with  the
sponsor) he entered the UK  illegally.  The  illegal  entry  to  the  UK  in
December 2013 is not factored into the Judge's  consideration  at  [15]  and
[16]. It is also clear from the Judge's  findings  of  fact  that  when  the
appellant completed his application for entry clearance in 2015 he  did  not
mention illegal entry into the UK in 2013,  so  that  the  Visa  application
form is neither candid nor accurate.

10. The appellant's entry to the UK in 2013, and  his  failure  to  disclose
illegal entry in his visa application form in 2015,  demonstrates  that  the
Judge's conclusion that the appellant turned over an entirely new leaf  when
he met the sponsor is not safe.
11. Section S-EC of the rules sets out  a  number  of  general  grounds  for
refusal. Mandatory grounds for refusal are  set  out  in  S-EC.1.2  to  1.7.
Discretionary grounds for refusal are set out in S-EC.2.2 to  2.5.  At  [17]
the Judge clearly focuses on the absence of criminality. In this  case  that
is an irrelevant consideration. Criminal behaviour is  dealt  with  in  S-EC
1.4, which says
      (S-EC.1.1. The applicant will be refused entry clearance on grounds of
      suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2. to 1.9. apply)
      S-EC.1.4. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to
      the public good because they have:
           (a) been convicted of an offence for which they have been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years; or
           (b) been convicted of an offence for which they have been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but
           less than 4 years, unless a period of 10 years has passed since
           the end of the sentence; or
           (c) been convicted of an offence for which they have been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 12 months,
           unless a period of 5 years has passed since the end of the
           sentence.
12. In this case the relevant  considerations  are  S-EC  1.1  and  S-EC1.5,
which say

      S-EC.1.1. The applicant will be refused entry clearance on grounds  of
      suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2. to 1.9. apply.


      S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is  conducive  to
      the  public  good  because,  for  example,  the  applicant's   conduct
      (including convictions which do not fall within paragraph  S-EC.1.4.),
      character, associations, or other  reasons,  make  it  undesirable  to
      grant them entry clearance.

13. S-EC 1.5 is a mandatory ground for refusal. The  determinative  question
is the appellant's  conduct.  The  Judge's  consideration  of  the  negative
aspects of the appellant's conduct at [16] is incomplete. Her assessment  of
the negative aspects of  his  conduct  fails  to  take  account  of  illegal
entrance the UK in  2013  and  the  selective  history  given  in  the  visa
application form in 2015.

14.  The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules.   The
appellant's application was submitted in August  2015.  There  is  only  one
competent ground of appeal, and that is on article 8 ECHR grounds.  Although
the Judge was correct to consider the immigration rules, that  consideration
forms part of the background to the appeal. The  Judge  did  not  go  on  to
carry out an article 8 proportionality balancing exercise.

15. The absence of full consideration of article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal,
the purported success under the immigration rules, and the failure  to  take
account of illegal entry to the UK in December 2013 all amount  to  material
errors of law. We must set the decision aside.

16. Although we set the decision aside there is adequate material before  us
to enable us to substitute our own decision. We invited parties'  agents  to
make submissions on article 8 ECHR grounds to assists us.

The Facts

17. The appellant is Algerian national  born  in  1980.  The  sponsor  is  a
British national born in 1968. The sponsor  has  children  from  a  previous
relationship who are now adults and who do not live with  her.  The  sponsor
has a granddaughter. The sponsor's  son  is  the  father  of  the  sponsor's
granddaughter. He is separated from the  sponsor's  granddaughter's  mother,
with whom the sponsor's granddaughter lives.

18.  The  sponsor's   granddaughter   is   nine   years   old.   Since   her
granddaughter's  birth,  the  sponsor  has  provided   childcare   for   her
granddaughter every Friday. That arrangement helps  the  child's  mother  to
work. The sponsor is employed full-time. She has elderly parents  who  still
pursue an independent life.

19. In 2009 the appellant entered the UK illegally using a  Polish  passport
and an assumed identity which he purchased in Greece. The  sponsor  took  up
residence in  Northern  Ireland.  He  was  not  encountered  by  enforcement
officers until 19 September 2012. When confronted he admitted using a  false
identity. He was detained and only then made an application for asylum.  His
application was unsuccessful. He appealed against refusal of his  protection
claim, & his appeal was dismissed. Between May 2013 and April 2014 the  Home
Office tried to contact the appellant but he did not respond.

20. The sponsor met the appellant in Belfast in March 2011.  They  exchanged
telephone numbers, and when the sponsor returned to Scotland  they  remained
in contact. In April 2011 the sponsor returned to Belfast for  a  date  with
the appellant, and  a  relationship  developed.  The  sponsor  then  visited
Belfast once every 2 to 3 months to see the appellant. In October  2011  the
appellant told the sponsor that he was an overstayer and said that he  could
not return  to  Nigeria.  The  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the
appellant continued to grow stronger.

21. In September 2012 the appellant was detained for four days. It was  then
he told the sponsor that he had been using a false passport.  In  June  2013
the appellant moved to the Republic of  Ireland.  The  relationship  between
the appellant and sponsor continued and the sponsor continued to  travel  to
visit the appellant. The sponsor & the appellant  then  started  to  discuss
their long-term plans, and then talk turned to  the  appellant  joining  the
sponsor in Scotland so that they could live together permanently.

22. In  December  2013  the  appellant  entered  Scotland  illegally  to  be
reunited with the sponsor. On 31 December 2013 they agree to marry and on  6
June 2014 they married. They then  consulted  a  solicitor  who  helped  the
appellant submit an application for leave to remain in the UK on 22  October
2014. That application was refused on 20 January 2015. The appellant had  no
right  of  appeal.  In  June  2015  the  appellant   returned   to   Algeria
voluntarily. He has remained there since. He made an  application  to  enter
the UK as the spouse of the  sponsor  on  26  August  2015.  The  respondent
refused that application on 23 October 2015. That  refusal  is  the  subject
matter of this appeal.

23. The sponsor has visited the appellant in  Algeria  several  times  since
June 2015. The sponsor and the appellant are husband and wife. They  have  a
genuine and subsisting relationship. They want to live together in the UK.

24. The sponsor works as a medical receptionist in  a  medical  practice  in
Oban. The sponsor's mother is 70 years old. Her father is 76 years old.  The
sponsor visits her parents several times each  week.  The  sponsor's  father
has kidney disease and asthma. Her mother has  an  irregular  heartbeat  and
Polymyalgia. The sponsor has two adult children, both of them are around  30
years of age.  The sponsor's brother is an adult with  his  own  family.  He
lives in Dunblane. The sponsor is in regular contact with  her  brother  and
his family.

25.  The  respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant  meets   the   financial
requirements and English language requirements of appendix FM, but  did  not
accept  that  the  appellant  met  the  relationship  requirements  or   the
suitability requirements for entry clearance.

26. The sponsor and the  appellant  are  in  daily  contact  using  Internet
messaging services.

27. The sponsor owns the house that she lives in. The appellant has met  the
sponsor's family, who all extend a welcome to him.  The  appellant  has  met
the sponsor's granddaughter.

Submission

28.  Ms Hussain asked us  to  find  that  the  respondent's  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the article 8 family life rights  of  the
appellant and the sponsor. She told us that they are parties to a valid  and
subsisting marriage. She told us that the respondent's decision  will  cause
the sponsor to leave the UK, and that as the sponsor is  a  British  citizen
whose parents and children are in the UK, whose job is in the UK  and  whose
house is in the UK, then the decision  is  a  disproportionate  interference
with the right to respect for family life. She emphasised  the  relationship
between the sponsor and her granddaughter and the desire  of  the  appellant
and sponsor to pursue family life in the UK.

29. Miss O'Brien, for the respondent, submitted that the decision is  not  a
disproportionate interference with  the  article  8  rights  of  either  the
sponsor or the appellant. She emphasised strong features in public  interest
which she argued must be given great weight. She told us that the  sponsor's
existing family relationships are principally relationships with adults  and
not  beyond  the  normal  range  of  relationships,  because  none  of   the
relationships  have  any  element  of  dependency.  She  told  us  that  the
relationship between the sponsor and her  granddaughter  can  continue,  and
that there is nothing to stop the sponsor from going to Algeria.  She  urged
us to uphold the entry clearance officer's decision.

Article 8 ECHR

30. Because of his age and the length of time the appellant was in  the  UK,
he cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  immigration
rules. The appellant's own conduct in returning to  Algeria  tells  us  that
there are no insurmountable obstacles to his integration there,

31. The respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant  meets  the  language  and
financial requirements of appendix FM. On the facts as we find  them  to  be
the  appellant  and  sponsor  are  married  and  want   to   live   together
permanently. For a period between 2014 and 2015 they lived together  in  the
UK. They have nurtured their relationship with daily contact  and  with  the
sponsor's  visits  to  Algeria.  The  appellant   meets   the   relationship
requirements of appendix FM.

32. The appellant cannot meet the suitability requirements of  appendix  FM.
The appellant entered the UK illegally using a false passport  in  2009.  He
then remained in the UK illegally, evading  enquiry  from  the  Home  Office
throughout 2013 and 2014. He made an unsuccessful claim  for  asylum,  which
his subsequent voluntary return to Algeria tells us had no  foundation.  The
appellant  entered  the  UK  illegally  in  December  2013  to  further  his
relationship with the sponsor. The appellant's  conduct  falls  well  within
the range of conduct which engages  paragraph  S-EC1.5  of  the  immigration
rules. On the facts as we find them to be the respondent is correct to  rely
on paragraph  S-EC  1.5,  which  is  a  mandatory  ground  of  refusal.  The
appellant cannot meet the requirements of appendix FM

33. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 it was made clear that  (even
in a deportation case) the Rules are not  a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

34. We have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i) Does family life,  private  life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8
    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with
    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and
    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

35. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells us that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

36. On the facts as we find them to be the appellant  and  the  sponsor  are
married and want to  live  together.  Family  life  within  the  meaning  of
article 8 therefore exists. That finding must be  viewed  against  the  fact
that the appellant and sponsor committed themselves to each other when  they
knew that the appellant did not  have  the  right  to  be  in  the  UK.  The
appellant and sponsor did not know, when they entered into  marriage,  which
country their future lay in. It is a striking feature of this case  that  it
was only  after  marriage  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  sought  legal
assistance to submit an application for leave to remain.

37. What is pled for the appellant is that because the sponsor is a  British
citizen with a home, with employment and with an established family  in  the
UK, then the respondent's decision must be a disproportionate  interference.
The problem with that  submission  is  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  an
expression of choice

38. In SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  Richards  LJ  drew  a
distinction in entry clearance cases, on the  one  hand,  involving  someone
outside the United Kingdom who applies to come here to  take  up  or  resume
family life when family life was  originally  established  in  ordinary  and
legitimate circumstances at some time  in  the  past,  rather  than  in  the
knowledge of its precariousness  in  terms  of  United  Kingdom  immigration
controls; and cases, on the  other  hand,  where  someone  from  the  United
Kingdom marries a foreign national or establishes a family  life  with  them
at a stage when they are  contemplating  trying  to  live  together  in  the
United Kingdom, but when they know that their partner does not have a  right
to come here. In the latter cases, the relationship will  have  been  formed
under conditions of known precariousness  and  it  will  be  appropriate  to
apply a similar test of exceptional  circumstances  before  a  violation  of
Article 8 will be found to arise in relation to a refusal to grant Leave  to
Enter outside the Rules.

39. In terms of section 117D of the 2002 Act the  sponsor  is  a  qualifying
partner because she is a British citizen. Section  117B(4)(b)  of  the  2002
Act tells us to  attach  little  weight  to  the  relationship  between  the
appellant and the sponsor. In this case great  emphasis  is  placed  on  the
sponsor's established life in the UK and on her British citizenship. We  are
told little about the appellant's circumstances in Algeria.

40. The sponsor has visited the appellant several times in Algeria since  he
returned there in 2015. There is no reliable evidence placed  before  us  to
indicate that family life between the appellant and sponsor cannot  continue
in Algeria. The weight of reliable evidence  indicates  that  the  sponsor's
parents are not dependent upon her, and the sponsor's adult children are  no
longer dependent upon her. The sponsor has a job which she  will  relinquish
if she moves to Algeria. She must have  known  that  when  she  married  the
appellant.

41. The maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
interest. The respondent's decision is not a breach of the right to  respect
for family life because the appellant and the sponsor  did  not  know,  when
they married each other, where their future lay. When the  sponsor  and  the
appellant were married the appellant had no right  to  be  in  the  UK.  The
respondent's decision does not change that. Family life  for  the  appellant
and sponsor can continue. The impact of the respondent's decision is  simply
that it cannot continue in the country they have  selected  as  their  first
choice.

42. If the sponsor decides to leave the UK then she will  leave  behind  her
home,  her  employment,  her   parents,   her   adult   children   and   her
granddaughter. There is no evidence  that  the  termination  of  her  weekly
contact with the last will materially affect the child. She will be able  to
maintain contact with each  of  her  relatives  by  instantaneous  means  of
communication. There is nothing to stop the sponsor from returning to  visit
her relatives. The sponsor will leave her home and employment, but for  many
people that is an inevitable part of the changes brought about by  marriage.
That must have been something the  sponsor  thought  about  before  entering
into marriage with a man who has no right to be in the UK.

43. When we consider all  of  these  matters  we  can  only  find  that  the
respondent's decision is not a  disproportionate  breach  of  the  right  to
respect for family life for either the appellant or the sponsor.

44.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  for  the  appellant  to  submit  a  new
application for entry clearance. As a matter of comparative justice, it  may
be that any entry clearance officer looking at  a  future  application  from
this appellant  will  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  possible  to  apply  for
revocation of a deportation order to facilitate re-entry  to  the  UK  after
the expiry of three years. By analogy, we wonder if the  importance  of  the
appellant's immigration history will diminish  because  of  the  passage  of
time when consideration is given to any  future  application  made  by  this
appellant. Although we are critical of the appellant's  immigration  history
we are also mindful of the fact that it is  now  almost  3  years  since  he
voluntarily returned to Algeria.

45. After considering all of the evidence  we  still  know  nothing  of  the
appellant's  home,  his  habits  and  activities  of   daily   living,   his
significant  friendships,  any  integration  into   UK   society,   or   any
contribution to his local community. There is no reliable  evidence  of  the
component parts of private life within the meaning of article 8 of the  1950
convention before us. The appellant fails to establish that he  has  created
article 8 private life within the UK.

46.   We dismiss the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

CONCLUSION

47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 August 2017  is
tainted by a material error of law. We set it aside.

48. We substitute our own decision.

49. The appeal is dismissed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed Paul Doyle
  Date  7 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


