
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/11502/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 7 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              MISS RASHPAL KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Smeaton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is an Indian national born on 3 March 1975.  She  appeals
    with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Hollingworth, who
    on 20 September 2018 considered that it was at least arguable that  the
    judge who heard her appeal (Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Burnett (Judge Burnett)) had not adequately reasoned his decision under
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  Specifically  he
    noted that the appellant had provided evidence of her relationship with
    the partner in the UK,  that  the  public  interest  analysis  was  not
    adequately reasoned, and he specifically criticised paragraphs 39 to 41
    of the decision for a lack of fulsome analysis.

Background

2.    The  appellant's  immigration  history  is  before  recorded  in   the
    respondent's refusal of leave  to  remain  dated  14  April  2016.  The
    appellant First came to the UK on 24th October 2008 and made  a  number
    of applications which were refused before an application was made on 15
    October 2015 based on her private or  family  life  with  an  unmarried
    British partner namely Kuldeep Singh.  However,  that  application  was
    also refused and did not attach any rights  of  appeal.  The  appellant
    made a further application therefore on 11 January 2016 indicating that
    the appellant wish to be considered under the wider "family life  as  a
    partner (10-year route)" and "private life in the UK  (10-year  route).
    This was refused by a letter dated 14 April 2016 and on 28th  of  April
    2016 the appellant gave notice of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The decision of 14 April 2016 is therefore the subject of  the  present
    appeal.

3.   At the hearing before of the First-tier  Tribunal,  on  5  April  2018,
    Judge Burnett heard oral evidence by the appellant and  submissions  by
    her representative Ms Harvey, the  respondent  being  unrepresented  at
    that hearing.  The Immigration Judge also had the benefit of a skeleton
    argument which set out the arguments of law in relation to  that  case.
    The judge set out at length the legal basis for  the  refusal  and  the
    current case law as it applied to the  case.   He  also  considered  in
    detail the Immigration Rules and in particular EX.1(b) of  Appendix  FM
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  noted  that  there  had  to  be  very
    significant obstacles to be faced by the appellant if she were returned
    with her partner to her home country. The judge  found  there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles,  in  the  sense  of  any  very   significant
    difficulties, to family life continuing outside the UK.

4.   Furthermore, the Immigration Judge was not satisfied, if the  appellant
    were returned to India, that an application to return to the  UK  would
    necessarily be successful. The appellant and her partner,  although  in
    the UK for some time, would not be prevented from going back  to  India
    and getting a job there.   He  had  been  back  to  India  on  previous
    occasions.  He himself had come to the UK as an asylum seeker but  that
    application had been unsuccessful, and I was told at the  hearing  that
    it was treated as a  "Legacy  case"  and  that  is  how  he  ultimately
    obtained leave to remain in the UK.

5.   Having considered all the factors in the case, the  judge  pointed  out
    in paragraphs 21 - 22 of his decision that he did not need to reach any
    view as to whether or not those Rules  were  met,  he  considered  that
    nevertheless  A  Refusal  of  the  Application  under  the  Rules   may
    nevertheless "inform" the human rights decision. He Concluded that  the
    appellant did not satisfy the Rules. He then looked at the  appellant's
    private or family life under Article 8 and "taking a holistic approach"
    (see paragraph 41) in the judge's judgment, the public interest in that
    case was not "outweighed by the appellant's interests".  So, taking all
    factors into account he decided there was a necessary and proportionate
    interference with  the  appellant's  private  or  family  life  and  he
    dismissed the appeal.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

6.    At  the  hearing  before   me,   submissions   were   made   by   both
    representatives.  Mrs Smeaton presented a  detailed  and  careful  oral
    argument which supported her skeleton argument which she handed  in  on
    the morning of the hearing. She stated that the Tribunal could  not  be
    satisfied that all the factors in the case had been properly considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  What was required was a detailed analysis,
    preferably quoting the words of Sir Ernest Ryder  in  the  case  of  TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 (at paragraph 31):

         "... Where article 8 is in issue within the  Rules  there  will  of
         necessity have to be a conclusion on the question whether there are
         insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of the appellant and his
         or her family. That involves the evaluation or value judgment based
         upon findings of fact. When a  tribunal  goes  on  to  consider  an
         article 8 claim outside the Rules (as it will do where article 8 is
         engaged, see Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60)...".


    He went on to say that It was at least desirable to adopt a  structured
    approach.  What Lord Thomas had said in the earlier case of Hesham  Ali
    at paragraphs 82 - 84 was "strongly  endorsed"  by  Sir  Ernest  Ryder.
    after the Tribunal has found the facts, the  Tribunal  should  set  out
    those factors that weigh in favour of immigration  control,  i.e.  "the
    cons" against those factors which weigh in favour of family and private
    life - the pros, in a form of balance sheet so that it can be  set  out
    and can be examined and analysed and understood by the parties.

7.   Mrs Smeaton said there was an absence of that type of analysis  in  the
    judge's decision.  There were highly material factors  in  relation  to
    Section 117B(1) to (3) which considered, for example,  the  appellant's
    ability  to  speak  the  English  language  and  her  ability   to   be
    economically independent without the need for  taxpayer  support  which
    did not feature adequately in the decision.

8.   On the other hand, Ms Isherwood  argued  that  there  was  no  material
    error of law.  She said that  it  was  quite  right  of  the  judge  to
    carefully analyse the Immigration Rules as he had  done.   It  was  not
    accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  appellant   would
    necessarily  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    furthermore the respondent was the person who was entitled to  consider
    that factor or that matter.  She referred me to the case of Chen [2015]
    UKUT 189. In the case of Chen, Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  had  had  to
    consider a judicial review application by a Chinese citizen against the
    respondent's decision to refuse an application for leave to  remain  on
    the basis that article 8 was engaged. In that case,  the  argument  was
    run that the appellant could return to her home country to make a fresh
    application. The case considered the degree to  which  that  separation
    from her husband, a British citizen, could itself  be  an  interference
    with her human rights.  At paragraph (i) of  the  headnote  Judge  Gill
    pointed out that a temporary separation to enable an individual to make
    an application for entry clearance, may be disproportionate but in  all
    cases it will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of
    State  evidence  that  such   temporary   separation   will   interfere
    disproportionally with his protected rights. Ms Isherwood also referred
    to the third paragraph  of  the  headnote,  which  stated  that  on  an
    application for leave on the basis of Article 8 the Secretary of  State
    was not obliged to consider whether an application for entry clearance,
    if one were to be made, would be successful.  Accordingly, her  silence
    on this issue did not mean that it was accepted that  the  requirements
    for entry clearance would be granted.

9.   Ms Isherwood submitted that there was a great  deal  of  evidence  that
    the appellant's private or family life could  be  continued  in  India.
    There was no automatic  right  to  choose  where  one  conducted  one's
    private or family life and  the  Tribunal  Judge  was  therefore  fully
    entitled to reach  the  decision  she  came  to  on  the  evidence  and
    arguments presented to her.

10.  Mrs Smeaton, by way of reply, argued  that  the  case  of  Chen  was  a
    judicial review case, and it did not follow  that  a  statutory  appeal
    would be treated the same way. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  that
    case was in a different position than the judge hearing this appeal. In
    this case, the appellant met all the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but her separation for the purposes of making a fresh application
    from abroad would be an unlawful interference with her human rights.

11.  At the end of the hearing I rose to consider my decision as to  whether
    there was an error of law in the decision First-tier Tribunal, which  I
    gave later on the day Upper Tribunal.

Conclusions

12.  Having had an opportunity to consider  these  arguments  and  carefully
    consider the judge's decision, it is clear that he fully  into  account
    the argument that there were insurmountable obstacles to the return  of
    the appellant to India to make a fresh application for entry  clearance
    to join her partner. I consider that the judge correctly concluded that
    there was insufficient  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude that an application for entry clearance would necessarily have
    been successful. In addition, as the judge pointed out at paragraph  35
    of his decision, the appellant's partner  had  close  connections  with
    India himself. He had been back to India on  occasions  and  there  was
    nothing to prevent him going there with the appellant if he desired  to
    do so.  It was a country that they  were  both  culturally  assimilated
    with. There was no reason, therefore,  why  the  appellant  should  not
    return to India and make an application for entry clearance to  re-join
    her partner there. The was  a  need  to  recognise  the  importance  of
    effective immigration controls.  This  was  a  factor,  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude, that  outweighed  other  considerations.  It  was
    reasonable in all circumstances for the respondent to insist  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.  The  appellant  had  a
    poor immigration history  and  it  was  therefore  reasonable  for  the
    respondent to insist that she did so.

13.  The judge was entitled to conclude that there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles so as to satisfy the Immigration Rules and in particular  the
    requirements of paragraph  EX.  1  (b)  of  Appendix  FM  those  Rules.
    Furthermore, the interference with the family life would not be of such
    weight for the requirement that the appellant returns to India for  the
    purposes of making an appropriate application to  be  disproportionate.
    The judge appears to have correctly considered the burden and  standard
    of proof as he set it out in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the  decision.  He
    also referred to a number of the leading authorities, including some of
    those quoted by Mrs Smeaton and Ms Isherwood. The judge looked  at  the
    public interest considerations under the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (2002 Act), including the requirement in  section  117B
    (3) of the 2002 Act that a person seeking to enter  the  UK  should  be
    financially independent and not a burden on  taxpayers.  These  "public
    interest considerations" required respondent to look  at  the  economic
    wellbeing  of  the  UK  and  balance  those  against  the  individual's
    interests. In the end, the judge had to decide where the balance was to
    be struck. He looked carefully at the individual circumstances  of  the
    appellant before reaching his decision (see paragraph 38, for example).
    Although there are some aspects of his analysis  which  could  be,  and
    were criticised by Ms Smeaton, the judge came to a conclusion  that  he
    was entitled to come to on the evidence presented before him.

Decision

14.  For those reasons I have dismissed the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The   decision   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   therefore   stands.



No anonymity direction is made by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  make  no
anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date 4 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the judge dismissed the appeal, there could be no fee award  and  I  make
no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 4 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
