

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  HU/11509/2018
                                                               HU/11515/2018
                                                               HU/12702/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2019                |On 19 August 2019               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                            1) Mrs FERIDE ASLLANI
                           2) Miss ARSILDA ASLLANI
                            3) Mr ARGJEND ASLLANI
                           (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel
      (instructed by Arora Lodhi Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. In a  determination  promulgated  on  4  June  2019,  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor  (as  he  then  was)  set  aside  the
         decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal T Jones, promulgated on
         4 March 2018,  having  found  material  errors  of  law.   By  that
         decision, Judge T Jones had allowed the Appellants' linked  appeals
         against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department to refuse their Article  8  ECHR  human  rights  claims,
         based on their family life with their father, Mr Sahit Asllani, who
         is a British Citizen by naturalisation.  The full  details  of  the
         appeals and of the error of law  findings  are  set  out  in  Judge
         Norton-Taylor's decision and need not be repeated here.

      2. The Appellants are nationals  of  Albania,  wife/mother  and  adult
         children, respectively born on 6 June  1972,  15  May  1997  and  8
         October 1999.  The Appellants had applied for  entry  clearance  to
         the United Kingdom from Albania in  2012.   That  was  refused  and
         their appeals to the First-tier Tribunal were dismissed  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Herlihy in a determination promulgated on 29 November
         2013.  Thereafter the Appellants  contrived  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom illegally, and made a series of applications  to  the  Home
         Office.

      3. When setting aside Judge T Jones's  decision,  Judge  Norton-Taylor
         preserved the following findings of fact (see [28] and [29] of  his
         determination):

          a. The Appellants entered the United Kingdom illegally;

          b. Their  sponsor  is  currently  healthy  and  running  his  own
             business;

          c. The family have a house in Albania;

          d. The family have "very significant" cash savings;

          e. There are family members living in Albania who would be  in  a
             position to offer some assistance;

          f. The Appellants speak English;

          g. The sponsor has returned to Albania on a number of occasions;

          h. The  Second  Appellant's  partner  has  dual  British/Albanian
             nationality and has assets in both countries; and

          i. The Appellants cannot meet any relevant Immigration Rule.

      4. Judge Norton-Taylor directed that the appeal should remain  in  the
         Upper Tribunal.  The resumed  hearing  was  to  be  concerned  with
         whether the Appellants are on the facts of their cases able to show
         a sufficiently strong Article 8 ECHR claim to succeed  outside  the
         Immigration   Rules,   i.e.,   whether   there   were   exceptional
         circumstances.  At [27]  Judge  Norton-Taylor  indicated  that  the
         appeal hearing would be on submissions only, doubtless whether  the
         judge  had  intended  that  further  evidence  would   be   called,
         particularly as voluminous evidence had already been served for the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing.  In the event,  further  evidence  was
         served, in an inconveniently unnumbered and unindexed bundle  which
         exceeded 100 pages.  A copy of that bundle had not reached the Home
         Office Presenting Officers Unit and time was given to Ms  Jones  to
         prepare.  An Albanian interpreter had not been  requested  but  was
         requested on the morning of the hearing.  The appeals were put back
         to enable an interpreter to be obtained, after  which  the  hearing
         commenced.

    5.     All of the Appellants gave evidence, as did their sponsor, where
         necessary through  the  tribunal's  Albanian-speaking  interpreter.
         The tribunal has kept a full note.  Part of the new evidence sought
         to challenge the preserved findings, and  so  is  inadmissible.  In
         reality, none of the additional evidence  was  new,  and  consisted
         mainly of reiteration of the strength of the family  relationships,
         and emphasis of their desire to remain in the United Kingdom.

    6.     Ms Jones for the Respondent relied on the  reasons  for  refusal
         letter dated 15 May 2018, the preserved findings of  fact  and  the
         determination dated 28 November 2013.  The only issue  was  whether
         there were exceptional circumstances outside the Immigration Rules.
          Plainly there were not.  The sponsor  was  from  Albania  but  had
         pretended to be Macedonian and had obtained his British Citizenship
         by deception.  It was not accepted that he suffered from depression
         or that his existing medical conditions could  not  be  treated  in
         Albania, where he visited regularly.  There were no  insurmountable
         obstacles for the whole family to live in  Albania.   The  children
         were now adults  having  received  free  education  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The whole situation had  been  caused  by  the  sponsor's
         deception.  The appeals should be dismissed.

    7.     Mr Hawkin for the Appellants relied his skeleton  argument.   It
         would be wrong for the Appellants  to  have  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom where they had now lived for five and a half  years.   They
         had been refused entry clearance and had felt compelled to be  with
         their father who was very  ill,  so  had  entered  illegally.   The
         Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  had  decided  not  to
         revoke the unlawfully obtained British Citizenship, so the  sponsor
         could not be removed.   Thanks  to  the  presence  of  his  family,
         especially his wife who looked after him, he was well enough to run
         his own profitable business.  His medical  problems  would  require
         life long surveillance as  well  as  a  large  cocktail  of  drugs.
         Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 applied: there  was  no  useful  purpose  in
         requiring the Appellants to return  to  Albania  merely  to  obtain
         entry clearance, when the financial requirements were  met.   There
         had been delay by Secretary of State for the Home Department.   The
         circumstances were  exceptional  and  the  chapter  should  now  be
         closed.

    8.     The tribunal reserved  its  decision  which  now  follows.   The
         tribunal finds that no new facts of any significance  emerged  from
         the additional evidence, which was mere repetition.   That  is  not
         surprising given the relatively short period of time which  elapsed
         following the hearing before Judge Norton-Taylor and indeed  before
         Judge T Jones.   Any  depression  which  the  sponsor  has  is  not
         sufficiently serious to prevent him working and is related  to  the
         uncertainty  of  the  litigation  path  the  family  has   unwisely
         followed.

    9.     The tribunal accepts the submissions of Ms Jones.  It  is  bound
         to say that these appeals have no merit.  In the first place, there
         has been no relevant delay by  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  That argument was based on the fallacy that appellants
         whose applications have been refused by the Secretary of State  for
         the Home  Department  have  an  unlimited  ability  to  make  fresh
         applications and/or to purse any legal  avenue  nominally  open  to
         them.    The fact that the United Kingdom is not a police state and
         relies on appellants whose to whom leave to remain has been refused
         to comply with the law and to depart voluntarily is ignored.

    10.    The Appellants had and still have the  option  of  making  fresh
         entry clearance applications from Albania (where they have a house,
         among other matters), taking into account  the  findings  of  Judge
         Herlihy,  and  taking  steps  to  achieve   compliance   with   the
         Immigration Rules, but they have chosen not to do so.  In or  about
         2013  they  had  the  further  option  of  making  applications  to
         Secretary of State for the Home Department on compassionate grounds
         if there had been evidence to warrant that, but  again  they  chose
         not to do so.   Instead  they  placed  themselves  above  the  law,
         entered the United Kingdom illegally resorting to criminals.   They
         have since refused to return to  Albania,  pursuing  meritless  and
         repetitive applications to the Home Office.  The  Second  Appellant
         and Third Appellants have received free education and health  care.
         All the Appellants have received the benefit the  United  Kingdom's
         public  services,  from  clean   streets   upwards,   without   any
         entitlement and without any contribution.  They appear unwilling to
         pay the fees applicable to settlement applications.   Such  conduct
         is plainly contrary to the public interest.     This is far from  a
         situation where requiring an entry clearance application to be made
         is an  empty,  bureaucratic  procedure,  as  indicated  in  Agyarko
         (above) or in MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953.

    11.    The Appellants' conduct is all the more difficult to  understand
         given  that  the  sponsor  obtained  his  British  Citizenship   by
         deception.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
         decision in 2010 not to revoke that grant  of  citizenship  on  its
         face is incomprehensible and was not explained to the tribunal.  In
         any event, that decision was reached before the sponsor connived at
         the illegal entry to the United Kingdom of his  family.   The  2010
         decision not to revoke must accordingly be  susceptible  to  review
         because such conduct indicates that there  is  no  loyalty  to  the
         state and no recognition of the duties of a British Citizen.    The
         decision not to revoke was certainly not regarded by the  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department as requiring Article 8 ECHR  leave
         to be granted to the Appellants.

    12.    Plainly the sponsor cannot  be  removed  unless  and  until  his
         British  Citizenship  is  revoked.   Nevertheless   the   preserved
         findings of fact show that the sponsor can go  to  Albania  at  any
         time and has done so  at  will.   He  has  benefitted  from  United
         Kingdom healthcare and is now in  the  best  health  which  can  be
         expected, given his medical history.  There is no  reason  why  his
         various condition(s) cannot be monitored in Albania and treated  if
         necessary. His medical notes can be made available.  He  has  funds
         and can purchase any medication which is necessary and not supplied
         by the Albanian state.   There is no reason why he cannot  start  a
         business in Albania if he wished.  His family can provide him  with
         exactly the same level of support and companionship  as  they  have
         done in the United Kingdom, without  the  added  concern  of  their
         illegal presence.

    13.     As  the  preserved  findings  show,  the  whole  family  retain
         extensive and deep links to Albania,  where  they  have  spent  the
         majority of their lives.  The sponsor chose  to  leave  his  family
         behind and he is the cause of family separation.  There is no  good
         reason why they cannot enjoy their family life there,  happily  and
         lawfully in the land of their nationality, where they will be  able
         to  work.   The  tribunal  finds  that  there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances.

    14.    The Second Appellant has developed a close relationship  with  a
         dual British/Albanian national, Mr [MB], as the preserved  findings
         record.  He  too  has  close  ties  with  Albania,  as  he  readily
         confirmed.  The couple plan to have a  wedding  celebration  there.
         Plainly their family and private life can be  enjoyed  in  Albania.
         The tribunal so finds.  If their preference is for life together in
         the United Kingdom, no good reason was identified as to why Mr  [B]
         cannot sponsor the Second Appellant to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
         lawfully under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, in  the  usual
         way.  He agreed that he had known at  all  times  that  the  Second
         Appellant had no form of leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom. Again, the tribunal finds that there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances.

    DECISION

    The appeals are DISMISSED




    Signed Dated 13 August 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


