
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11565/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|(hybrid)                                     |                              |
|On: 19th July 2021                           |On: 06th October 2021         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Farkhanda Javed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Abbas, Counsel instructed by Imperium Group
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(2020)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 1st  January  1953.
    She appeals against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Tully) to dismiss her human rights appeal.
 2. The matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
    refusal to grant the Appellant leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    would be unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The matter  in
    issue before me is whether its decision, that it would not, is vitiated
    by procedural unfairness.




    Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The matter came before Judge Tully on  the  17th  September  2019.  The
    Appellant's  recorded  representatives  were  not  in  attendance.  The
    Appellant and her family were. Judge Tully asked  the  Appellant,  with
    the assistance of an interpreter, whether she wished  to  proceed.  The
    Appellant appeared, as it is recorded at paragraph 13 of the  decision,
    "unsure what to say", so her son spoke up. He told the  judge  that  an
    application for an adjournment had been made  because  his  mother  was
    mentally unwell and wished to call live evidence from a psychiatrist on
    the point.  The psychiatrist in question had prepared a report but  was
    not available for the hearing because he was on  leave.    Judge  Tully
    asked the Appellant's son whether that was  the  only  reason  for  the
    request and he confirmed that it was.


 4. The Home Office Presenting Officer  (HOPO)  strongly  objected  to  the
    matter being adjourned. The expert opinion had only been sought late in
    the day; it was very unusual to have a psychiatrist give live  evidence
    and little would be achieved by cross examination; an adjournment would
    simply result in delay.

 5. The Tribunal directed itself to rule 4(3)(h) of the Procedure Rules and
    to the overriding objective set out at rule 2. It then proceeded to set
    out the history of the matter thus far. An adjournment request had been
    made on the 4th September 2017 because the representative  was  waiting
    for a  report  from  the  psychiatrist;  the  report  was  subsequently
    produced, filed and served under cover of letter which - wrongly in the
    Tribunal's view - described the report  as  a  'draft'.    In  deciding
    whether to  adjourn  the  Tribunal  took  the  following  matters  into
    account: that the Appellant  had  had  since  the  21st  June  2021  to
    instruct a psychiatrist; the assessment had taken place only  a  matter
    of days before the hearing; it  is  rare  for  a  doctor  to  attend  a
    hearing; the psychiatrist had only met the Appellant once and so  could
    be expected to add little to his own report; the HOPO was  present  and
    ready to proceed; there would be delay and expense if the  matter  were
    to be adjourned. The adjournment request was,  those  factors  in  mind
    refused.

 6. The Tribunal went on to dismiss the appeal.   The  grounds  challenging
    the legality  of  the  decision  to  do  so  are  foreshadowed  in  the
    Tribunal's final paragraph on procedural matters:

         "19. I indicated to the appellant and her son that the  adjournment
         request was refused and I planned to proceed.   No  further  issues
         were raised at that stage. Later in the hearing during her evidence
         the appellant said that she  was  unsure  why  we  were  proceeding
         without  her  representative,  however  the  matter  had  not  been
         advanced at the start of the hearing by either her or her  son.  No
         explanation for absence was offered  and  it  was  clear  that  the
         representative was aware of the hearing date. I was satisfied  that
         this comment from the appellant was more closely related to her not
         wanting to answer some questions that were put to her which  raised
         difficult issues, than to a genuine confusion  about  why  we  were
         proceeding without her representative".



    Proceedings Before the Upper Tribunal

 7. The grounds of appeal  assert  that  paragraph  19  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal betrays two errors in approach by the Tribunal:


              i) Error of fact. A  witness  statement  is  produced  by  the
                 Appellant's son who avers that he did mention the  lack  of
                 representation at the outset of the hearing;


             ii) Procedural unfairness.  Even if the lay Appellant  and  her
                 family had failed to mention the lack of representative, it
                 was a Robinson  obvious[1]  issue  of  fairness  which  the
                 Tribunal should have considered of  its  own  motion.   The
                 grounds pray Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
                 00418 (IAC) in aid.   That  was  of  particular  pertinence
                 given the Appellant's prima facie mental health issues.

 8. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  6th  March  2020  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman.


 9. Mr Abbas, who appeared before me, was not the  representative  who  did
    not appear at first instance. He explained that he has been involved in
    the case since its inception, but was not instructed  at  the  relevant
    time. He had assisted the Appellant in making her  initial  application
    to the Home Office but after that she had gone  elsewhere,  instructing
    Addison & Khan Solicitors in Ilford to lodge  and  pursue  her  appeal.
    The  Appellant  and  her  family  have  told  him,  and  the   relevant
    information is produced before me in the form of  a  witness  statement
    from the Appellant's son Mr Waqar Javaid, that in the  run  up  to  the
    hearing they were advised by their representative that they should  try
    and have the hearing adjourned in order to call the  psychiatrist.   It
    was not until the late afternoon of the 16th September, the day  before
    the hearing, that the family were told that  the  representative  would
    not be attending. Mr Javaid asserts that he was advised to attend court
    and ask for an adjournment himself.  Mr  Abbas  told  me  that  he  has
    tried, and failed, to contact  Addison  &  Khan  for  comment.  He  has
    pursued  them  for  copies  of  the  case  file,  which  has  not  been
    forthcoming. He candidly acknowledged that he does not therefore really
    know why they chose not to attend,  nor  why  they  thought  that  live
    evidence from the psychiatrist was so vital,  nor  why  they  have  not
    provided him with  the  papers.  He  has  contacted  them  on  numerous
    occasions and has received no response.


10. The account given by Mr Abbas is in material respects supported by  the
    court file.

11. The pre-hearing review record, dated the 27th August 2019,  shows  that
    the representatives indicated that Mrs Javed  was  experiencing  mental
    health issues. Medical evidence was to  be  called.   The  hearing  was
    listed for the 10th September 2019 but was adjourned  upon  application
    by Addison & Khan. By their letter of the 4th September 2019  the  firm
    filed a letter from Consultant Psychiatrist Dr Waquas Waheed who stated
    that following an initial consultation with the Appellant  on  the  3rd
    September, he had formed the view that a) the Appellant  was  suffering
    from severe mental health problems  and  b)  that  he  would  like  the
    opportunity to give oral evidence at the hearing where he  proposed  to
    provide "details of her  mental  health  problems  and  the  associated
    cultural context".  The application for an adjournment was  successful,
    but only partially so. Addison and Khan had  requested  a  new  hearing
    date after the 25th September so that Dr Waheed could complete his full
    report. A new hearing date  was  set  for  the  17th  September.   Upon
    receipt of notice of that hearing Addison & Khan  wrote  again  to  the
    court, pointing out in a letter dated the 12th September that they  had
    requested longer for the doctor to complete his assessment, and praying
    in aid Ngaigwe (adjournment-fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC).   The
    firm were advised by a Tribunal caseworker, on the 16th September  2019
    at 14.45 in the afternoon, that they could make their application for a
    "postponement" on the day of the hearing.


12. In light of this material it is clear that Mr Abbas'  understanding  of
    events leading up to the appeal is accurate. What is less clear is  why
    the firm representing the Appellant chose not  to  attend  the  hearing
    before Judge Tully on the 17th September 2019. Judge  Tully's  note  of
    proceedings that day indicates that  the  hearing  commenced  with  her
    confirming the language of the interpreter, recording those present and
    who was giving evidence, what documents she  had  before  her  and  the
    procedure for the hearing being explained  to  the  Appellant  and  her
    witnesses. Then under the heading 'adjournment request' it is  recorded
    that someone - presumably the Appellant's son Mr  Javaid  -  apologised
    and referred to the earlier requests for an adjournment.  He  explained
    that his mother was in poor mental health and  that  they  requested  a
    later hearing date. He referred to the letter  from  the  psychiatrist.
    The judge's note then records "what can he say re the reps".  The  note
    then records the submissions of the HOPO, and the judge's decision,  in
    the form that they are set out in the determination. The  evidence  was
    then called. At the beginning of the first witness' evidence - I assume
    this to be the Appellant  herself  -  the  judge  records  the  comment
    "wouldn't it be better if the reps were here". The  judge  records  her
    own response as follows: "the reps are not here. No adj request on that
    basis but in any event could proceed w/o rep".


13. In light of the judge's note I accept the substance of the evidence now
    offered  by  Mr  Javaid,  namely  that  he  did  mention  the  lack  of
    representation and the outset, and that his mother also mentioned it as
    a concern when she gave her evidence.

14. Before I go on to consider the submissions made before  me  about  this
    procedural history it is appropriate that I note that  the  information
    provided at the hearing by Mr Abbas is supported by the court  file  in
    one other material respect. That is that since his firm came on  record
    on the 21st October 2019 they have repeatedly asked  the  Tribunal  for
    copies of the papers:  he  also  written  to  the  Tribunal  expressing
    concern about the conduct of Addison & Khan.

15.  So, to the appeal before me. Mr Abbas acknowledges that up  until  the
    day of the hearing itself the only  reason  given  for  an  adjournment
    being sought was that the Consultant Psychiatrist was not available  on
    the given hearing date and  he  required  more  time  to  complete  his
    assessment and report.  Mr Abbas submits however that the family raised
    their concerns about the lack of  representation  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing; even if the judge had not understood that to have  been  given
    as a formal reason for the adjournment request made by the  Appellant's
    son, it was an obvious issue of fairness,  which  persisted  throughout
    the hearing. At the very least it should have been revisited  when  the
    Appellant herself raised it at the beginning of her oral evidence.   Mr
    Abbas submitted that confronted by lay witnesses,  none  of  whom  were
    equipped to address the court on legal matters including Articles 3  &8
    ECHR, Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules,  the  Tribunal
    should have considered  of  its  own  motion  whether  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed. The adjournment  sought  was  a  short
    one: a matter of a week or two.

16. Mr McVeety simply pointed out that on the face of the decision  itself,
    the adjournment application was based squarely on the  absence  of  the
    doctor. The report was before the court and it was not  clear  why  his
    live evidence was required: in this respect Mr McVeety agreed with  the
    submissions made by the HOPO on the day.

17. For the sake of completeness I note that I was also  referred  by  both
    advocates to the various written submissions made in the lead up to the
    appeal being listed in the UT for oral hearing. Directions were  given,
    in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdown, for  these  submissions
    to be made, and altogether I have read the grounds, the statement of Mr
    Javaid, further written submissions from Imperium Group and a  skeleton
    argument by Mr Abbas; for the Respondent I have a  'rule  24  response'
    authored by Senior Presenting Officer Mr Lindsay, a written note by Zoe
    Young, the presenting officer before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  a
    skeleton argument prepared by Mr McVeety.


18. I note that in her written submissions the Respondent  has  focused  on
    the factual accuracy of the statement made by Mr Javaid to  the  effect
    that he had raised the lack of representation at the beginning  of  the
    hearing.   The Respondent asserts that this assertion "can only be made
    good on the basis of clear evidence",  and  Mr  Lindsay  in  particular
    highlights the  negative  credibility  findings  that  the  judge  made
    against Mr Javaid. All of that rather falls by the wayside in light  of
    the judge's note, which indicates four things. First,  that  Mr  Javaid
    did mention the lack of representatives in the course  of  his  request
    for the matter to be adjourned.  Second,  that  the  Appellant  herself
    raised it at the very beginning of her oral evidence.   Third, that the
    day in court did not commence with the Tribunal making enquiries as  to
    where the representatives were. Instead the Appellant and her witnesses
    were taken through all of the procedure and  housekeeping.  Even  in  a
    jurisdiction where we are used to dealing with litigants in person this
    was a firm that had been on record since the inception of  the  appeal:
    it is striking  that  the  Tribunal  did  not  apparently  consider  it
    necessary or appropriate to make that  enquiry.  Fourth,  at  no  point
    during the hearing did the Tribunal consider, or invite submissions on,
    whether it was just to proceed in the absence of the Appellant's  legal
    representatives.  The note simply indicates  that  the  hearing  "could
    proceed w/o rep": that is not the same thing.

19. I am wholly satisfied that the non-attendance of the representative was
    a material consideration for the court in deciding whether the  hearing
    should proceed, or continue. This was an Appellant who had, at least in
    the  view  of  the  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  "severe"  mental  health
    problems. Regardless of the view taken by the Tribunal of that evidence
    in its final analysis,  it  was  required  by  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance to treat the Appellant has a vulnerable witness  for
    the purpose of the hearing.   That this was so had already been flagged
    in the court file  by  the  pre-hearing  review.   That  Guidance  Note
    specifies, inter alia,  that  consideration  should  always  be  given,
    before and during the substantive hearing to adjourning  an  appeal  to
    enable a vulnerable appellant to get representation: see 5(vi), 5(vii),
    10, 10.2(viii).   The fact that it  was  not  the  basis  of  a  formal
    application by a lay witness is largely irrelevant. It  was  clearly  a
    concern raised by the family and it was obviously  a  matter  that  the
    Tribunal should have considered of  its  own  motion.    The  power  to
    adjourn is a general case management power derived from part 4  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (IAC) Rules. It can be exercised at  any  time  and
    the duty of fairness requires the Tribunal, particularly in the case of
    vulnerable  witnesses  but  not  exclusively  so,  to   exercise   that
    discretion for the duration of the proceedings.    The failure  of  the
    Tribunal to do  so  in  this  case  renders  its  decision  flawed  for
    procedural unfairness. I set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to
    be heard de novo by a judge other than Judge Tully.



    Decisions


20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for error of law
    such that it must be set aside.


21. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal before a Judge
    other than Judge Tully.

22. There is no order for anonymity.

                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                                   3rd August 2021










                           -----------------------
[1] R (on the application of Robinson) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [1997] EWCA Civ 3090

