
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: HU/11925/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |       Decision & Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                      |
|On 23 May 2017                    |       On 15 June 2017           |
|                                  |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ratherford, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as RA.

   1. I have made an anonymity order because this  decision  refers  to  the
      circumstances of RA's minor children.


   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      ('SSHD') against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT')  dated
      30 September 2016, in which it allowed the appeal of RA, a citizen  of
      Jamaica, on Article 8 grounds only, against the SSHD's decision  dated
      26 April 2016 to refuse his human rights claim.

Background

   3. The FTT correctly set out the lengthy background to this case  at  [5]
      and it is only necessary to summarise it in this decision.


   4. RA has been in the UK continuously since June  2002.   On  28  January
      2011 he  was  sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment  for  supplying
      cocaine.  He has not re-offended since that time.


   5. On 27 February 2012 a deportation order was signed against RA  and  he
      appealed this to the FTT.  In a decision dated 1 June  2012,  the  FTT
      allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  At this point RA relied upon
      his relationship with a British citizen together with his relationship
      with his step-daughter (born in 1998), his two younger children  (born
      in 2007 and 2008) and another child from a previous relationship (born
      in 1997).  The FTT accepted the findings contained in a  report  dated
      24 May 2002, prepared by an independent social worker, to  the  effect
      that the relationship with his children would be terminated  and  this
      would have devastating effects upon the lives of the children, for the
      reasons identified in the report.  RA was granted leave, in line  with
      this decision until 23 April 2014.

   6. RA made an in-time application for further  leave  to  remain.   After
      giving him an opportunity to make further submissions, the SSHD signed
      a deportation order against RA dated 26 April  2016  and  refused  his
      human rights claim.  This decision relied upon the 2011 conviction and
      the change in the legal framework relevant  to  the  consideration  of
      Article 8 applications of foreign national offenders.

FTT decision under appeal

   7. RA appealed against the SSHD's 2016 decision to the FTT.   It  is  the
      FTT's decision dated 30 September 2016 that forms  the  subject-matter
      of the instant appeal.


   8. The FTT directed itself to the relevant legal framework at [8-14].  In
      so doing, the FTT expressly reminded itself that  a  foreign  criminal
      will only be granted further leave on the basis of  Article  8  if  he
      qualifies under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force  at  the  date  of
      decision, even if his first period of leave was granted  before  those
      provisions came into force.  The FTT made clear findings at [18]  that
      since  the  2012  FTT  decision,  RA  had  strengthened   his   family
      relationships.  In 2013 a son was  born.   He  has  secured  full-time
      employment and committed no further offences.

   9. The FTT correctly directed itself that the 2012 FTT decision  must  be
      the starting point [19] and set out two material changes to  be  taken
      into account.  First, some family relationships had  strengthened  but
      the two older children had reached the age of 18 and  led  independent
      lives  [20].   Second,  the  applicable  legal  framework  had  become
      "significantly more exacting" [21].

  10. After referring to the findings of fact  contained  in  the  2012  FTT
      decision at [22-24] the FTT again reminded itself that  reasonableness
      is clearly not the same or as rigorous as the unduly  harsh  test  but
      that the devastating effects identified "are the equivalent  of  being
      unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without [RA]".

  11. The FTT then turned to the circumstances of the children at [26].  The
      FTT noted that  the  children  are  British  citizens  who  have  been
      resident in the UK for a lengthy period, and as such they "should  not
      be removed, unless there are substantial countervailing reasons to the
      contrary.  I find no such countervailing reasons in this case".    The
      FTT went on to find that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
      children to relocate to Jamaica, and allowed the appeal.

Hearing

  12. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety focused upon the FTT's failure to
      consider  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  RA's  criminal
      history, when making its findings at [26].  Ms Rutherford relied  upon
      her Rule 24 reply and acknowledged that the FTT  had  not  taken  into
      account RA's offending or immigration history.  She however  asked  me
      to note that RA had not reoffended and the FTT  plainly  had  this  in
      mind when making its findings on undue harshness.


  13. After hearing from both representatives I indicated that the  FTT  had
      made an error of law such that the decision should be  set  aside  and
      remade.  I give my reasons for this below.


  14. Both representatives also  agreed  that  the  material  in  this  case
      relevant to the children's circumstances requires substantial updating
      and further comprehensive  findings  of  fact  are  required  both  in
      relation to their circumstances and the updated  position  of  RA  (in
      relation to risk etc.).  In these circumstances  both  representatives
      agreed that given the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
      required, this should be done in the First-tier Tribunal.


Error of law discussion

  15. It is agreed that the two central issues which had to be determined by
      the FTT was whether or not it would be unduly harsh for  the  children
      to remain in the UK without RA and relocate to Jamaica with RA  -  the
      unduly harsh questions.  It therefore follows that the FTT should have
      had regard to  the  cases  which  had  been  involved  in  the  proper
      construction of what is meant by unduly harsh within  the  context  of
      the Rules. Those authorities are unanimous  in  emphasizing  that  the
      unduly harsh test is a rigorous and exacting one.  The  FTT  correctly
      directed itself in relation to this aspect of the test.


  16. The authorities have not been as clear as to the proper factors to  be
      taken into account when applying the  test  i.e.  in  assessing  undue
      harshness should the circumstances of the children alone  be  assessed
      or should all the  relevant  circumstances  including  the  claimant's
      criminal and immigration history be taken into account?  This has been
      resolved by the Court of Appeal in the case  of MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
      [2016] EWCA Civ 617.   The Court observed that the more  pressing  the
      public interest in removal the harder it was to show its effects would
      be unduly harsh. The relevant  circumstances  therefore  included  the
      deportee's criminal  and  immigration  history.  It  follows,  and  Ms
      Rutherford accepted,  that  in  determining  whether  deportation  was
      unduly harsh the FTT had to  have  regard  to  all  the  circumstances
      including RA's criminal and immigration history.


  17. It is clear from MM (Uganda) that it is not  appropriate  to  consider
      the unduly harsh question solely from the perspective  of  the  impact
      which deportation would be likely to have upon the children or partner
      involved. When [26] is read together with  the  entirety  of  the  FTT
      decision,  the  FTT's  approach  was  based  exclusively   or   almost
      exclusively on an assessment of  the  potential  consequences  to  the
      children.  The FTT found no such countervailing  reasons  relevant  to
      the children but failed to take into account other factors,  including
      the criminal convictions of the appellant,  when  addressing  the  two
      central  issues  before  it  predicated  upon  the   undue   harshness
      questions.   This error of law has  played  a  material  role  in  the
      overall assessment of the undue harshness questions.




Remittal


  18. I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
      Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the  factual  findings
      required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this is  an
      appropriate case to remit to the FTT.    Both  representatives  agreed
      that  extensive  fact  finding  is  necessary  regarding  the  current
      circumstances.  The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  2016
      was dated, and relied in large part upon a social worker's report from
      2012.  The family dynamics have substantially changed since 2012.   In
      addition, Ms Rutherford pointed out that there had been a recent death
      in the family, and the impact of this upon the children needed  to  be
      addressed.  It may also be relevant for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
      make findings upon RA's rehabilitation and risk of re-offending.

Decision

  19. The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


  20. I remit the appeal to the FTT to remake the decision.

Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 June 2017


