
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/11380/2019
                                                               HU/12323/2019
                                                                         (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2021                       |On 11 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               Mr yaser Najeh Kamel khattab (first appellant)
                   Miss rahmeh khattab (second appellant)
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Wood, Legal Representative for IAS, Liverpool
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devlin ("the judge"), promulgated on 9 October 2020. By that  decision,
    the judge dismissed the appellants' appeals  against  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 19 July 2019, their human rights claims (made by way of
    applications for entry clearance).

 2. The appellants are citizens of Jordan. Their human rights  claims  were
    based primarily on paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules,  which
    provides as follows:

           297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:248

           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

           ...

           (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
           United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

 3. The United  Kingdom-based  sponsor,  Mrs  Barton,  is  the  appellants'
    maternal grandmother.

 4. In refusing the human rights  claims,  the  respondent  concluded  that
    there were no "serious and compelling family or  other  considerations"
    which made the exclusion of the  appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom
    undesirable. It was accepted that the other  criteria  under  paragraph
    297 of the Rules were satisfied.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Having set out the case in outline, the judge proceeded  to  state  her
    findings, reasons, and conclusions at  [73]-[249].  On  any  view,  she
    adopted a  very  conscientious  approach  to  what  were  clearly  very
    important issues in the appeals.

 6. The judge directed herself to the guidance set out in Mundeba (s.55 and
    para 297(i)(f)) [2013]  UKUT  88  (IAC)  on  more  than  one  occasion,
    together with references to other appropriate judgments of  the  higher
    courts.

 7. The detailed consideration of the constituent elements of paragraph 297
    of the Rules is set out between [76] and [177]. Then, between [178] and
    [186], the judge proceeded to bring all of the specific  considerations
    together and then set out her conclusions in a  lengthy  section  under
    the  sub-heading  entitled  "Looking  at  everything  in  the   round".
    Ultimately, she concluded that  despite  there  being  factors  in  the
    appellants' favour there were no "serious  and  compelling"  family  or
    other considerations.

 8. The judge then went on to provide  a  very  detailed  consideration  of
    Article 8 on a wider basis. Her findings and conclusions  are  set  out
    between [188] and [249]. She concluded that the respondent's  decisions
    were not disproportionate.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. There are two grounds of appeal put forward, although in  reality  they
    overlap somewhat. First, it is said that the judge misdirected  herself
    in law in relation to the guidance set out in Mundeba.  References  are
    made to specific the judges consideration of the evidence which, it  is
    said, all pointed towards the  existence  of  "serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations." Second, it is said  that  the  judge's
    findings/conclusions were irrational in light of her  consideration  of
    the evidence.

10. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  observed
    that she was "only just persuaded"  that  the  proposed  challenge  was
    arguable.



The hearing

11. Mr Wood relied on the grounds of appeal. Beyond that, he was  admirably
    concise in oral submissions (a commendable trait  not  always  seen  in
    representatives before the Tribunal). He  confirmed  that  the  central
    thrust of the appellants' case was that in light of the  evidence,  the
    judge should have reached precisely the  opposite  conclusion  to  that
    which she arrived at. He referred me to the facts in Mundeba,  although
    he did not seek to draw a direct comparison between that case  and  the
    present. There had been  strong  evidence  before  the  judge  and  she
    should, in all the circumstances, have found that there  were  "serious
    and compelling family or other considerations" to exist.

12. Ms Cunha submitted that the judge had correctly directed herself to the
    law, made adequate findings of fact, and that the high threshold for  a
    perversity challenge had not been met.

13. In reply, Mr Wood submitted that there were conflicting findings in the
    judge's assessment.

14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions on error of law

15. I am only entitled to interfere with  the  judge's  decision  if  I  am
    satisfied that  it  contains  errors  of  law.  Having  considered  her
    decision holistically, I have concluded that no such errors exist.

16. It is plain that the judge correctly directed herself to the applicable
    legal framework, both  in  respect  of  paragraph  297  of  the  Rules,
    Mundeba, and Article 8 on a wider basis. The had note of Mundeba  reads
    as follows:

           "The exercise of the duty by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
           assess an application under the Immigration Rules as to  whether
           there are family or  other  considerations  making  the  child's
           exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of  what
           the child's welfare and best interests require.

           ii) Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights,  due
           regard must be had to the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of  the
           Child. An entry clearance decision for the admission of a  child
           under  18  is  "an   action   concerning   children...undertaken
           by...administrative authorities" and so by Article 3  "the  best
           interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".

           iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55 UK Borders Act  2009
           only applies  to  children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
           doubtless explains why the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI  invites
           Entry Clearance Officers  to  consider  the  statutory  guidance
           issued under s.55.

           iv) Family considerations require an evaluation of  the  child's
           welfare including emotional needs.  'Other considerations'  come
           in to play where there are other aspects of a child's life  that
           are serious and compelling for example  where  an  applicant  is
           living in an unacceptable social and economic environment.   The
           focus needs to be on the circumstances of the child in the light
           of his or her age, social backgrounds and developmental  history
           and will involve inquiry as to whether:-

           a there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

           b.  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

           c.  there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care;

           The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to   whether   the
           combination  of  circumstances  are  sufficiently  serious   and
           compelling to require admission.

           v)  As a starting point  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are
           usually best served by being with both or at least one of  their
           parents. Continuity of residence is another  factor;  change  in
           the place of residence where a child has grown up for  a  number
           of years when socially aware is important: see also SG (child of
           a polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC) [2012] Imm AR
           939 ."

17. It simply cannot be said that the  accurate  legal  direction  set  out
    earlier in the decision has not been carried through  to  the  findings
    and conclusions.  All  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the  Mundeba
    guidance are specifically dealt with under relevant sub-headings in the
    decision. Indeed, it is in my view difficult to see what more she could
    have done to ensure not only that she approached her assessment of  the
    evidence on a correct footing, but also that  the  reader  was  clearly
    able to see that this is what she did.

18. The  judge  has  in  my  judgment  produced  a  thorough  and  balanced
    assessment of the evidence before her,  reaching  sustainable  findings
    and equally sustainable conclusions drawn therefrom. I do  not  propose
    to set out all of the matters considered by the judge. They  appear  in
    the body of her decision for all to read. There is no  suggestion  that
    she misunderstood the evidence or failed to  have  regard  to  relevant
    evidence. What appears at [77]-[177] is a very careful consideration of
    all aspects of the evidence, undertaken  within  the  applicable  legal
    framework of paragraph 297 of the Rules and in light of Mundeba.

19. Importantly, at [178]-[186], the  judge  brings  all  of  her  previous
    considerations together and sets out what are in my judgment  eminently
    sustainable conclusions. The matters at  [77]-[177]  must  be  seen  in
    light of the holistic evaluation in this section of the  decision.  The
    fact that the judge did find  that  certain  aspects  of  the  evidence
    weighed in favour of the appellants' indicated that she had  adopted  a
    balanced approach. What it did not indicate  was  that  the  favourable
    findings were bound to lead to a conclusion that the appellants  should
    succeed with reference to paragraph 297 of the Rules.

20. Nor am  I  satisfied  that  the  elevated  threshold  of  a  perversity
    challenge is met in this case. Far from it.  Whilst  appreciating  that
    the appellants and Mrs  Barton  will  be  very  disappointed  with  the
    judge's decision, the findings and conclusions reached were well within
    the sphere of rationality. That  they  felt  strongly  that  the  judge
    should have found in their favour does not mean that she was  bound  to
    do so.

21. For the reasons set out above, the appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal must be dismissed.



Anonymity


22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and nor do
    I.



Notice of Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


24. The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 28 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
