
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11037/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 22 January 2019             |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                             MISS VINIA CHIKOSHA
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Ward, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  14  July  1999.  She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian
    sitting at Taylor House on 21 September 2018 in which he dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  14
    September 2017. That decision was to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
    entry clearance to join her aunt, [NC],  born  18  September  1976  and
    naturalised as a British citizen in 2008 ("the  sponsor")  pursuant  to
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Respondent's concerns were that there was no evidence to  show  the
    Appellant had ever lived with the sponsor. The Appellant had lived with
    her mother and since she died with her legal guardian.  Although  there
    was evidence of the  sponsor's  personal  and  financial  circumstances
    there was no other evidence of a relationship  with  the  sponsor.  The
    Respondent was not satisfied that  the  sponsor  was  taking  important
    decisions about the Appellant's upbringing and the Appellant could  not
    therefore meet the requirements of paragraph 297 (i) (e) or (f).

 3. The entry clearance manager reviewed the file following the Appellant's
    appeal and accepted the family relationship between the  Appellant  and
    the sponsor noting that at the date of the ECM review the Appellant was
    17 years of age and had lived apart from the sponsor  the  entirety  of
    her life. The Appellant's formative years had been spent in her country
    of origin which included family friends and schooling.

The Appellant's Case

 4. The Appellant's grounds of appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    acknowledged that the Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration
    Rules save that there were serious family or other circumstances  which
    made exclusion of the Appellant  undesirable.  The  Appellant's  mother
    died on 22 February 2013 of AIDS. This was the worst  thing  that  ever
    happened  to  the  Appellant.  After  her  mother  died  her   paternal
    grandmother moved into the home to  help  look  after  the  Appellant's
    father. The sponsor arranged from the  United  Kingdom  for  nurses  in
    Zimbabwe to go to the Appellant's house and look after the  Appellant's
    father. She continued to give the family money.

 5. On 16 August 2014 the Appellant's father died  in  hospital  and  as  a
    result of losing her parents the Appellant could not concentrate on her
    schoolwork and would not eat. The Appellant met the  sponsor  when  the
    sponsor came to Zimbabwe in 2015 for the  funeral  of  the  Appellant's
    grandmother, the sponsor's mother. The sponsor arranged for a cousin of
    hers called Beauty and Beauty's husband to move into the home. At first
    things were fine but slowly things went bad between the  Appellant  and
    Beauty. Beauty took the money which the  sponsor  was  sending.  Beauty
    told the Appellant that people were saying the Appellant was a  lesbian
    and that this was what  had  caused  the  deaths  in  the  family.  The
    Appellant had never had a relationship with either a boy or a girl  but
    to be a lesbian in Zimbabwe was a very bad thing. Some  pupils  in  the
    school started  to  make  the  same  allegation  and  others  said  the
    Appellant was involved in witchcraft. She had brought a  curse  on  the
    family.

 6. At present the Appellant is still in the family home  and  the  sponsor
    has arranged for two couples to lodge with the Appellant  there.  These
    people are not close to the Appellant and she  does  not  really  trust
    anyone now. There was no one in Zimbabwe who the Appellant could really
    rely on. The Appellant wanted to come to the United  Kingdom  and  live
    here with her aunt, the sponsor.

The Decision at First Instance

 7. At the hearing before the Judge  the  sponsor  gave  evidence  and  the
    Appellant relied on the report of a  Zimbabwean  clinical  psychologist
    called Lazarus who dealt with the  Appellant's  relationship  with  the
    sponsor. The Appellant  had  been  referred  for  forensic  examination
    complaining of suicidal thoughts  and  feelings  of  worthlessness.  By
    contrast the Appellant had not complained of suicidal thoughts  in  her
    statement and neither had the sponsor said the Appellant was  suicidal.
    The Judge expressed himself bemused where  this  information  had  come
    from in the psychologist's report.

 8. At [35] to [43] the Judge set out his conclusions.  The  Appellant  had
    not said in her witness statement  she  was  gay.  The  allegation  had
    arisen because apparently someone had seen the Appellant holding  hands
    with another girl. Although the people living in the  Appellant's  home
    were not close to her she did not complain about them as they  did  not
    harass or bully her.  She  felt  secure  with  them.  Beauty's  husband
    remained on good terms with the Appellant and the Judge did not  accept
    that the sponsor had had sole responsibility for  the  Appellant.  This
    was to some extent agreed as could be seen from the grounds of  appeal.
    The Appellant was cared for by her parents then by her father and  then
    her grandmother and then her cousin Beauty  and  then  she  lived  with
    friends and returned to the family home. She had  two  couples  in  the
    house and found them a source of security.

 9. There had been no sole responsibility but at best  such  responsibility
    had been shared with other family members. The Appellant was continuing
    to study. The sponsor paid infrequent visits to Zimbabwe and had  never
    made a special trip just to see the Appellant. There were no serious or
    compelling family or other considerations which  made  the  Appellant's
    exclusion undesirable and the Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

10. The Appellant appealed against this decision in lengthy grounds settled
    by counsel who had appeared at first instance. The grounds argued  that
    the sponsor had made regular visits to see the Appellant,  contrary  to
    the Judge's findings. The grounds complained that the Judge had  failed
    to make a finding on a material matter namely the accusation  that  the
    Appellant was gay. The Judge had not asked himself what the Appellant's
    best interest required and had conducted no balancing exercise  between
    those  interests  and  any  other  factors.  In  the   light   of   the
    psychologist's report concerning the Appellant's  poor  mental  health,
    the lack of any alternative care in Zimbabwe for the Appellant and  the
    evidence of contact between the Appellant and the  sponsor,  the  Judge
    could have found it was in the Appellant's best interests to  join  her
    legal guardian.

11. The grounds also complained that the Judge was wrong to query where the
    information about the Appellant's suicidal feelings came  from  as  the
    Appellant had said in her statement that "sometimes I  just  wanted  to
    die." The sponsor had said that if the Appellant remained  in  Zimbabwe
    she could end her life. There was nothing in the  Appellant's  evidence
    approaching a claim that the Appellant felt secure  with  her  lodgers.
    The psychologist had  spent  seven  hours  with  the  Appellant  before
    preparing his report and there could be no reasonable  requirement  for
    an Appellant to repeat an exhaustive description of her symptoms (in  a
    statement) when she had provided them in the  context  of  the  medico-
    legal report.

12. The Appellant's claim was not in relation to sole responsibility  since
    both of the Appellant's parents were dead. The question was whether the
    sponsor  had  continuing  control  and  direction  over   the   child's
    upbringing including making all the important decisions in the  child's
    life. The sponsor's evidence was  that  she  had  made  every  decision
    regarding the Appellant and directed others to carry  out  her  wishes.
    She had chased the Appellant's lodgers  to  pay  their  rent  and  made
    decisions regarding the Appellant's schooling  and  even  arranged  for
    tradesmen to visit the  Appellant's  home.  The  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the continuing interference in the Appellant's and the
    sponsor's family and private life was proportionate.

13. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Povey on 22 November 2018. In granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that the Judge had arguably erred in  his
    dismissal of the expert medical report. The conclusion that the  expert
    assessment of the Appellant reporting numerous symptoms associated with
    anxiety and trauma was not reflected in the Appellant's or  her  aunt's
    witness statements  was  both  factually  inaccurate  and  arguably  an
    insufficient basis to reject the expert report in its entirety. If  the
    Judge had other reasons for placing no weight on the  expert  evidence,
    they were not disclosed. The assessment of the Appellant's mental well-
    being was material  to  the  Judge's  assessment  that  there  were  no
    compelling family or other considerations.

The Hearing Before Me

14. In consequence of the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to determine in the first place whether there was a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. If  there  was
    then the decision would be  set  aside  and  directions  made  for  the
    rehearing of the appeal. If there was not the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal would stand.

15. For the Appellant her solicitor relied on the grounds of appeal settled
    by counsel. The Appellant had never claim she was gay, but she had been
    accused  by  others  and  ostracised  on  that  basis.  The  Judge  had
    considered the wrong Rule. The application was made under paragraph 297
    (f) not (e). There was a human rights appeal outside the rules, but the
    Judge had not considered Article 8 and there  had  been  no  structured
    approach in accordance with the Razgar  step-by-step  approach  and  no
    consideration of proportionality.

16. For the Respondent it was submitted there was no material error of  law
    in the decision. Paragraph 27 of the  Immigration  Rules  applied  when
    someone who was refused entry clearance had gone from being a child  at
    that time to being an adult by the time of the hearing. By the  hearing
    the Appellant was an adult, her age had changed during the  process  of
    the case. The refusal letter had considered sole responsibility and the
    circumstances of the Appellant. The  statement  of  the  Appellant  and
    sponsor did not refer to the Appellant having thoughts of suicide.  The
    Judge had recorded the sponsor's evidence  at  [22]  that  some  family
    members had accused the Appellant of being gay, the  point  being  that
    others had not. The Appellant had not been totally  ostracised  by  her
    family. The Judge had spent some time in the determination  considering
    the medical evidence. The grounds were a mere  disagreement  and  there
    were  no  serious  or  compelling  circumstances  which  required   the
    Appellant's admission to the United Kingdom.

17. In conclusion the Appellant's solicitor emphasised the extract from the
    Appellant's witness statement that sometimes she just  wanted  to  die.
    The Judge had wrongly rejected the psychologist report.  The  Appellant
    had never conceded that she could not satisfy the rules and  the  entry
    clearance manager was wrong to say there had been  such  a  concession.
    The last paragraph of  the  grounds  of  appeal  said:  "whilst  it  is
    acknowledged that the Appellant cannot succeed on the Immigration rules
    alone, satisfying them is a matter which is relevant to  the  issue  of
    proportionality". That was framed in that way  because  satisfying  the
    rules was not enough to win a human rights only appeal.

Findings

18. The Appellant put forward her claim on  several  different  bases.  The
    first was that she would be suspected of being gay which had led to her
    ostracism by some family members in Zimbabwe.  The  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor both denied that the Appellant was  gay  and  the  grounds  are
    wrong to suggest that the Judge did not give a definitive  decision  on
    this claim. At [29] the Judge pointed out there was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant was gay and he did not think it was right for the sponsor
    to try to make much of an incident which was just innocent handholding.
    Only some members of the family had  jumped  to  the  wrong  conclusion
    about this incident others had evidently not. There was simply no basis
    for the Appellant to put forward a claim that  she  might  be  at  risk
    because people would wrongly think that she was gay.

19. As the Appellant was out of the country the situation under  Article  8
    to be considered was at the date of decision not the date  of  hearing.
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  does
    not apply to children outside the United Kingdom and the  Judge  cannot
    therefore be criticised as the grounds seek to do for failing  to  make
    the best interests assessment for someone to  whom  the  act  does  not
    apply. What T Jamaica [2011] UKUT 483 says in its head note is:

         "Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
         does not apply to children who  are  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
         Where there are reasons to believe that a child's  welfare  may  be
         jeopardised   by   exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom,   the
         considerations of  Article  8  ECHR,  the  "exclusion  undesirable"
         provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  extra  statutory
         guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to apply  the  spirit  of  the
         statutory guidance in certain circumstances  should  all  be  taken
         into account by the ECO at first instance and the Judge on appeal.

20. The Judge analysed the Appellant's living arrangements  noting  that  a
    number of family members had shared care of the Appellant in  the  past
    which included the emotional and financial support  from  the  sponsor.
    The argument had been made during the hearing recorded by the Judge  at
    [34] that it was in the welfare of the Appellant that she comes to  the
    United Kingdom. The primary consideration must be given in that  regard
    to the welfare of the child under the  rules.  That  was  an  incorrect
    statement of the law since the best interests of a child are a  primary
    consideration  but  not  the  primary  consideration.  The  Judge   was
    evidently satisfied that the care for the Appellant  while  she  was  a
    minor was adequate,  the  Appellant  was  now  an  adult  and  did  not
    therefore require any further parental care in that respect.

21. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had had  suicidal  thoughts
    or flashbacks. The evidence cited was that the Appellant had been upset
    after the death of  her  parents  and  could  not  concentrate  on  her
    schoolwork and that sometimes she just wanted to die herself. There  is
    no indication that the Appellant thought in terms of  harming  herself.
    It was a matter for the Judge to decide  what  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence was  and  the  difference  between  wanting  to  die  and  the
    contemplation of taking steps to carry this out. There was no  evidence
    of the latter and the sponsor had not indicated there was.

22. The problem with the psychologist  report  was  that  he  had  somewhat
    embellished his report by attributing to the Appellant ideas  that  she
    had not expressed or intended to carry out. This inevitably  undermined
    the weight that the Judge could  place  on  that  report.  The  sponsor
    suggested that if the Appellant remained in Zimbabwe she could end  her
    life but if that was not supported by evidence from  the  Appellant  it
    did not strengthen the psychologist's report  but  tended  to  indicate
    that that was the source of the embellishment.

23. The Appellant complains that the main thrust of  her  argument  in  the
    appeal was not whether the sponsor had sole responsibility for her  but
    whether  there  were   serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which made exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.  That
    sits uneasily with paragraph 22 of the grounds of onward  appeal  which
    specifically argue that the Judge was wrong to say the sponsor did  not
    have sole responsibility. The Judge did not consider  that  there  were
    serious and compelling family or other considerations as he made  clear
    at [42]. If the Appellant is not relying on sole responsibility (as she
    cannot) then paragraph 22 of the grounds largely falls away.

24. In any event the problem for the sponsor's claim of sole responsibility
    was that although she  had  visited  Zimbabwe,  she  had  other  family
    members herself there who she could visit. As a result,  the  important
    point from the Judge's point of view was that  the  sponsor  had  never
    made a trip to Zimbabwe just to see the Appellant. The  failure  to  do
    that undermined the sponsor's argument as to how involved  she  was  in
    the care of the Appellant. The Judge's view was that a number of family
    members had taken part in the  care  of  the  Appellant  not  just  the
    sponsor. Whilst that did go  to  rejecting  the  argument  as  to  sole
    responsibility importantly it also went to reject the  argument  as  to
    compelling circumstances since if there were people available  to  care
    for  the  Appellant  there  were  not  compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which made the Appellant's exclusion undesirable.

25. It is also significant that it was the sponsor who claimed  credit  for
    putting the two couples to live with the Appellant. If that was  a  bad
    arrangement and made the Appellant miserable, then  confidence  in  any
    arrangements the sponsor might make to look after the Appellant in  the
    United Kingdom would be undermined and the Rules would not be  met.  On
    the other hand, if  the  sponsor  is  right  and  the  arrangement  has
    benefitted the Appellant, the criticism of the  determination  made  in
    the grounds (that the Judge wrongly stated that the Appellant has  some
    security in her current arrangements) is fatally undermined. The  Judge
    was entitled to conclude that what was said to be the Appellant's fears
    were groundless, see [42] which indicates  that  the  cousin's  husband
    continues  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  Appellant.  Whilst  the  Judge's
    conclusion section is brief he does express clearly his views and gives
    his decision accordingly. There were no  exceptional  circumstances  in
    this case and once the Appellant could not satisfy the Rules it  became
    difficult to see how she could succeed outside the Rules under  Article
    8. The Judge was aware of the Article 8 claim, see [34]  but  evidently
    rejected it. I do not consider that there was any material error of law
    in the  determination,  the  grounds  of  onward  appeal  were  a  mere
    disagreement with the decision of the Judge. I dismiss the  Appellant's
    onward appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 6 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 6 February 2019
.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
