
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11241/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 26th July 2019                             |On 7th August 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    F. O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Adesina, of Galaxy Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  Mark  Davies  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on  29th  March
    2019.

 2. On 15th April 2015 the Appellant made a human  rights  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family and private  life.
    The Appellant had been in a relationship with a British citizen to whom
    I shall refer as AC.  They have two children, a  son  born  11th  April
    2007 and a daughter born 24th July  2005.   The  children  are  British
    citizens.  The Appellant and AC are no longer  in  a  relationship  and
    there is a restraining order in force prohibiting contact between them.



 3. The application for leave to remain was, in the main,  based  upon  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  children.   The  application  was
    refused on 20th April 2016 and the Appellant appealed to the FTT.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 4. The appeal was heard by the judge on 28th February 2007.  The  decision
    was to remit the case back to the Respondent to consider section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The Respondent  was
    granted permission to appeal  and  on  22nd  November  2017  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that the FTT had  made  a  material  error  of  law  and
    remitted the appeal back to the FTT to be heard again by the judge.

 5. The appeal was heard again by the judge on  1st  August  2018  and  the
    hearing adjourned.  The family court protocol was engaged.  The  appeal
    was heard again on 21st March 2019.  The judge heard evidence from  the
    Appellant and his adult stepson TC.  The Appellant's evidence was  that
    he was having contact with  his  minor  children  with  their  mother's
    consent.  The mother, AC, had not attended the hearing because  of  the
    restraining order which was in force.  The Appellant's evidence was  to
    the effect that he had seen his children  every  weekend  since  August
    2018 and AC was aware of this.

 6. TC gave evidence confirming that he took his minor brother  and  sister
    to the Appellant's address in March 2018, and had done that three times
    a month and during the school holidays ever since.  He said that AC was
    aware of this.  TC produced letters from his mother, and his sister.

 7. The judge found that the Appellant had produced a letter claiming to be
    from AC dated 15th February 2017  which  was  a  forgery  and  was  not
    written by her.  The judge found that the two letters  produced  by  TC
    dated 9th February 2019 were forgeries and  "in  all  probability  were
    written by" the  Appellant.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    testimony had no credibility whatsoever.

 8. The judge concluded that the Appellant was utilising  his  children  to
    try and prevent his removal from the UK.  The judge was satisfied  that
    the Appellant was not having contact with his  children  and  concluded
    that the Appellant did not have family life  with  his  children  which
    engaged Article 8.  The judge found that as Article 8 was  not  engaged
    the appeal must be dismissed.  In the  alternative  if  Article  8  was
    engaged, any interference with the Appellant's  family  life  with  his
    children was in accordance with the law in order to maintain  effective
    immigration  control,  and  his  removal   from   the   UK   would   be
    proportionate.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The Appellant had been unrepresented before  the  FTT.   He  instructed
    representatives to submit an application for permission to appeal.

10. In summary it was submitted that the judge had made inadequate findings
    and had failed to take into account material evidence.

11. It was submitted that there was a letter from Cheshire West and Chester
    Council which stated that there  was  an  arrangement  agreed  for  the
    Appellant to see his children and this  was  confirmed  by  TC  at  the
    hearing.  The date of the letter from the council was not specified  in
    the application for permission to appeal.

12. It was submitted that AC, the mother of the children, had  submitted  a
    statement to confirm that the Appellant had contact with his  children.



13. Reliance was placed upon the Respondent's policy guidance in  which  it
    is stated that strong reasons must be given for a child to leave the UK
    if the child has resided in the UK for at least seven  years.   It  was
    pointed out that the children are British and  have  lived  in  the  UK
    since birth.  It was contended that the judge had  failed  to  consider
    this policy.

Permission to Appeal

14. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Manuell of the  FTT
    but following a renewed application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Lindsley in the following terms;

         "4.  It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal is  insufficiently
             reasoned and perverse with respect to  whether  the  Appellant
             sees  his  children,  and  particularly  that  there  was   no
             consideration of the email from Mr  Tom  Main,  social  worker
             dated 22nd March 2019  which  was  sent  to  the  Home  Office
             Presenting Officer the day after the  hearing  which  made  it
             clear that there was contact between  the  Appellant  and  his
             children and that  social  services  do  not  object  to  that
             contact if another family member is present - the  pattern  of
             contact which arguably had been said to be taking  place.   It
             is arguable that this evidence was either available or  should
             have been available to the First-tier Tribunal at the date  of
             promulgation  of  the  decision,  and  could  have  materially
             affected the decision in this case."

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. At the Upper Tribunal hearing Mr Bates advised that he  relied  upon  a
    response dated 8th July  2019,  lodged  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.    That   response
    indicated that the Respondent  accepted  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    revealed a material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    consideration of whether the Appellant had physical  contact  with  his
    two British children.

16. Consequently the Respondent did not oppose the Appellant's  application
    for permission to appeal and invited the Upper Tribunal  to  remit  the
    appeal to the FTT for a de novo hearing.

17. Mr Bates advised that he did not seek to  depart  from  the  concession
    that there was a material error of law, but suggested that  it  may  be
    more appropriate to re-make the decision in the Upper  Tribunal.   This
    was on  the  basis  that  there  would  be  very  limited  fact-finding
    required.  Mr Bates submitted that in re-making the decision the  issue
    to be decided was whether the Appellant had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his children.  If he did,  then  his  appeal
    would succeed with reference to section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

18. Mr Adesina advised that he was prepared for the Upper Tribunal to  deal
    with the appeal today, and the Appellant had attended, as had AC and TC
    to act as witnesses.  Because the restraining order remained  in  force
    Mr Adesina advised that AC was waiting outside the  hearing  room,  and
    the Appellant was waiting outside the court building so there would  be
    no contact between them.

19. I decided that the Respondent's concession that the FTT had  materially
    erred in law was rightly made for the following reasons.

20. The judge had before him at the hearing an email from Cheshire West and
    Chester Council (the council) dated 5th  March  2019.   This  had  been
    produced in response to a request from the Respondent  for  information
    as to whether the Appellant was having contact with his  two  children.
    The information in  the  email  dated  5th  March  2019  was  that  the
    Appellant's last contact with the  children  was  in  September/October
    2018 and AC had stopped contact as she felt  the  children  were  being
    used to support an immigration claim.

21. The judge found, based upon this information, that  a  letter  said  to
    have been written by AC dated 15th February 2017 had been forged by the
    Appellant.  I find this to be an error of law, as inadequate  reasoning
    is given for this conclusion.  The letter dated 15th February 2017  was
    prepared  well  before  contact  was  said  to  have  been  stopped  in
    September/October 2018.

22. The judge also found that two other letters produced  at  the  hearing,
    one from AC dated 9th February 2019, and the other said  to  have  been
    written by the Appellant's daughter dated 22nd February 2019, were also
    forgeries.  Again I find that inadequate reasons for this finding  have
    been made.  The Respondent in producing  the  email  from  the  council
    dated 5th March 2019 had referred to the initial letter  from  AC,  but
    had not suggested that it was a forgery, but  had  requested  that  the
    Tribunal "treat the letter with caution".

23. I find that there has been an error of  law  by  way  of  a  procedural
    irregularity.  This cannot in any way be attributed to the  judge.   On
    22nd March 2019 the social worker involved in this case, Mr  Tom  Main,
    sent an email to  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   This  email
    disclosed that the children had in fact been seeing the Appellant on  a
    number of occasions in recent months.  In other words, the  information
    contained in the email dated 5th March 2019 was incorrect.  Mr Main  in
    the email dated 22nd March 2019 confirms that contact has been  regular
    at weekends and facilitated by the older siblings of the two  children,
    one of whom is TC.  Mr Main stated that he and AC had been  unaware  of
    this.

24. Mr Main confirmed that AC has subsequently stated that she is happy for
    the children to have contact with the Appellant so long as there is  an
    older sibling present, and from  a  social  care  perspective  Mr  Main
    confirmed that the council  did  not  object  to  the  children  having
    contact with the Appellant provided there  was  another  family  member
    present.

25. This email was produced the  day  after  the  hearing  but  before  the
    decision was promulgated on 29th  March  2019.   It  appears  that  the
    email, which is clearly material, was not brought to the  attention  of
    the judge.  I take into account the guidance in MM  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT
    00105 (IAC) which confirms that where there is a defect or  impropriety
    of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance,  this  may
    amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the FTT  to
    be  set  aside.   A  successful  appeal  is  not   dependent   on   the
    demonstration of some failing on the part of the FTT.

26. I am satisfied that the failure to bring to the attention of the  judge
    the email dated 22nd March  2019  is  a  defect  or  impropriety  of  a
    procedural nature.  This could  have  had  a  material  effect  on  the
    proceedings.

27. For the reasons given above  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  FTT
    discloses a material error of law and is set aside.

28. I was invited to proceed and hear evidence so that the  decision  could
    be re-made, and agreed that this would be appropriate.  The Appellant's
    representatives had prepared a further bundle comprising 31  pages  and
    Mr Bates was provided with a copy of this.

29. Both representatives indicated they were ready  to  proceed.   I  heard
    evidence firstly from AC who adopted her witness statement  dated  22nd
    July 2019.  She was not questioned by Mr Adesina but was cross-examined
    by Mr Bates.  In answering questions put in cross-examination  AC  said
    that she consented to the Appellant having direct contact with the  two
    children.  She said that contact must be supervised by TC, and she said
    that this had been agreed because there  was  a  restraining  order  in
    force which meant that she and the Appellant could  not  be  in  direct
    contact with each other.

30. She was asked whether the Appellant made any decisions in  relation  to
    the children.  She said that this depends.  When asked to elaborate she
    explained that the Appellant is a maths teacher and that  he  wants  to
    make sure that the children are doing their homework and doing well  at
    school.  She said that the children take their homework with them  when
    they visit the Appellant.  She confirmed that they have direct  contact
    with the Appellant most weekends.

31. When asked whether the children go to the Appellant's address  with  TC
    for contact the reply was in the affirmative.  Mr Bates asked  that  if
    there was a problem with the children such as an accident, would AC  be
    content for the Appellant to deal with it, and  she  replied  that  she
    would.

32. Mr Bates indicated that he had no further questions, and in view of the
    evidence given by AC, that there would be no need to call evidence from
    the Appellant and TC.  Mr  Bates  stated  that  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  the
    children, and that it would not be reasonable for the children to leave
    the UK and therefore it was conceded that the appeal should be allowed.



33. In my view the concession was rightly made.  Only one Ground of  Appeal
    is open to the Appellant in this appeal, and I must decide whether  the
    Respondent's decision is contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998.  The Appellant relies upon Article 8 of the  1950  Convention  in
    relation to his family life with his children.

34. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances, and that the decision to refuse his human  rights  claim
    interferes disproportionately in his family and private  life  in  this
    country.  It is for the Respondent to  establish  the  public  interest
    factors weighing against the Appellant.  The standard  of  proof  is  a
    balance of probabilities throughout.

35. I find  that  Article  8  is  engaged.   I  must  have  regard  to  the
    considerations in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  This confirms that the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  The Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules in  order
    to be granted leave to remain.

36. I set out below section 117B(6);

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

37. The Upper Tribunal decision  in  JG  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  00072  (IAC)
    confirms that section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act  requires  a  court  or
    Tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in  question  would  leave  the
    United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to  be  the  case,  and  ask
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.

38. This is relevant in this case, as clearly, even if the  Appellant  left
    the UK, the children would not do so.  Mr Bates was in my view  correct
    to accept that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    leave the UK.  The decisions in KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  and  AB
    (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661  confirm  that  when
    considering reasonableness the Tribunal must focus on the children, not
    on the immigration history of the parent.

39. In this case the children are British.  They were born in  the  UK  and
    have always lived  here.   It  cannot  be  reasonable  to  expect  such
    children to leave the UK.

40. The other issue relevant in section  117B(6)  is  whether  there  is  a
    genuine  and  subsisting   parental   relationship.    The   biological
    relationship between the Appellant and the children has never  been  in
    dispute.  It was clear from the answers given by AC, that the Appellant
    does have contact with  his  children  and  does  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with them.

41. If the requirements  of  section  117B(6)  are  satisfied,  the  public
    interest does not require the person  with  the  parental  relationship
    with the children to be removed from the  UK  if  that  person  is  not
    subject to deportation.  The Appellant is not subject  to  deportation.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, the public interest does not  require
    his removal, and his removal would be a  disproportionate  interference
    with his family life rights with  his  children.   On  that  basis  the
    appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT contained an error of law  and  was  set  aside.   I
substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant's children are minors, and  is  made
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.



Signed                              Date 28th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Upper Tribunal which were not before the initial  decision
maker.


Signed                              Date 28th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
