
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11478/2016
                                                               hu/11485/2016
                                                               hu/11488/2016
                                                               hu/11489/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                            |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                          Ms EJI (FIRST appellant)
                          Mr SJM (SECOND appellant)
                         MISS TSM (THIRD appellant)
                        MASTER ESM (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1.   In a decision posted on 30 May 2017 Judge Parkes of the First-tier
         Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal  of  the  appellants,  who  are
         husband and wife and  two  children,  all  nationals  of  Tanzania,
         against the decision made  by  the  respondent  on  13  April  2016
         refusing their applications for leave to  remain.   It  is  not  in
         dispute that the third appellant was born in the UK in October 2017
         and went to Tanzania in 2008/9 before returning after  nine  months
         on 16 April 2009, and that accordingly she has resided continuously
         in the UK for seven years at the date of the respondent's  decision
         (and eight years by the date of the judge's decision).  Nor  is  it
         in dispute that the fourth appellant was born in the UK in May 2013
         and has resided here since.  The  fourth  appellant  was  diagnosed
         with autism spectrum disorder in May 2016.

    2.   The judge's assessment of the third appellant's  circumstances  is
         best captured by quoting paragraph 17:

             "The best interests of the Third Appellant are principally  to
             live with her parents and that will be the case  whether  they
             remain in the UK or return to Tanzania.  The contents  of  the
             report in relation to the Third Appellant do not show anything
             that is significantly out of ordinary in regards either to her
             progress in the UK, the life that she has established and  her
             hopes for the future and her concerns about what may happen in
             the event of removal to Tanzania.  So far as she is  concerned
             in remaining with her parents whilst she may prefer to  be  in
             the UK the evidence does not  show  that  her  best  interests
             require her to remain in the UK and that her needs,  familial,
             social and educational can be met adequately in  Tanzania.   I
             would add that it appears that the adults have  not  made  any
             real  effort  to  introduce  the  Third   Appellant   to   the
             possibility of remaining in the  UK  and  that  of  course  is
             consistent with their stated aim of living in the UK come what
             may, this is discussed further below".

         The summary of the judge's assessment of the  fourth  appellant  is
         given at paragraph 23:

             "The desirability of the Fourth Appellant living in the UK and
             receiving the professional support identified is supported  by
             the various reports in the bundle.  His difficulties  seem  to
             have been apparent from a fairly early stage but only recently
             confirmed by the diagnosis referred to above.  In addition  to
             the general observations about the best interests of a  child,
             and I note that although born in the UK he has not lived  here
             for over 7 years, his best interests would probably be  served
             by his continuing to receive the professional help in  the  UK
             that has been  identified  in  terms  of  continuity  but  the
             evidence does not show that he could not  receive  appropriate
             support in Tanzania".

    3.    The  appellants'  grounds  revolve  around  the  one  theme,  the
         contention that the judge's approach to the  position  of  the  two
         children was flawed.

    4.   I heard excellent submissions from Mr  Pipe  and  Mr  Mills,  both
         concise and to the point.

    5.   I am persuaded that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
         treatment of the position of the two child appellants.  At the date
         of the hearing before the judge  the  respondent  had  in  place  a
         policy which stated that in the case of children  who  had  resided
         continuously in the UK for at least seven years, it  was  necessary
         to assess whether there were "strong reasons" for not granting such
         children leave to remain.  Further, in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 705, the Court of Appeal considered that a similar approach was
         required under the applicable law.

    6.   It is demonstrably clear that the judge  did  not  apply  such  an
         approach.  At paragraph 30 he stated:

             "In short the adults have a very poor immigration  history  in
             which they have  put  personal  convenience  above  any  legal
             obligations that they have, in doing so they have  not  always
             acted in the best interests  of  their  children.   They  have
             received significant  benefits  to  which  they  have  had  no
             entitlement.   If  this  case  concerned  only  the  first   3
             Appellants then it would have no merit at all".

         Even if the last sentence is considered as a carelessness and meant
         to apply only to the first  two  appellants,  the  judge  in  other
         paragraphs clearly proceeded on the basis that the third and fourth
         appellants could not establish unreasonableness unless able to show
         factors "significantly out  of  the  ordinary"  (paragraph  17)  or
         "something more than the usual life that would  be  expected  of  a
         child of the relevant age" (paragraph 24).  As  regards  the  third
         appellant, this approach effectively reversed  the  presumption  in
         favour of granting leave and the formulation at  paragraph  24  did
         not even consider length of residence as a relevant factor  at  all
         (only comparable age).  Whilst citing MA  (Pakistan)  at  paragraph
         24, the judge flatly disregarded its guidance.

    7.   The judge's treatment of the fourth appellant's  circumstances  in
         one respect compounds the difficulties already identified with  the
         approach to both child appellants, in  that  it  proceeded  on  the
         basis that length of residence (albeit in this  child's  case  less
         than seven years) was irrelevant.  In another respect it  does  not
         appear to have recognised  the  significance  of  the  judge's  own
         finding at paragraph 23:

             "The desirability of the Fourth Appellant living in the UK and
             receiving the professional support identified is supported  by
             the various reports in the bundle.  His difficulties  seem  to
             have been apparent from a fairly early stage but only recently
             confirmed by the diagnosis referred to above.  In addition  to
             the general observations about the best interests of a  child,
             and I note that although born in the UK he has not lived  here
             for over 7 years, his best interests would probably be  served
             by his continuing to receive the professional help in  the  UK
             that has been  identified  in  terms  of  continuity  but  the
             evidence does not show that he could not  receive  appropriate
             support in Tanzania".

    8.   If the fourth appellant's best interests were "probably ... served
         by his continuing to receive the professional help in the UK"  then
         that, on KO (Nigeria) ([2018]  UKHL  53)  principles,  that  factor
         should have been recognised to go a significant way  in  satisfying
         the reasonableness requirement.  To contrary effect, the  judge  at
         paragraphs 30 and 31 treated the parents'  "very  poor  immigration
         history"  as  one  of  the  factors  informing  the   question   of
         reasonableness.  Of course, KO (Nigeria) was not published  at  the
         date of the judge's decision but it declares the law as it must  be
         understood to have always been.

    9.   Mr Mills indeed relies on this  last  verity  to  argue  that  the
         judge's decision, even if not consistent  with  MA  (Pakistan)  was
         consistent with KO (Nigeria).  However, in the first place I do not
         read Lord Carnwath's analysis to have ousted the approach of Elias,
         LJ to seven year child cases.  Even if I prove to  be  wrong  about
         that, I cannot see  that  there  is  anything  in  Lord  Carnwath's
         reasoning to dispute the well-established public law principle that
         the respondent must be expected to follow her own published  policy
         and failure to apply such a policy reduces the public interest that
         might otherwise lie against an applicant in an Article 8 case.

    10.  Further, and in any event, the judge plainly  did  contravene  the
         approach to assessment of reasonableness enjoined by Lord  Carnwath
         in KO.

    11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the decision  of  the  judge
         should be set aside for material error of law.

    12.  Ordinarily in a case such as this it would be appropriate  to  re-
         make the decision in the Upper Tribunal.  However, I  am  persuaded
         to exercise my discretion to remit the  case  to  the  FtT  on  the
         footing that:

         (i)  it is now over eighteen months since the judge's decision  and
             the appellants should have the opportunity through one of  the
             parents (if not the third appellant as  well)  to  update  the
             children's and family's circumstances;

         (ii)  assessment  of  the  fourth   appellant's   autism   requires
             independent evidence updating the nature  and  extent  of  the
             professional health services he has been receiving in the UK.

    13.  To conclude:

         The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for  material  error  of
         law.

         The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Parkes).

         An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 3 January 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

