
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11375/2016
     hu/11380/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2018                        |On 7th March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Sunilkumar Parmar
                  Dharmishthaben Jashvantbahi Parmar Parmar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Praisoody, Counsel instructed by Deccan Prime
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State  who  was
    the Respondent in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.   For
    the sake of convenience I shall refer to the parties as they were known
    at the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant applied for leave to  remain
    on the basis of his family  and  private  life.   The  application  was
    refused  by  the  Respondent  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously  used  deception   in   obtaining   his   English   language
    certificate.  In those circumstances the Respondent's view was that the
    public interest  in  the  proportionality  exercise  fell  against  the
    Appellant and for removal.   The  matter  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the judge concluded that the Appellant had not been  shown
    to  have  exercised  deception  in  obtaining  his   English   language
    certificate and allowed the appeal.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission on the basis that the judge  has
    allowed the appeal on a basis that it is not clear from  the  decision,
    and argues that  the  findings  in  respect  of  the  English  language
    certificate were flawed by a failure to apply  the  appropriate  burden
    and standard of proof, and that in any event the judge  has  failed  to
    make any findings in respect of Article  8  and  failed  to  conduct  a
    proportionality exercise.

 3. At the hearing before me both representatives were  in  agreement  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed  by  legal  error  in
    that the judge has failed to provide any reasoning in relation  to  the
    only ground of appeal that was open to the Appellant namely the  ground
    that  the  decision   interfered   with   his   human   rights.    Both
    representatives were in agreement the decision could not stand and must
    be set aside.  The factual matrix of the remaking of  the  decision  is
    too broad to be undertaken at the Upper Tribunal and it is  appropriate
    in those circumstances for the matter to be remitted be  heard  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The representatives were in  agreement  that  the
    matter  should  be  remitted  de  novo  so  that  all  matters   remain
    outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error on  the
grounds set out above and the matter is to be  heard  de  novo  by  a  judge
other than Judge Juss.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge




