
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11430/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2017                             |On 10 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A H]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop of Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because this case concerns  the  welfare  of  a  child  and  the  First-tier
Tribunal made a  similar  order.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  might  want  to
consider if such an order is necessary when it rehears the appeal.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,  hereinafter  "the
claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State  on  19  April  2016
refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The application  that
was thus refused was prompted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  notifying  the
claimant that he  was  the  subject  of  a  deportation  order  because  she
regarded him as a persistent offender whose deportation was  in  the  public
good.

Once it was established that the claimant is  indeed  a  "foreign  criminal"
within the meaning of  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 it would probably have been more helpful if  the  judge  had
focused her attentions on the provisions of that Section, and in  particular
the provisions of Section 117C.  The judge was aware of this  provision  but
I find allowed herself to be sidetracked by consideration of the  Rules,  in
a way which was not necessarily erroneous but was not particularly  helpful.
The prospects  of  rehabilitation  and  re-offending  are  not  particularly
relevant considerations in a deportation appeal that does not involve an  EU
national or, possibly, a young offender. The  rules  illuminate  policy  and
article 8 balancing exercises require some weight to  be  given  to  a  wide
range of factors but statute is, and should be seen to be,  binding  on  the
Tribunal.

The claimant has not been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  four
years or more and so although his deportation is  in  the  public  interest,
because that is what Parliament says, the public interest will  not  require
deportation if his circumstances come within either  of  the  two  statutory
exceptions labelled, helpfully, as "Exception 1",  or  "Exception  2",  that
are explained under Section 117C of the Act.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt
the exceptions are not exclusive and it is by no means  unlikely  that  some
appellants will be able to take advantage  of  both  exceptions  and  indeed
this claimant may be such a person.

To come within the scope  of  Exception  1  a  claimant  has  to  have  been
lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life (this  claimant
plainly has), to be  "socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
Kingdom" and to have shown that "there would be very significant  obstacles"
to his integration into the country to which he would be  removed,  in  this
case Bangladesh.

That the claimant has been in the United Kingdom for most  of  his  life  is
uncontroversial but it is not clear to  me  if  the  judge  decided  if  the
claimant was "socially and culturally integrated"  in  the  United  Kingdom.
She acknowledged at paragraph 5 of her decision that it  was  the  Secretary
of  State's  case  that  the  claimant  was  not  socially  and   culturally
integrated.  If there is a finding on  this  point  that  I  have  missed  I
apologise, but I cannot see it in the decision.

The judge has  decided  quite  clearly  that  there  are  "very  significant
obstacles" to the claimant's integration.  She says as much at paragraph  24
of her decision.  However, like the Secretary of State,  I  have  difficulty
in  ascertaining  how  she  has  reached  that  conclusion.    Clearly   the
claimant's long residence in  the  United  Kingdom  is  a  relevant  factor.
There is some equivocation in the judge's  finding  about  the  support  the
claimant would get in Bangladesh.  The judge notes that  he  has  not  lived
there since 1979 and he has "little ties or connections" to the country  and
also that he  has  an  uncle  and  grandmother  living  there.   However  at
paragraph 11 of her decision the judge said that the claimant "has an  uncle
and grandmother living in Bangladesh and I find he has  not  shown  that  he
could not join one or both of them".

I appreciate the ability to join either of them is not the  same  as  saying
that there are no "very significant obstacles to his integration" but  there
is a tension between the findings that should  be  resolved.   That  is  not
necessarily fatal to the determination on its own but  there  is  really  no
explanation for the conclusion of the points I have indicated, and I do  not
find them to be sufficient.   I  am  not  saying  that  the  judge  was  not
entitled to reach this conclusion.  My finding is that  the  explanation  is
too thin to amount to a meaningful explanation at all.

It follows that even if there is a finding that the  claimant  is  "socially
and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom" a finding that there  would
be very significant obstacles is not reasoned adequately and so it  has  not
been shown the claimant comes within the terms of Exception 1.

Exception 2 applies where there is a "genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
with a qualifying partner or a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
with a qualifying child" and the effect of deportation  on  either  of  them
would be unduly harsh.  Again, the judge has  made  clear  conclusions  that
the effect would be unduly harsh.  The judge has  found  that  it  would  be
"unduly harsh for them  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  presence  and
assistance of the [claimant]".   I  do  not  follow  that  conclusion.   The
wording of the Section implies that some harshness is due  in  the  case  of
deportation.  The claimant and his partner and child do  not  appear  to  be
living together as a nuclear family.  The reasons for that might have to  be
investigated.  I am not saying that a person has to be living in  a  nuclear
family to take advantage of Exception 2 but it is harder to come within  the
scope of the section when they do not.  Again, although  the  conclusion  is
clear the reasons are not.

Neither is any consideration of  why  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
partner and child to remove to Bangladesh.  I am very aware of  the  reasons
why that conclusion  might  be  reached.   Many  people  in  Bangladesh  are
desperately poor and I note that the claimant's partner  has  no  experience
of life in Bangladesh but these strands have not been drawn  together.   The
judge should have considered when the relationship started  as  far  as  the
partner was concerned as that might  illuminate  whether  the  harshness  is
undue.  Clear findings about the nature of  the  parental  relationship  and
the importance in the life of the child might also have been helpful.

I am also concerned by the weight the judge  has  given  to  rehabilitation.
Prospects of rehabilitation do not feature  very  prominently,  if  at  all,
under Section 117.  Whilst I am not suggesting they are  irrelevant  matters
the prospects of rehabilitation or minimal risk of future offending are  not
weighty considerations.  It might be perfectly lawful and proper  to  deport
a person who is a reformed character because public interest in  removing  a
foreign offender extends beyond preventing him committing  further  offences
in the jurisdiction.

I therefore conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
entirely unsatisfactory and I set it aside.

I have looked carefully at the papers to  see  if  I  can  make  a  decision
without a further hearing but I find that I  cannot.   There  are  too  many
points or findings  here  that  are  nuanced  and  depend  on  argument  and
possibly on impressions made in oral evidence.

This is a case that needs to be decided again with the benefit  of  argument
and such evidence as the parties may wish to call and  I  am  satisfied  the
fairest way to bring about a disposal is to allow the Secretary  of  State's
appeal and set aside the findings and direct the case be heard again in  the
First-tier Tribunal, which is what I do.









|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 9 January 2018                |
|Judge                                |                                     |







