
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11655/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th August 2019                  |On 2nd September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mrs Mahbuba Akter Jakia
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rahman, legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For  convenience  I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"  and
    "Respondent" as at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who applied for settlement  as
    the spouse of a British national to enter the United Kingdom  and  that
    application was refused by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO).   Her
    subsequent appeal to First-tier Tribunal Griffith was allowed on  human
    rights  grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  23rd   April   2019.
    Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the judge had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons why it was accepted that the UK Sponsor had
    adequate capacity to lawfully enter into a marriage even if  the  issue
    of capacity was not raised in the refusal letter.

 3. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker in a decision dated 9th July 2019.

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me on the above date.

 5. For the Secretary of State Mr Tarlow relied on his grounds.  The  issue
    of capacity should have been considered by the judge and not to  do  so
    was a material error in law.

 6. For the Appellant Mr Rahman relied  on  his  Rule  24  notice  and  his
    skeleton argument.  There was  no  error.   The  judge  had  considered
    matters appropriately and the decision should stand.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The judge noted (paragraph 27) that the sole  reason  for  refusal  was
    because the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting owing to the paucity of evidence.  It appeared that  neither
    the ECO nor the Entry Clearance Manager had any knowledge of the  state
    of health of the Sponsor and the  practical  limitations  in  terms  of
    communicating with the Appellant that emerged during the hearing.   The
    judge noted (paragraph 28) that the Sponsor gave evidence to  the  best
    of his ability.

 9. The judge was satisfied that the Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  were  in
    regular telephone contact.  There was also  evidence  in  his  passport
    that he spent a month in Bangladesh as  claimed  between  November  and
    December 2018.  The judge noted (paragraph 33) that there was  evidence
    that the Appellant and Sponsor had conducted their married life  mainly
    by telephone since the Sponsor's return to the UK  and  with  a  visit.
    There was no evidence of any countervailing  factors  such  as  a  poor
    immigration history or deception.

10. In paragraph 34 the  judge  said  that  taking  into  account  all  the
    available evidence she was satisfied that sufficient evidence had  been
    adduced to show on a balance of probabilities that the relationship was
    genuine and subsisting and that the parties intended to  live  together
    permanently in the UK.  The judge therefore went on to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds.

11. In the Rule 24 notice it  is  said  that  Judge  Griffith  soundly  and
    properly handled and considered the matter  such  as  capacity  of  the
    Sponsor's ability within the  scope  of  his  learning  disability  and
    limitation due to his autism.  The judge had had the chance  to  assess
    the credibility and integrity of the Sponsor who  had  previously  been
    married for eight years and was able to identify the Appellant and  had
    been able to attend the hearing before the Tribunal. It was argued that
    there was no material error in law  to  be  found  in  respect  of  the
    decision of Judge Griffith.

12. The judge had the benefit of hearing the evidence from two witnesses  -
    the Sponsor and her mother.  It can be said she considered the evidence
    carefully.  She applied the  relevant  case  law.   She  made  adequate
    findings and the clear implication of her findings is that the  Sponsor
    did have adequate capacity to enter into a marriage.

13. In my view the decision is entirely appropriate based on what  evidence
    was presented  to  the  judge.   There  was  no  need  to  consider  an
    adjournment.  It was correct to say  that  the  whole  case  turned  on
    whether the marriage was genuine and subsisting.  She had regard to the
    state of health of the Sponsor and the practical limitations that  this
    imposed on him. The judge weighed the evidence appropriately  and  gave
    clear reasons why she considered that the parties did  intend  to  live
    together  permanently  and  that  the  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting.

14. It follows that there is no error in law in the judge's decision  which
    must stand.



Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.

17. No anonymity order is made.


Signed           JG Macdonald                             Date  28th  August
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

