
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11350/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 17, 2019                            |On May 1, 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              mr Sohail Shahzad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by David Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who entered the United Kingdom as
    a visitor in December 2010.  Any leave that he had would  have  expired
    on June 2, 2011.

 2. On March 10, 2017, the appellant lodged an application for  asylum  but
    this was refused by the respondent on September  8,  2017.   No  appeal
    appears to have been lodged by him in respect of this decision.

 3. On October 31, 2017 the appellant lodged an application  for  leave  to
    remain under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  based  on  his
    relationship  with  his  partner,  Rehmiah  Khatoon  Iqbal,  but   this
    application was refused by the respondent on March 12, 2018.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on  May  22,  2018  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Spicer on  December
    17, 2018.

 5. In a decision promulgated on January 7, 2019  the  Tribunal  found  the
    appellant and  his  partner  were  not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  and  consequently  did  not  intend  to   live   together
    permanently.  Alternatively, the  Judge  considered  the  case  at  its
    highest and concluded that even if they had been in such a relationship
    the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395 because he had been here unlawfully  and
    could not therefore satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the appellant had not met the financial requirements of Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge went on to consider Article 8 ECHR
    having regard to the appellant's claim at its highest  and  found  that
    removal was proportionate.

 6. The appellant appealed this decision on January 23, 2019  and  although
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer refused permission  to  appeal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission to appeal finding it was
    arguable the Judge may have erred by failing to make adequate or proper
    findings on the witness evidence, in particular, the evidence  of  Asha
    Mahmood or other witness  statements  provided  and  appeared  to  have
    treated one inconsistency as largely  determinative  of  the  issue  of
    whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. I raised with both Mr Bellara and Mr Bates the fact that the Judge  had
    considered this case at its highest as evidenced in paragraphs 60,  61,
    67 and 70 of the decision.  I enquired from Mr Bellara whether he would
    be arguing the Immigration Rules could be met and he conceded that they
    could not due to the appellant's  immigration  status.   Therefore  the
    sole issue the Judge had to  consider  was  whether  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Bellara adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    proportionality assessment was flawed because the Judge had in his mind
    the appellant was not a credible witness but in  assessing  credibility
    the Judge had failed to consider the evidence of the stepdaughter, Asha
    Mahmood who had both  provided  a  witness  statement  and  given  oral
    evidence and it was incumbent upon the Judge to make  findings  on  her
    evidence.  He referred to the guidance provided by the Tribunal  in  AK
    (Failure to assess witnesses' evidence) Turkey [2004]  UKIAT  00230  in
    which the Tribunal stressed the importance of making an  assessment  on
    credibility of evidence.  Even though  the  Judge  had  considered  the
    evidence at its highest he submitted there was an error by  failing  to
    engage with that evidence in paragraph 70 of the decision.

10. Mr Bates opposed the application  and  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    considered the appellant's claim at its highest.  Whilst  reliance  was
    placed on the  stepdaughter's  evidence  he  submitted  that  when  the
    appellant moved into the family home in 2015 she was already  21  years
    of age so it was questionable how essential his  support  was  at  that
    stage.  She was no longer a child who relied on his financial, physical
    or emotional support.

11. The Judge considered the appellant's appeal at its highest and Mr Bates
    submitted that any reliance would not have altered  the  conclusion  in
    this case.

12. With regard to the second aspect of the grant of permission,  Mr  Bates
    submitted that the appellant and  his  partner  had  given  conflicting
    evidence on two important issues which  undermined  their  credibility.
    The  first  concerned  the  fact  that  the   appellant   claimed   the
    relationship began the moment he moved into the  property  whereas  the
    appellant's partner claimed the relationship began later.  There was  a
    second important discrepancy in that the appellant  stated  he  had  no
    contact with children with his wife and children  living  in  Pakistan.
    This evidence was contradicted by  his  partner  who  stated  that  the
    appellant did have contact and that  she  herself  had  spoken  to  his
    sister.  In all the circumstances, he invited the  Tribunal  to  uphold
    the decision.

13. Mr Bellara reiterated the failure to assess  that  evidence  undermined
    the whole decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

14. The circumstances of this appeal are set out above and I note the Judge
    set out in some  detail  the  background.   The  Judge  considered  the
    evidence from two angles. It is clear from the decision that the  Judge
    did not find the appellant's evidence credible and concluded  that  not
    only were the appellant and partner not in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship but additionally they did not intend to live together.

15. The failure to make specific findings about Ms Mahmood's evidence could
    amount to an error in law but for  the  fact  the  Judge  proceeded  to
    consider the appellant's appeal at its highest. As  I  stated  earlier,
    the Judge made clear that he considered the appeal on  the  basis  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting and went  on  at  paragraph
    [67] to consider whether Article 8 was  engaged  for  the  purposes  of
    family life and concluded that it would be  and  thereafter  considered
    proportionality.

16. The Judge followed the five-stage approach set out in the  decision  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 from paragraph [64] onwards of the decision.  The
    Judge accepted the appellant had developed both a  private  and  family
    life as evidenced by his findings in paragraphs [66] and [67] and  then
    correctly went on to consider  the  position  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules with specific reference to Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   The
    cornerstone of that  section  is  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest and at paragraph [70] the
    Judge set out  factors  that  he  felt  should  be  considered  in  his
    assessment.  None of the findings in  paragraph  [70]  of  the  Judge's
    decision were challenged in today's grounds of appeal.

17. Mr Bellara's submission is that Ms Mahmood's evidence should have  been
    given some weight and it was insufficient for the Judge to  simply  set
    out the evidence in paragraphs 35 to 38 of his decision.

18. Would the failure to carry out such an assessment  be  so  material  to
    outweigh the other  findings  in  paragraph  70  of  the  decision  and
    therefore amount to an error in law?

19. Ms Mahmood was 21 years of  age  when  the  appellant  moved  into  the
    property.  She is in full-time employment working as a receptionist  at
    a dental practice although  she  had  recently,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, started a new job at a private scanning  clinic.   I  have  no
    doubt that she sees the appellant as a positive  influence  within  her
    family, but the level of his involvement would  not  be  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8 in its own right.

20. The Judge correctly highlighted important issues that  weighed  on  the
    side of maintaining immigration control.  The appellant had  come  here
    as a visitor and his whole private and family life had  been  developed
    whilst he was here precariously.  His status as a visitor had ended  as
    long ago as June 2011.  He did not meet  his  partner  until  2015  and
    consequently  any  relationship  that  did  exist  was  caught  by  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the  2002  Act  because  he  formed  that
    relationship whilst he was here  unlawfully.   Whilst  not  a  deciding
    factor the Judge noted he had to use an interpreter at the hearing  and
    appeared to speak little  English  and  the  Judge  noted  he  was  not
    financially independent and had been unable to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.

21. Against this background I am satisfied that any failure to deal with Ms
    Mahmood's evidence about her relationship with the  appellant  was  not
    material to the issue of proportionality for the reasons set out above.



22. If the Judge had assessed proportionality only on the  basis  that  the
    relationship was not genuine then there may have been an error in  law,
    but on the basis the Judge considered the case  at  its  highest  I  am
    satisfied there is no material error in law and I therefore dismiss the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The original decision is upheld and this appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Dated 29 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I uphold the original  decision  to  make  no
fee award.


Signed                              Dated 29 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
