
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11520/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2018                          |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                IFTEKHAR [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fouladvand, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded  as
    15th June 1973.  He made application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.   The  application  was  refused.   He
    appealed.  The matter came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Suffield-Thompson sitting at Newport on 29th August 2017.

 2. It is clear from the decision and from the papers that there was a time
    when the Appellant's case was linked with that of  his  former  partner
    and three children.  Those three children are all  minors,  the  eldest
    has a date of birth of 28th November 2009, the next 25th April 2010 and
    the youngest 13th March 2014.  Application was made for the appeals, if
    indeed they were appeals at that time, of the  former  partner  of  the
    Appellant and children to be severed from this Appellant so that  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson considered only the appeal of this Appellant.   Judge
    Suffield-Thompson then went  on  to  resolve  the  appeal  against  the
    Appellant.

 3. Not content with that decision by notice dated 24th  January  2018  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Having at first been refused permission  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the renewed application was granted  on  2nd  March  2018  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the basis that it was arguable that  the
    judge erred by making findings without reference to  the  Family  Court
    order issued on 16th May 2017.  There  were  in  fact  other  documents
    which might have been called for and which when this matter  last  came
    before me I directed should be obtained from the Family  Court.   Those
    documents have now been obtained and have been made available  both  to
    the Appellant's representative and to the Secretary of State.

 4. By consent there is an error of law in this case on the basis that  the
    judge did not look to all of the material evidence to which  regard  to
    it had been had.  I should add that I agree.

 5. The issue for me then is whether to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or to re-make it.  I take the view that the Appellant's appeal
    should never have been separated from that of his  former  partner  and
    children.  The case of Beoku-Betts makes it clear that  there  is  only
    one family in family life and even though the Appellant and his  former
    partner are estranged, still the family life is to be considered in the
    context of those relationships.

 6. I direct therefore in remitting this matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    that insofar as the Appellant's former partner has ongoing  proceedings
    in the First-tier Tribunal this appeal shall be linked  to  it  and  be
    heard before the same judge.  In  those  circumstances  the  First-tier
    Tribunal consider whether notwithstanding the minority of the  children
    their best interests can still be served by family life  continuing  in
    India where both parents may need to go if  leave  is  not  granted  or
    whether they should continue in the United Kingdom.   It  seems  to  me
    that the First-tier Tribunal would  be  significantly  handicapped,  as
    indeed I would be, if  this  matter  were  to  proceed  with  only  the
    Tribunal having an eye on part of the case.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  on  the  basis  of  a  material
error of law.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  at  Hatton
Cross (the Appellant has changed  address  so  that  Newport  is  no  longer
appropriate) to be linked, appeal reference number being HU/02645/2018  (the
Appellant's partner's appeal).  It is understood that this is to  be  listed
on 21st December 2018, however if there is any change to  the  date  of  the
partner's appeal then necessarily consideration will have  to  be  given  to
this appeal as they are from this date hence linked.

I also direct that the Resident Judge at Hatton Cross  shall  consider  what
further directions should be made in this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 24 September 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker





















