
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/11034/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th July 2017                     |      On 2nd August 2017             |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                       Mr Jigneshkumar Jashbhai Patel
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Arayn, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose appeal was dismissed on human
    rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Solly in a decision promulgated on 10th November 2016.  A part of
    the Appellant's case was if he was returned to India he would be killed
    by his father.  Likewise his wife would also be killed by  her  family.
    The judge did not believe that the account was credible and went on  to
    dismiss the appeal.

 2. Unfortunately the judge said that the  standard  of  proof  is  on  the
    balance of probabilities.  That obvious error resulted  in  grounds  of
    application being lodged and permission to appeal granted.  A  Rule  24
    notice was lodged submitting that even if the correct standard had been
    applied that given the glaring inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  and
    his partner's account even on the lower standard it  was  not  arguable
    that the judge could have come to any different conclusion.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. Before me Mr Arayn submitted that the error was material and there  may
    well have been different findings by the judge if she had  applied  the
    correct standard of proof.  He emphasised that the  difference  in  the
    standard  of  proof  namely  the  balance  of  probabilities  and   the
    reasonable degree of likelihood was considerable.  He argued  that  the
    decision should be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He accepted that the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not include Article 3 but the Appellant had said in his statement  that
    he was "scared and apprehensive".  It was clear from what the Appellant
    had said in oral evidence that there was an obvious human rights  point
    which the judge was duty-bound to take.

 5. For the Home Office Ms Isherwood emphasised the clear factual  findings
    made by the judge.  Accordingly, even though the judge  did  fall  into
    error in not applying the correct standard of proof this  had  made  no
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

 6. I reserved my decision.

    Conclusions

 7. The parties agreed before me that the judge fell into fundamental error
    in treating the Appellant's claim that he would be  killed  if  he  was
    returned to India as a claim which correlated to proof on  the  balance
    of probabilities.  As the grounds of application say the Appellant  had
    raised issues which were to be  considered  through  the  prism  of  an
    Article 3 assessment, which the judge did not do.  As  such  the  judge
    fell into material error.

 8. Ms Isherwood put forward a strong argument that,  irrespective  of  the
    standard of proof, the evidence between the Appellant and his wife  was
    simply  not  reconcilable  (judge's  finding  at  paragraph  31).   The
    Appellant  had  not  even  answered  a  question  in  cross-examination
    (paragraph 32).  Nevertheless it seems to me unarguable that the  error
    made by the judge was a fundamental one.  The  grounds  of  application
    are entirely correct to say that the judge  should  have  made  factual
    findings through the prism of Article 3.  By not doing so it  seems  to
    me that the Appellant has not had a fair trial and of course the  Upper
    Tribunal must be the guarantor of that.  If there is any doubt  in  the
    matter (and there  is  a  doubt  here  given  the  material  evidential
    discrepancies) that doubt is to be resolved in favour of the  Appellant
    who complains of the error.  It seems to me that the  factual  findings
    made by the judge cannot be relied on because they are tainted  by  the
    fact that she used the wrong standard of  proof  in  determining  those
    facts.  As such this judgment is not safe and cannot stand.

 9. It therefore seems to me that the appropriate course of  action  is  to
    set aside the decision in its entirety.  No findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact-
    finding necessary for a decision to  be  remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  that
    connection Ms Isherwood told  me  that  the  Appellant's  wife  has  an
    entirely similar claim to that of the Appellant and under reference  to
    file number HU/01459/2017 an  appeal  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    wife's case has been set down for a full hearing at Birmingham on  26th
    September 2017.  It would seem appropriate that consideration be  given
    to consolidating these appeals in terms of the Procedure Rules.

    Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside the decision.

12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I see no need for an anonymity order at this time.





Signed   JG Macdonald                        Date 1st August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald













