
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11602/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on Papers (P)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 November 2020                 |On: 01 December 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     ZPS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell, promulgated on 7  January  2020.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 15 May 2020.

Anonymity

 2.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously,  nonetheless  such  a
    direction is now made on account of the appellant's health issues.



Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 11 August 2011 as a Tier  5  (Creative-
    Sport) migrant, with leave to enter until 10 August 2012.  Her  attempt
    to extend her  leave  to  that  of  a  Tier  5  (Charity)  migrant  was
    unsuccessful and her appeal against this decision was rejected as being
    out of time. Her appeal rights were exhausted  on  31  July  2015.  The
    appellant's partner BMM entered the UK as a working holidaymaker on  15
    August 2006  and  overstayed  when  his  leave  expired  in  2008.  The
    appellant made a human rights' claim on 11 March 2019 with BMM  as  her
    dependent. The basis of that claim was that the appellant suffers  from
    HIV, left Upper Lobe Aspergilloma  and  was  undergoing  investigations
    into other ailments and would  face  destitution  on  return  to  South
    Africa. The Secretary of State refused that claim in a  decision  dated
    25 June 2019 primarily because it was not accepted that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules or had demonstrated  that
    there were exceptional or compassionate circumstances.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and much  of
    her testimony concerned her fears that she would not be able to  obtain
    life-saving medication, treatment or employment in  South  Africa.  She
    also mentioned an operation that she was due to  have  on  one  of  her
    lungs. The judge found that the appellant's  claim  did  not  meet  the
    threshold to establish a potential breach of Article 3, that  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules was not met and that no unduly  harsh  consequences
    would arise from her return to South Africa.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal mainly  concern  the  failure  by  the  judge  to
    consider the medical evidence regarding the appellant's lung  condition
    in reaching his findings.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

Procedure

 7. Directions were served on the parties by email on 24 July  2020,  which
    stated that a provisional view had been taken that the matter could  be
    decided without a hearing and  invited  written  submissions  regarding
    whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  whether  that
    decision should be set aside.  The  parties  were  further  invited  to
    submit reasons if it was considered that a hearing was necessary.

 8. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do. The respondent provided submissions attached to an email
    on 29 July 2020 which expressed agreement that  the  issue  of  whether
    there was a material error of law could be justly determined without an
    oral hearing. The appellant forwarded written submissions by email on 4
    August 2020  and  agreed  that  "this  matter  could  be  appropriately
    determined without an oral hearing."

 9. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that given  my  ultimate
    decision, the appellant has not been disadvantaged by the error of  law
    issue being decided without a hearing in this instance.

Decision on error of law

10. I have taken into consideration all the documents before me in reaching
    my decision.  The respondent's submissions noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not have the benefit  of  AM  [2020]  UKSC  17  which  was
    promulgated 3 months after the decision and reasons in the  appellant's
    case. Furthermore, the respondent noted that at [72]  the  Judge  found
    that the caselaw subsequent to N did not lessen the  threshold,  failed
    to particularise what he meant and relied on the N threshold  at  [73].
    Consequently, the respondent agreed that this amounted  to  a  material
    misdirection of law.

11. The appellant's submissions concurred with those of the respondent  and
    further, argued that the respondent had failed  to  rebut  the  medical
    evidence that the appellant required a life-saving lung operation which
    would not be accessible in South Africa. The Upper Tribunal  was  urged
    to substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

12. The respondent is correct to concede  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    reliance on the threshold in N amounts to a material error of law  both
    owing to the recent decision in AM as  well  as  the  judge's  lack  of
    discussion regarding his finding that Paposhvili did not lessen  the  N
    threshold. There was also no reference in the reasons to Savran,  which
    was additionally relied upon by the appellant at the hearing.

13. There is also the matter of  the  medical  evidence.  The  most  recent
    medical  report  of  Professor  Macallan,  a  professor  of  infectious
    diseases and medicine at St George's University Hospitals includes  his
    opinion  that  the  medication  used  to  treat  the  appellant's  lung
    condition, namely Aspergilloma, was toxic and infrequently used and may
    not be available in South Africa; that the  appellant  required  cardio
    thoracic surgery which he did not  think  would  be  available  in  her
    country or origin and that the possibility of  the  appellant  changing
    her HIV medication on return to South Africa could make  it  impossible
    to  treat  her  Aspergilloma  owing  to  drug  interactions.  Professor
    Macallan explained that if the appellant was  unable  to  proceed  with
    surgical treatment this would be potentially  life-threatening  leading
    to the development of serious bleeding from the lungs  or  leaving  her
    profoundly disabled. While the judge briefly refers to this evidence at
    [70], there was no assessment of the serious consequences  referred  to
    by Professor Macallan nor clear findings made as to the  weight  to  be
    attached to it. No evidence was put forward on behalf of the respondent
    to show  that  the  infrequently  used  drug  the  appellant  used  for
    Aspergilloma was available in South Africa. At [73]  the  judge  states
    "In general terms such medication is available in South Africa and I do
    not find that the Appellant can establish reliance upon the judgment in
    N with respect to her HIV condition.  "  This  finding  was  less  than
    adequate in the circumstances and amounts to a further  material  error
    of law. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    is unsafe and set it aside in its entirety.

14. The appellant requested, in the first instance, that the Upper Tribunal
    remake the decision on the papers,  by  allowing  her  appeal.  I  have
    decided not to do so for the following reasons.  Firstly,  the  medical
    evidence is now somewhat dated and the most recent  letter  of  5  July
    2019 from Professor Macallan is incomplete, in any event. Secondly, the
    respondent  may  wish  to  explore  whether  the  drug   in   question,
    Voricanazole  is  available  in  South  Africa  as  well   as   whether
    cardiothoracic surgery is available. The respondent, depending  on  the
    outcome of that exploration, may wish to review this case in the  light
    of the judgment in AM.

15. In the alternative, the appellant is of the view that the appeal should
    be remitted for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. While
    mindful of statement 7 of the Senior President's Practice Statements of
    10 February 2010, it is the case that the appellant has yet to have  an
    adequate consideration of the  medical  aspects  of  her  human  rights
    appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive her
    of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House IAC, with a time estimate of 3 hours, by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell.


Signed:  Date 23 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

