
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11543/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                             |On 01 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                   M.B.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Veloso promulgated on 24 January 2019  dismissing  the  appeal  of  MBB
    against a decision of the Respondent  refusing  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependant of her father.

2.   The appeal before Judge Veloso was considered  without  a  hearing  'on
    the papers'.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Guinea born on 12  October  2000.   On  1
    February 2018 she applied with her sister, ABB, for entry clearance  to
    join their father ('the sponsor'), a British  citizen,  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Their mother was also living with the sponsor in the  UK,  and
    so in substance these were applications to join their parents.

4.   The Appellant's sister  was  born  on  18  November  2002,  and  so  is
    approximately two years younger than the Appellant.   It  may  be  seen
    that the application was made at a time when both the Appellant and her
    sister were under the age of 18. Indeed, both were still under the  age
    of 18 when their respective applications were refused on 24 April 2018.



5.   The single basis of refusal for the Appellant  and  ABB  was  that  the
    Respondent did not accept that the girls were related as claimed to the
    sponsor.  Subsequent to the refusals DNA  tests  were  conducted  which
    established the relationships.  The  DNA  tests  (dated  30  May  2018)
    actually pre-date the Entry Clearance Manager's Review of the  case  (7
    January 2019), but it seems the  results  had  not  reached  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager by the time of the Review.

6.   The Appellant and her  sister  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    indicating that they wished the appeals to be decided 'on  the  papers'
    without a hearing.

7.   Both appeals were considered as linked  cases  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Veloso, (ABB's case with the reference HU/11545/2018).  The Judge
    concluded that  the  DNA  evidence  was  sufficient  to  establish  the
    relationship as claimed in each of the  applications.   However,  quite
    properly, the Judge recognised that these were appeals on human  rights
    grounds, and the mere fact that the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were met was not inevitably a reason for allowing the appeals.

8.   The Judge went on to consider the family life as between  each  of  the
    appellants and their father in the  UK.   Seemingly  primarily  on  the
    basis that she was still a minor, the Judge concluded that ABB  enjoyed
    family life with the sponsor, and found that the Respondent's  decision
    represented a disproportionate interference when evaluated at the  date
    of the consideration of the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   However, a different view was reached in respect of MBB,  seemingly  on
    the sole basis that she was no longer a minor.  The  Judge  noted  that
    the Appellant "is now 18 years old and therefore an  adult"  (paragraph
    28).  I pause to note that by the date of the hearing  she  would  have
    been 18 years and 3 months old.

10.  The Judge then said this:

         "Whilst applying common sense, [MBB's] family life with the sponsor
         would not have simply ended on the very day of her  18th  birthday"
         (paragraph 29),
    before noting that the Appellant's appeal bundle did  not  provide  any
    particular information as to the nature of the Appellant's relationship
    with either of her parents.

11.  However, it is to be noted that the same was the  case  in  respect  of
    the evidential material as it related to ABB - yet this did not prevent
    the Judge from reaching a conclusion favourable to her. In reality  the
    only distinguishing feature was that the Appellant had recently  passed
    the age of majority.

12.  I find the Judge's observation at paragraph 29  that  as  a  matter  of
    common sense family life could not be considered to have  simply  ended
    upon the Appellant reaching her majority  is  irreconcilable  with  the
    Judge's conclusion at paragraph 31 that Article 8 was not engaged.

13.  In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  also  in  error  in
    stating:

         "It is not known who the [MBB] currently lives with and whether  it
         is with [her sister]" (paragraph 30).

14.  A perusal of the visa application forms makes it adequately clear  that
    both applicants lived together with their  grandmother.   This  is  not
    only apparent from the fact that they both made use of the same address
    in their respective application form, but also because the response  at
    question 84 of each form refers specifically to them being in the  care
    of their maternal grandmother, and being financially supported  by  the
    sponsor who sends money to Guinea to that end. There was  no  basis  to
    infer that circumstances had changed since the application.

15.  It seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge singularly failed  to
    have regard to the evidence of the application form. In  so  doing  the
    Judge also failed to have regard to the fact  that  there  was  plainly
    family life as between the Appellant and her  sister.   The  impact  of
    allowing one daughter to come to the United  Kingdom  and  leaving  the
    other  daughter  behind   would   necessarily   interfere   with   that
    relationship.

16.  It is also appropriate to recall in this context that  it  has  been  a
    longstanding policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  of  the  entry
    clearance service with regard to applicants for entry clearance who are
    under 18 at the time of application but  reach  their  majority  either
    during the course of the application or during the appeal process,  not
    to rely upon the reaching of the majority as a reason for defeating the
    application or appeal.  Such a principled approach finds expression in,
    for example, Appendix FM of the Rules which so far as  they  relate  to
    entry clearance for a child make it evident  that  the  requirement  in
    respect of age is only that the applicant be under 18 at  the  date  of
    the application (paragraph E-ECC.1.2.). It would be disproportionate to
    deny the Appellant the benefit of this principled approach  because  of
    the passage of time involved in listing the appeal.

17.  In my judgement, in the context of Article  8  in  circumstances  where
    both  these  girls  made  applications  as  minors  which  should  have
    succeeded, it would be entirely disproportionate now to allow  one  but
    refuse the other on the sole basis that by the date of consideration by
    the Tribunal she was three months past her 18th birthday.

18.  In all such circumstances I find errors in the approach of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal amounting to errors of law. I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in respect of MBB.  I re-make the decision  and
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

19.  For completeness I note that Ms Cunha, whilst initially  indicating  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that  the  Appellant's  challenge  was
    resisted, upon further discussion acknowledged  the  matters  indicated
    herein, and ultimately invited me to allow the appeal.

20.  For the avoidance of any  doubt,  the  favourable  decision  in  appeal
    HU/11545/2018 is not the subject of any challenge, and accordingly  the
    appeal of ABB remains allowed. Because ABB is a minor and because  some
    of the  discussion  herein  touches  upon  her  case,  I  continue  the
    anonymity order that has been made in these proceedings.

Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

22.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



To the Respondent
Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)

    I have allowed the appeal  and  accordingly  I  give  consideration  to
    making a fee award.


    I note that Judge Veloso declined to make a fee award in favour of  ABB
    notwithstanding that he allowed the  appeal,  on  the  basis  that  the
    appeal had only succeeded in consequence of the DNA evidence  that  had
    been produced after the Respondent's decision.

    It is not for me to interfere with Judge Veloso's decision  in  respect
    of the fee award in ABB's case. However, I take a different  view.  The
    Appellant  and  her  sister  provided  supporting  evidence  of   their
    relationship to the  sponsor  with  the  application.   The  Respondent
    rejected that supporting evidence.  The consequence of the DNA evidence
    is to demonstrate that the Respondent was wrong so  to  do.   In  those
    circumstances it seems to me  that  had  the  Respondent  accepted  the
    evidence at face value, it would not have been necessary to  pursue  an
    appeal  at  all.   In  such  circumstances  I  find  a  fee  award   is
    appropriate.


    I make a full fee award in favour of the Appellant.


    (However, this does not affect the decision of Judge Veloso not to make
    a fee  award  in  favour  of  ABB,  in  respect  of  which  I  have  no
    jurisdiction to interfere.)


Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

