
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11325/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2021                     |On 7 April 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          mrs elysee mumbusi kiboba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ntochukwu, Legal Representative from Voice for
                    the Voiceless UK
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davey ("the judge"), promulgated on 13 February 2020, by
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of her human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of DRC born in  March  1971,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2018 having spent a considerable amount  of  time  in
    Belgium.  Her husband had left DRC in 2002 and  come  directly  to  the
    United Kingdom where  he  has  resided  ever  since.   He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in 2004.  In 2003 the couple's son, D,  born
    in December 1998, travelled  from  DRC  to  join  his  father  in  this
    country.  D too was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2004  and  he
    has resided in this country ever since his arrival.

 3. D suffers from moderate  to  severe  sensorineural  hearing  loss  with
    associated delays in speech and language development.   In  respect  of
    the challenges facing him, he has  received  assistance  from  relevant
    professionals and the local authority over the course of time.

 4. The human rights claim made by the Appellant on 21 December 2018 relied
    on the family life said to be enjoyed in the United  Kingdom  with  her
    husband and D.  It  was  said  that  the  family  unit  should  not  be
    separated and that it could not relocate to DRC to reside  permanently,
    largely because of D's situation, but  also  because  the  husband  had
    resided in the United Kingdom for a significant period of time.

 5. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant could not  satisfy  any  of
    the relevant Immigration Rules relating to Article 8,  nor  were  there
    any exceptional circumstances such  that  leave  to  remain  should  be
    granted.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge set  out  the  relevant  background.   At  [5]-[11]  he  made
    references  to  the  absence  of  detailed  and  up-to-date   evidence,
    particularly relating to D's  circumstances.   The  Appellant  had  not
    provided  details  in  her  witness  statement  as  to  the  particular
    assistance she provided to her son in this country.   The  judge  noted
    that the most recent documentary evidence relating to  D  was  dated  1
    December 2017 and he noted that D had  been  discharged  from  relevant
    services in that year.

 7. At [11] the judge rejected the Appellant's  assertion  that  she  might
    face difficulties on return to DRC due to a claimed relationship with a
    relative of the (former) President Laurent Kabila.  This was said to be
    an embellishment on the Appellant's part.

 8. At [12] and [16] the judge concluded that the Appellant and her partner
    would not face significant obstacles or insurmountable obstacles in re-
    establishing life in the DRC.  He stated (in my  view  correctly)  that
    the real focus of the Appellant's case related to D's circumstances and
    whether it would be proportionate for him to go back with  his  parents
    to live in his country of nationality.

 9. At [13] the judge directed himself to Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60  and
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and the need to consider positive  and  negative
    factors when undertaking the balancing exercise pursuant to an  Article
    8 assessment.  At [14]  he  made  reference  to  a  number  of  factors
    relating to D which weighed in favour of him both  remaining  with  his
    parents and in the United Kingdom.  These factors were said to include:
    the fact that D had grown up in this country (having  arrived  in  this
    country at the age  of  4  or  5);  he  had  been  educated  here  with
    assistance from relevant agencies; that he knew nothing of life in  the
    DRC; that he did not speak "Congolese" (in fact Lingala); and that  his
    "friends, connections and roots are  well  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom".

10. In the next paragraph the judge concluded  that  notwithstanding  these
    factors, it was both  reasonable  and  proportionate  to  expect  D  to
    relocate to the DRC with his parents.  In so concluding, the judge took
    account of his finding that the parents could  themselves  re-establish
    themselves in that country.  He also  took  account  of  the  mandatory
    considerations under section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  In [18] the judge expressly disregarded concerns that
    he held relating to what he described as the Appellant's "abuse  of  UK
    immigration  controls".   Finally  at  [19]  he  stated  that  if   the
    Appellant's circumstances were looked at in isolation,  the  Article  8
    claim would be bound to have failed.



The Appellant's challenge

11. The grounds of appeal are, as noted in the  grant  of  permission,  not
    entirely easy to follow.  The essential points to  be  drawn  out  from
    them are as follows.  It is said that the judge  should  have  regarded
    the factors he set out in [14] as being sufficient to show that D could
    not be expected to go and live  in  DRC  and  therefore  the  Appellant
    should have succeeded in her appeal.  It is said  that  the  conclusion
    that D could go and live  in  that  country  was  essentially  perverse
    and/or lacking in adequate reasoning and that in all the  circumstances
    it would not have been reasonable to expect the Appellant to leave this
    country alone and make an entry clearance application from DRC  (having
    regard to the Chikwamba principle).

12. Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted permission by a decision dated
    17 August 2020.  On 14 October 2020 the Respondent provided a  rule  24
    response.  Paragraph 2 of this document reads as follows:

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
         appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing in  the  Upper  Tier
         Tribunal to consider whether it would be  proportionate  to  expect
         the Appellant and her family members to return to the DRC."

13. The file then came in front of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson.   By  a
    direction notice dated 1 December 2020, she took the view that the rule
    24 response was unclear on the basis that it  failed  to  identify  the
    basis of the purported concession as to error  of  law  and  failed  to
    address any issues  concerning  the  materiality  in  respect  of  such
    errors.  She did not consider it appropriate for the Tribunal  to  deal
    with the matter without a hearing and was of the  view  that  the  case
    remained suitable for a  hearing  at  which  it  should  be  determined
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had indeed erred in law  at  all
    and, if it had, whether its decision should be set aside.

The hearing

14. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Kotas confirmed that he  had  informed
    Mr Ntochukwu in advance of the Respondent's current position  that  the
    rule 24 response was no longer being relied on and  that  she  in  fact
    opposed the Appellant's appeal.

15. Mr Ntochukwu confirmed that he was content to proceed with the  hearing
    on that basis.  There was no application for an adjournment.

16. In all the circumstances, I considered that it was fair to  proceed  on
    the basis set out by Mr Kotas.  Judge Jackson had raised her concern on
    the rule 24 response issue number of  months  before  the  hearing.   I
    shared Judge Jackson's view.  The Respondent is entitled to put forward
    concessions, but the Tribunal is not necessarily bound to  accept  them
    when matters of law are involved. The absence of any particulars in the
    rule 24 response  was  problematic.  Further,  errors  of  law  do  not
    necessarily lead to a decision being set aside: that is  a  matter  for
    the Tribunal's discretion. In this case, the rule 24 response was vague
    in both respects.

17. I therefore proceeded to hear submissions.

18. Mr Ntochukwu relied on the grounds and expanded thereon.  He  submitted
    that the judge had essentially failed to take  proper  account  of  the
    interests of both D and the  Appellant's  husband.   When  the  matters
    referred to in [14] of the judge's decision were  taken  into  account,
    the conclusion in [15] was simply inconsistent: the judge  should  have
    concluded that it would not be proportionate for D to go  and  live  in
    the DRC.  Mr Ntochukwu confirmed that the judge had not failed to  take
    account of evidence, but had failed to  attach  appropriate  weight  to
    what evidence there was.  On the Chikwamba issue, he submitted that  it
    would be "reasonably likely" for  an  entry  clearance  application  to
    succeed if the Appellant made one from DRC.  Finally I was referred  to
    the well-known judgment of the House of  Lords  in  Beoku-Betts  [2008]
    UKHL 39.  The judge had failed to apply this principle in respect of  D
    and the husband.

19.  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  judge  had  clearly  found  that  the
    Immigration Rules had not  been  met.   He  pointed  out  the  lack  of
    relevant evidence relating to D's  current  circumstances.   There  had
    been no evidence from D himself, little from the Appellant  in  respect
    of relevant matters, and the documentary evidence was by  the  time  of
    the hearing before the judge outdated.  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings and  conclusions  were  not  perverse,  that  adequate
    reasons  had  been  provided,  and  that  the  judge's   decision   was
    sustainable.  In respect of the Chikwamba issue,  it  was  clearly  not
    certain or near-certain that an entry clearance application would  have
    succeeded.

20. In reply Mr Ntochukwu referred  me  to  paragraphs  20  to  23  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement  in  which  it  was  said  that  she  had
    provided evidence of the care provided to D in the United Kingdom.

21. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions

22. I conclude that the judge has not erred  in  law  such  that  I  should
    exercise my discretion to set his decision  aside,  with  reference  to
    section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

23.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that,   leaving   aside   D's
    circumstances for the time being, the Appellant and her  husband  could
    have reintegrated into DRC  society  without  facing  very  significant
    obstacles  (or  indeed  insurmountable  obstacles,  if  the   test   is
    materially different).  The judge was clearly aware of  the  length  of
    time that the husband had been in the United Kingdom and of his status.



24. Mr Ntochukwu confirmed that it was not argued that the judge failed  to
    take into account evidence, only  that  insufficient  weight  had  been
    placed on  relevant  matters.   The  weight  attributable  to  relevant
    factors is a matter for the fact-finding  tribunal,  subject  to  which
    represents a difficult threshold to overcome.  In this case,  there  is
    no perversity and the judge's findings  on  the  couple's  position  is
    sound.

25. As regards D's situation, the judge was entitled to conclude that there
    was a lack of both detailed and/or up-to-date evidence.  Paragraphs  20
    to 23 of the Appellant's witness statement do not in fact  provide  any
    real detail as to the particular care or assistance that  she  provided
    to D in this country, nor did it say anything about why such care would
    not be possible in the DRC.  As regards the documentary  evidence,  the
    letter  from  the  National  Deaf  CAMHS  from  Springfield  University
    Hospital in the Appellant's bundle, dated 15  February  2017,  was  not
    only relatively out of date, but  confirmed  that  D  did  not  require
    referral to adult mental health services.  As the judge noted at [9] of
    his decision, there was a missing page in the bundle but that had never
    been rectified by the appellant.   The  judge  clearly  recognised  the
    nature of D's conditions and challenges, but was also entitled to place
    these in the context of what evidence he had been presented with at the
    hearing.

26. I turn to what is said about D at  [14].   The  judge  took  what  were
    plainly relevant matters into account.  I agree with Mr Kotas that  the
    judge must have had the actual length  of  time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom in mind when referring himself to the fact that he had grown up
    in this country.  There was  no  obligation  on  the  judge's  part  to
    conduct what Mr Kotas described as a mathematical  exercise.   At  [15]
    the judge was weighing up the factors set out in the previous paragraph
    with all other relevant circumstances.  These of  course  included  his
    previous finding that the Appellant and her husband  could  reintegrate
    into DRC society without facing very significant obstacles.  In my view
    it is also clear enough that the judge  was  taking  into  account  the
    benefit to D from the reunification of his family  unit  following  the
    Appellant's arrival in this country from Belgium.   This  included  the
    care she and her husband would be able to  continue  to  provide.   The
    judge  was  also  of  course  bound  to  take  into  account  mandatory
    considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act, which he duly did.

27. Contrary to Mr  Ntochukwu's  submissions,  the  elevated  threshold  of
    perversity is not met in this case in respect of the assessment of  D's
    circumstances.  The judge was the arbiter of weight  and  he  conducted
    what in my judgment was an adequate balancing exercise,  having  regard
    to relevant factors, including those specific to D and the  Appellant's
    husband.

28. On the issue of reasons, I agree with Mr Kotas  that  a  judge  is  not
    required to give reasons for reasons.  In  this  case,  whilst  perhaps
    relatively briefly stated, the judge stated at [15] what his conclusion
    was, in light of the balancing exercise which he was obliged  to  carry
    out.

29. Finally, the Chikwamba argument, whilst not specifically  addressed  by
    the judge, could not have availed the Appellant (assuming that  it  was
    properly put at the hearing).  For  such  a  submission  to  have  been
    capable of affecting the outcome, the  Appellant  needed  show  that  a
    putative entry clearance application would have been certain  or  near-
    certain to succeed. On no rational view could that have been made good,
    at least on the evidence before the judge.

30. It may be said that the decision is one which I or another judge  might
    not have arrived at on the same facts, but that is not the test when it
    comes to deciding whether the First-tier Tribunal  has  erred  in  law.
    Whilst  one  would  certainly   have   sympathy   with   the   family's
    circumstances, and a relocation to DRC as a unit would not  be  without
    its difficulties, there are no errors of law in  the  judge's  decision
    such that I should exercise my discretion to set it aside.



Notice of decision

31. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    errors on a point of law.

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

33. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 31 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
