
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11628/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2021                     |On 12 August 2021                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Sohail Akhtar
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Harshaka Kannangara of Counsel, instructed by
                    Wise Legal Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 6 February 2019 to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.



Background

 2. The appellant was born in Pakistan in 1988,  in  a  village  in  Khyber
    Pakhtunkhwa Province.  He came to the United Kingdom on 24 January 2011
    as a Tier 4 Student.  He was 23 years old then, and is now 33.

 3.  The  appellant's  home  village  is  in  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Province
    (abbreviated  to  KPK  Province),  formerly  known  as  the  North-West
    Frontier Province, on  the  Afghan-Pakistan  border.   The  appellant's
    family still live in the village  in  KPK  Province,  but  one  of  his
    brothers now lives in Islamabad, much closer to  the  border  with  the
    Indian state of Punjab.

 4. The sponsor grew up in Pakistan, where she and her  twin  sister  lived
    with their grandparents in Karachi, some 800 miles from the appellant's
    home area.  Karachi, the sponsor's home area, is in the south  east  of
    Pakistan, near the mouths of the Indus river, on the Arabian Sea.

 5. In September 2015, the sponsor and her sister applied to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom and rejoin their parents, their three younger  siblings,
    and their father's two brothers and extended family  here.   They  were
    both still minors.  Their father was settled in the United Kingdom, but
    their mother was not yet settled.  The respondent refused,  but  in  an
    appeal decision on 8 January 2018, First-tier Judge  Manyarara  allowed
    the appeals and the sponsor came to the United  Kingdom  in  May  2018.
    She was given leave in line with her non-settled mother.

 6. The appellant continued to have leave to remain as a student  until  25
    May 2016.  On 24  May  2016,  a  day  before  his  leave  expired,  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain  outside  the  Rules,  which  was
    refused on 27 October 2016.

 7. On  15  August  2016,  the  appellant  made  an  application  which  he
    subsequently varied to seek leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules:  the
    respondent refused on 13 November 2017.

 8. On 2 February 2017, while the  earlier  application  was  pending,  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of  long  residence,
    which he also  varied  to  seek  leave  outside  the  Rules,  but  that
    application was rejected as void on 27 April  2018.   Another  decision
    rejecting his application for leave outside the Rules was varied on  11
    October 2018.

 9. It was the sponsor's evidence that the couple's relationship  began  in
    December 2017, six months before she entered the United Kingdom.  On 27
    October 2018,  the  appellant  and  sponsor  entered  into  an  Islamic
    marriage and began living together in her parents' extended family home
    in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's evidence is that his family are
    displeased with the marriage and he would be unable to return to  them,
    or to his home province.  He has not made an asylum claim and does  not
    wish to do so, as he confirmed to the First-tier Judge and to me today.

10. At the date of the  refusal  letter,  the  sponsor  was  expecting  the
    couple's first child, a  son,  who  was  born  in  December  2019.  The
    couple's relationship is accepted to be genuine and subsisting, but the
    parties have not contracted a civil marriage.

11. One of the sponsor's paternal uncles lives with  and  looks  after  the
    grandparents in Karachi, along with  his  wife  and  5  children.   The
    sponsor's grandmother is blind, and her grandfather is aged. There  was
    no  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Judge   about   what   sort   of
    accommodation the grandparents have, beyond  an  assertion  that  their
    home is small.

12. The respondent in her refusal letter treated the sponsor as  a  British
    citizen and parts of her decision are erroneous for that  reason.   The
    sponsor is not and never has been either settled in the United  Kingdom
    or naturalised as a British citizen.

13. The respondent refused leave to remain and the  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

14. The respondent  was  represented  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, as was the appellant.

15. The First-tier Judge heard evidence from the  appellant,  the  sponsor,
    and the sponsor's father, in whose home they all live.  There was  also
    a witness statement from one of the appellant's  paternal  uncles,  who
    lives in the United Kingdom.  There was no  evidence  from  the  wife's
    grandparents, or her paternal uncle who lives with them in Karachi.

16. The First-tier Judge on 4  March  2020  dismissed  the  appeal,  giving
    reasons from [18] in his decision. He accepted  that  the  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting, but also noted the evidence of the  sponsor
    that she was not British, or settled, and neither was her  child.    He
    made a finding  of  fact  to  that  effect,  noting  that  GEN.1.2  was
    therefore inapplicable, the parties not having lived together  for  two
    years in a relationship akin to marriage at that date.   In fact,  when
    the application was made on 22 January 2019, the period of cohabitation
    was less than 6 months.

17. The First-tier Judge considered whether the appellant had  demonstrated
    that there would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  in
    Pakistan: see paragraph 276ADE(vi), the only sub-section  of  paragraph
    276ADE available to the appellant on the facts.   The First-tier  Judge
    found as a fact that such obstacles had not been  shown:  even  if  the
    appellant had fallen out with his  family  in  northern  Pakistan,  his
    brother had been able to relocate away from the village,  and  Pakistan
    was a country of over 300 million people, with many large cities  where
    the appellant could go.

18. The judge accepted that the appellant had established  a  private  life
    with the sponsor, her  parents,  and  her  extended  family,  and  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged.  The appellant would either  have  to  move
    alone to Pakistan without his wife and  child,  or  else  separate  the
    sponsor from her extended family so that they could  move  to  Pakistan
    together.  However, the judge found that the proposed interference  was
    proportionate: on the facts.

19. The judge accepted that there was family life  between  the  appellant,
    the sponsor, and their baby son.    The best interests of the baby were
    to remain with his parents: he was not a British citizen.  The  sponsor
    had not been long in the United Kingdom: she had  been  here  for  less
    than 2 years at the date of  decision,  having  grown  up  in  Pakistan
    without her father. The evidence was that there was an extended  family
    of  at  least  nine  people  in  Karachi,  and  that  the  sponsor  had
    understated that part of her evidence.   The judge found that there was
    'a measure of family life' between the sponsor and her father which had
    to be respected, but that 'the focus of her family life  is  inevitably
    turning towards her husband and child'.

20. The First-tier Judge found  that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden of proving that removal of the appellant would be  proportionate
    and dismissed the appeal.

21. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

22. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that:

         "It is arguable that the judge materially erred in going  behind  a
         concession made by the Secretary of State as to the nationality  of
         the sponsor, and further arguable that the judge misunderstood  the
         background affecting the sponsor's status and  that  this  arguably
         has affected the reasoning overall of the judge in relation to  the
         eventual decision in this appeal."

Respondent's position

23. On 3 August  2020,  Ms  Isherwood,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, settled a Rule 24 Reply, the operative passages of which  were
    as follows:

         "2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
         permission to appeal in accordance with the  grant  of  permission,
         and given that the refusal  letter  accepts  that  the  appellant's
         partner is British, and that is not  the  case,  and  it  does  not
         appear that the appellant or his  partner  had  an  opportunity  to
         respond.

         3.   For completeness,  it  is  submitted  that  according  to  the
         system, the appellant's partner was granted  limited  leave  [as  a
         minor] in line with her parents.  In addition to this, she  has  an
         outstanding application for leave under ECHR on the  basis  of  her
         relationship with the appellant and her  child.   This  application
         was submitted on 29 February 2020.  Therefore, it is clear that the
         partner is not entitled to settlement.

         3.   Given the identified issues above, this is an appeal  suitable
         for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal."

24. On 30 September 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? gave triage directions
    with reference to the Covid  pandemic.   On  21  October  2020,  having
    thought better of the respondent's position, Ms Isherwood clarified  it
    by  withdrawing  the  concession  in  the  refusal  letter   that   the
    appellant's partner was a British citizen or settled, and the  Rule  24
    Reply acceptance that the decision contained a material  error  of  law
    such that it should be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.



25. Her Clarification continued:

         "5.  A further ground of challenge appears to be that the status of
         [the sponsor] in the light of  her  allowed  appeal  entitled  her,
         along with this miscategorisation of her nationality, to be treated
         as if she were settled.  This is misconceived.  As will be apparent
         from  her  appeal  decision,  [First-tier  Judge]   Manyarara   was
         considering a human rights appeal [by  the  sponsor  and  her  twin
         sister] as the application and decision fell after  6  April  2015.
         The reference to the appeal being allowed  'under  the  Immigration
         Rules'  (Notice  of  decision,  page   14)   is   thus   unhelpful.
         Additionally, it having been established that the correct rule  was
         paragraph 301, it was acknowledged that [the sponsor] was  eligible
         for no more than limited leave, in line with her (then) not settled
         mother.   This is what was granted.  Whilst she may thus have  been
         en route to settlement, she was not settled. ...

         6.   On further reflection, it appears that the grounds do not make
         out a basis on which the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law,  such
         that the determination should  be  set  aside.   The  position  may
         change once [the sponsor's] outstanding application is decided, but
         at  present  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  properly  entitled  to
         conclude that no case was made out under Appendix FM or Article  8.
         The Secretary of  State  is  not  bound  by  the  initial  Rule  24
         response, as it is for the Tribunal to decide, with the  assistance
         of the parties, whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
         such that it should be set aside. "

26. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

27. There were no  skeleton  arguments.   In  oral  submissions,  and  with
    frequent  consultation  with  the  appellant,  the  sponsor,  and   the
    sponsor's father, all of whom were in court (together with the child of
    the family), Mr Kannangara said that his main  argument  was  that  the
    sponsor had been admitted to the United Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    settlement and that had she  been  granted  entry  clearance  when  she
    applied for it, she would have been here two  years  earlier  than  she
    was, together with her twin sister.

28. The present application was valid,  by  operation  of  section  3C  and
    paragraph 39E of the Rules.   Accordingly,  the  relationship  had  not
    been commenced when the appellant was unlawfully in the United  Kingdom
    and section 117B(4)(b) was inapplicable.  Mr  Kannangara  asked  me  to
    allow the appeal.

29. For the respondent, Ms Everett contended that  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the decision.  It might be  that  the  Article  8  ECHR
    claim was stronger than the First-tier Judge  realised,  but  that  was
    speculative.  The First-tier Judge had given  proper  consideration  at
    [31] in his decision and it was adequately reasoned.

30. The grounds of appeal, and Mr kannangara's submissions, were in reality
    no more than an attempt to reargue the case in the Upper  Tribunal  and
    the appeal should be dismissed.

Analysis

31. The grounds of appeal  are  diffusely  and  badly  drafted.   They  are
    unsigned,  and  were  not  settled  by  Mr  Kannangara.    After   some
    discussion, we were able to agree  on  the  following  summary  of  the
    matters under challenge:



    1) The sponsor may in future be able  to  obtain  indefinite  leave  to
       remain: when the grounds were settled she had a pending  application
       for settlement;




    2) It was an error of law to find that there were no 'very  significant
       obstacles' to the appellant's reintegration in Pakistan.  The couple
       were not an independent family but lived in a family unit  with  the
       sponsor's father.  It would breach the Article 8 ECHR rights of  the
       appellant, the sponsor, and her father  to  split  up  the  extended
       family unit.  Nor was it factually correct to say that the appellant
       and sponsor could live with her family members in Karachi;




    3) The couple now had a child, born 10 October 2019, and a  second  son
       on the way.  The appellant was not currently permitted to  work  and
       the extended family was supported by his father-in-law.  During  the
       preceding period, when he was allowed to work, the appellant told me
       today that he worked as a sales adviser in Marks and  Spencer's  for
       over 9 years.



    4) The appellant does not rely on ground (iv), which related to the non-
       settled, non-citizen status of the sponsor;  and



    5) The appellant did not begin his relationship with the  sponsor  when
       he had no leave.  He had  3C  leave  until  21  December  2018.   Mr
       Kannangara acknowledged that the present application was made  after
       the 3C leave expired, though within  the  disregard  window  set  in
       paragraph 39E.

32. The appellant had written to the respondent setting  out  that  he  had
    received threats from his family, but Mr Kannangara was instructed that
    he had not, and would not, claim asylum.

33. I begin with the vexed  question  of  the  citizenship  status  of  the
    sponsor. The respondent made a plain error in relation to that  status:
    the sponsor has never been settled or naturalised as a British citizen.
     That evidence came from the sponsor herself at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing and it is unarguable that the judge was entitled to  rely  upon
    her evidence and to consider the appeal  on  that  basis.  That  was  a
    proper reason to  depart  from  the  concession/error  in  the  refusal
    letter.

34. That being so, the assertion that the sponsor (who now has  30  months'
    leave to remain) is on the route to settlement and may  be  settled  in
    future does not avail the appellant at present and is  not  capable  of
    being a material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which was predicated on the facts as they stood at  the  date
    of hearing.

35. The First-tier Judge did give consideration to the  best  interests  of
    the couple's baby son.  No material error of law in that  consideration
    has been identified.

36. Similarly on the evidence before the judge,  it  was  open  to  him  to
    conclude that the appellant, if returned alone, could live elsewhere in
    Pakistan, away from his family, and if returning with his wife and baby
    son, would be able to relocate  to  Karachi,  where  she  has  extended
    family.

37. These grounds of appeal are in reality principally  disagreements  with
    the First-tier Judge's findings of  fact  and  credibility.   I  remind
    myself of the narrow  circumstances  in  which  it  is  appropriate  to
    interfere with a finding of fact by a First-tier Judge  who  has  heard
    the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick
    and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed.   That  standard  is  not  reached
    here and accordingly, it is not open  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  re-
    examine the factual matrix in this appeal.

38. The grounds of appeal disclose no material error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, which is upheld.

DECISION

39. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      6 August
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



