
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11076/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 November 2019              |On 13 December 2019              |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE NICOL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                EMMANUEL [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patyna, instructed by Bail for Immigration
                    Detainees
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a Sierra Leonean national who was born on 5  May  1979.
   He appeals, with permission  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Owens,
   against a decision which was issued by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
   Walker) on 2 May 2019.   In  that  decision,  the  judge  dismissed  the
   appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human  rights
   claim, having concluded that his deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom
   would not be in breach of Article 8 ECHR in either its private or family
   life aspect.

2. The judge set out the appellant's immigration and offending  history  in
   full.  For the purposes of  this  decision,  it  suffices  to  note  the
   following.  The appellant entered the UK in 2003 and claimed asylum.  He
   did not pursue  that  application,  however,  and  remained  in  the  UK
   unlawfully.  He was granted Discretionary Leave (on family life grounds)
   for three years on 25 August 2011.  That is the only leave to  enter  or
   remain he has enjoyed.

3. Between 11  December  2003  and  5  December  2018,  the  appellant  was
   convicted of 38 offences, which the judge  summarised  at  [83]  of  his
   decision as follows:

         "Of these 8 were offences of driving  whilst  disqualified.   There
         were 16 other driving offences including one of driving with excess
         alcohol.  There were  7  offences  of  dishonesty,  5  offences  of
         assault or public order offences and two  offences  of  obstructing
         police.  He has been sentenced to immediate imprisonment on a total
         of 7 occasions with this total sentence amounting to 9 months  plus
         52 weeks plus 120 days, an overall total in excess of 2 years.   He
         has also been sentenced to suspended sentences of imprisonment on 4
         occasions totalling 10 months and 16 weeks - a period in excess  of
         1 year.   All  but  one  of  these  suspended  sentences  has  been
         activated in full or in part.  His antecedent history shows that he
         has used 15 different names  when  apprehended  for  these  various
         offences and four different dates of birth."

4. The appellant's offending caused the respondent to initiate  deportation
   action against him in 2013.  He pursued an appeal against that proposal,
   in which he relied primarily on his relationship with his wife  [SD],  a
   British citizen of Liberian origin, and their children.  That appeal was
   dismissed by the FtT because it did not accept that the appellant had  a
   genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife  and   children.
   Permission to appeal was refused by the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  and,
   on 9 December 2013, the Secretary of State signed  a  deportation  order
   against the appellant.

5. The appellant did  not  leave  the  UK.   In  2016  and  2018,  he  made
   representations against his deportation, contending that  he  was  in  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms [D] and their  children  and
   that it would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR for him to be deported.   On
   15 May 2018, the respondent refused to  revoke  the  deportation  order.
   Although she accepted that there was sufficient evidence  to  show  that
   the appellant, his  wife  and  their  children  enjoyed  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship, she considered the appellant to be a persistent
   offender whose deportation from the United Kingdom would not be contrary
   to Article 8 ECHR.  It was against  that  decision  that  the  appellant
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal for a second  time.   As  before  he
   relied upon his relationship with his wife and children.  They now  have
   five children: [L] (aged 14), [Hm] (aged 7), [M] (aged 4), [A] (aged  2)
   and [Ha] (aged 1).




The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

6. The appellant was represented by Ms Patyna before the judge.  She called
   the appellant and his wife and three other witnesses.  She relied  on  a
   volume of documents which  need  not  be  listed  here.   Amongst  those
   documents was an expert report from an Independent Social  Worker  named
   Peter Horrocks.  Having considered all of that  material,  Judge  Walker
   produced a lengthy and thorough decision in which he drew the  following
   conclusions.  He did not accept that the appellant was a changed man and
   he had no doubt that he was a persistent offender:  [86]-[92].   He  did
   not accept that the appellant could meet  any  of  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules.   He  had  not  been  lawfully
   resident in the UK for most of his life: [95].  He was not socially  and
   culturally integrated into the  UK:  [96].   Nor  would  there  be  very
   significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration   to   his   country   of
   nationality: [97]-[101].

7. The judge analysed the appellant's family life claim under paragraph 399
   of the Immigration Rules over the  course  of  [102]-[126].   At  [102]-
   [115], he gave reasons for concluding that it would not be unduly  harsh
   for the appellant's wife and children to follow him to Sierra Leone.  At
   [116]-[126], he gave reasons for concluding that it would not be  unduly
   harsh for the appellant's family to remain in the United Kingdom without
   him.  At [128]-[134], the  judge  concluded  that  there  were  no  very
   compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in  the  two
   exceptions to deportation which sufficed to  outweigh  the  very  strong
   public interest in deportation.




The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

8. Ms Patyna advanced two grounds of appeal against the  judge's  decision.
   The first was that the judge had failed  to  take  account  of  relevant
   considerations in concluding that it would not be unduly harsh  for  the
   appellant's family to live in Sierra Leone with  him.   The  second  was
   that the judge had erred in his consideration  of  Mr  Horrocks'  expert
   evidence, in that he had reached an irrational or inadequately  reasoned
   decision to attach weight to this report.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Owens
   granted permission on both grounds.

9. In submissions before us, Ms Patyna indicated that she had spoken to  Mr
   Bramble, who was prepared to accept on behalf of the respondent that the
   judge had erred in law in his consideration of the question  of  whether
   the family could relocate to Sierra  Leone.   She  submitted  that  this
   concession was correct, as the judge had failed to consider the accepted
   vulnerability of the appellant and  his  wife  when  assessing  how  the
   family would be able to manage in Sierra Leone.  It  had  been  accepted
   throughout that they both had a very limited education and that they had
   difficulty with reading.  Their  vulnerability  was  relevant  to  their
   ability to manage as adults in Sierra Leone but it was also relevant  to
   the assessment of the children's  best  interests  on  relocation.   The
   judge had considered their vulnerability in parts of  the  decision  but
   not when it came to this aspect of the assessment.  The judge  had  also
   failed to consider [L]'s best interests by reference to  anything  other
   than her education and  had,  in  particular,  failed  to  consider  the
   discrimination against women in that country.  These points were made at
   [27]-[28] of Ms Patyna's skeleton, with which she understood Mr  Bramble
   to agree.  It followed that there was  an  unlawful  assessment  of  the
   question posed by paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a)[1] of the Immigration Rules.

10. In respect of the judge's consideration of  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b)[2],
   Ms Patyna submitted that the judge had erred in his consideration of  Mr
   Horrocks' report, in that he had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  going
   behind the assessment undertaken by the expert.  She relied on what  was
   said by Sedley LJ (with whom Arden and Moses LJJ agreed) in Y &  Z  (Sri
   Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362; [2009]  HRLR  22.   At  [11]  of  his
   judgment in that case, Sedley  LJ  stated  that  a  Tribunal  must  give
   acceptable reasons for rejecting the evidence of an expert.  At [32]  of
   her skeleton argument, Ms Patyna  also  relied  upon  dicta  to  similar
   effect at [21] of SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155, per Stanley
   Burnton LJ, with whom Maurice Kay and Lewison LJJ  agreed.   The  report
   had highlighted [L]'s particular relationship with her father and it had
   been said that he  was  an  integral  part  of  her  life.   The  report
   considered the risk to the children in  the  event  of  the  appellant's
   deportation and, in particular,  the  problems  which  would  likely  be
   brought  about  by  long-term  separation.   The  reality,   Ms   Patyna
   submitted, was that the reasons given by the  judge  for  rejecting  the
   expert's opinion, did not undermine what he had  said.  The  result  was
   that the judge had left out of account the child-specific considerations
   which he was required to assess as a result of Zoumbas [2012]  UKSC  74;
   [2013] 1 WLR 3690.

11. At the start of his submissions, we asked  Mr  Bramble  to  clarify  the
   extent to which the respondent was prepared to accept that the judge had
   fallen into error.  He accepted that the judge's assessment  of  whether
   it would be unduly harsh for family life to continue in Sierra Leone was
   vitiated by a failure to take material matters  into  account.   It  was
   accepted, in particular, that the judge had erred in failing to  provide
   adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant's wife,  of  Liberian
   heritage and British nationality, would be able  to  secure  employment.
   Further, it was accepted that the judge's assessment of  the  impact  of
   relocation to Sierra Leone on [L] was too narrow, in that the judge  had
   focused on her education without considering  her  nationality  and  the
   discrimination against women in that country.  Nor had  there  been  any
   adequate consideration of the fact that [L] had  long-established  roots
   in the United Kingdom.

12. Mr Bramble nevertheless submitted that the  error  disclosed  by  ground
   one was not material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   It  was  to  be
   recalled, he submitted, that it was incumbent upon the appellant to show
   that it would be unduly harsh on the children to follow  him  to  Sierra
   Leone and that it would be unduly harsh on them  to  remain  in  the  UK
   without him.  He  submitted  that  it  was  apparent  from  the  judge's
   assessment that these two questions had been dealt with  separately  and
   that, contrary to the assertion in ground two,  the  judge's  assessment
   contained no legal error.  The judge had  concluded  that  there  was  a
   paucity of evidence to show that [L] had suffered an adverse reaction to
   her father's absence during his two later terms of imprisonment.  In  so
   concluding,  the  judge  had  clearly  taken  account  of  the   witness
   statements  before  him  and  the  periods  of  imprisonment  which  the
   appellant had actually served.  He had  been  entitled  to  attach  less
   weight to the expert report for the reasons he had given.

13. Mr Bramble submitted that the judge plainly  understood  the  law  which
   applied to the determination of the appeal.  Paragraphs [113] and  [125]
   contained model self-directions on KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1
   WLR 5273.  He had considered the expert report in detail  and  had  been
   entitled to conclude that it was deserving of less weight than had  been
   submitted by Ms Patyna.  In summary, it was accepted by  the  respondent
   that the judge had erred in law in his consideration of the first of the
   two questions posed by paragraph 399 but not in respect of  the  second.
   The assessment of the second limb stood and the error in respect of  the
   first limb was immaterial.

14. In reply, Ms Patyna accepted that she was  required  to  establish  that
   the judge had erred as alleged in grounds one and two  if  the  decision
   was to be set aside.  She submitted that although there was  an  absence
   of medical evidence concerning  [L]'s  reaction  to  her  father's  more
   recent periods of imprisonment, there was evidence  provided  about  her
   reaction in her parents' statements.  She submitted  that  [11]  of  the
   judge's decision contained what was,  on  any  proper  view,  a  legally
   flawed assessment of the expert  report  and  an  inadequately  reasoned
   rejection  of  the  same.   Those  flaws  tainted  the  judge's  overall
   conclusion, at [125], that the appellant's deportation would bring about
   nothing more than the 'inevitably harsh consequences' which  are  to  be
   expected from deportation.




Discussion

15. As we have recorded above, it is accepted by  the  respondent  that  the
   judge fell into error in his assessment of whether it  would  be  unduly
   harsh for the appellant's family,  and  in  particular  the  appellant's
   children, to live with him in Sierra Leone.  That concession is properly
   made and we agree with the reasons given by Mr Bramble for not  opposing
   the first ground, as set out at [10] above.  Ms Patyna accepted  orally,
   however, that she was also required to  establish  that  the  judge  had
   fallen into the error alleged in ground two if she was to show that  the
   overarching Article 8 ECHR analysis could not stand.

16. For the reasons which follow, we do not accept that the judge fell  into
   legal error in his assessment of whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
   the appellant's family to remain in the UK without him.  As  Mr  Bramble
   noted in his submissions, the judge's starting  point  was  an  accurate
   self-direction with reference to KO (Nigeria) at [113]  and  [125].   In
   the former paragraph, the judge directed himself in the following way:

         "Neither  the  nature  of  the  appellant's   offending   nor   his
         immigration history are relevant.  [KO (Nigeria)]  makes  it  clear
         that for something to be unduly harsh it must go beyond what  would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent, which will inevitably involve some  degree  of  harshness
         for the child.  However, it is not necessary at this stage for  the
         appellant to show that there are very  compelling  reasons  why  he
         should not be deported."

17.  Having  so  directed  himself,  the  judge  embarked  upon  a  detailed
   consideration of the claim made by the appellant and his wife, which was
   that the size of their family and the difficulties they have suffered in
   the past meant that the appellant's deportation would  give  rise  to  a
   degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for
   any child faced with the deportation of a parent.  In  support  of  that
   claim, the appellant relied particularly upon the report of Mr Horrocks.



18. Mr Horrocks qualified as a Social Worker in 1988 and  has  been  in  the
   field, including at senior management level, since  then.   Mr  Horrocks
   was provided with a number of documents connected with the appeal and he
   interviewed the family in  their  home  on  20  November  2018.   Having
   considered that material, he produced a report which extends to 31 pages
   of double-spaced type.  We do not propose to rehearse  the  contents  of
   the report.  We have read and considered it in its entirety, just as the
   judge clearly did.  The key conclusion  upon  which  Ms  Patyna  relied,
   however, was that the family would struggle to function in various  ways
   in the event of the appellant's deportation.

19. Mr Horrocks' report set out the organisational  difficulties  caused  by
   the fact that there were five children of varying ages and that [L], the
   eldest, was 'severely impacted by the separation from her father on  the
   last occasion when he was sent to prison: [4.15] refers.   He  expressed
   concern  about  the  appellant's  wife's  mental  health  problems   and
   recounted that she and the appellant had suggested that she might  'have
   some form of breakdown' if he was removed  from  the  UK.   Mr  Horrocks
   considered that there were 'significant risks' that  [L]  would  develop
   long-term eating problems as a reaction to the stress  of  her  father's
   deportation: [4.22].  He noted that there were 'only three  children  in
   the family' when the appellant was in prison and that the addition of  a
   further two children would render it less likely  that  the  appellant's
   wife would be able to manage, including with respect to  being  able  to
   meet the children's needs in terms of food and accommodation: [4.23] and
   [4.24].  He considered that there was a 'major risk' of family breakdown
   and of the children being taken  into  care  and  requiring  'long  term
   placement homes': [4.25].  In his conclusions, Mr  Horrocks  also  noted
   that the appellant's wife 'has physical health problems as a  result  of
   four caesarean operations and is unable to  lift  or  to  do  any  heavy
   work'.

20. As will be immediately apparent, the judge  would  have  been  bound  to
   conclude that there would be a degree of  harshness  beyond  what  would
   ordinarily be expected if he had accepted  Mr  Horocks'  report  in  its
   entirety.  We have no  doubt  that  the  test  of  undue  harshness,  as
   construed by KO (Nigeria), would be satisfied if it  was  accepted  that
   the absence of the appellant would cause [L] to develop long-term eating
   difficulties and the children to be taken  into  long  term  care.   The
   judge did not suggest that Mr Horrocks was not a proper expert  or  that
   he had assumed the role  of  an  advocate.   The  reasons  he  gave  for
   rejecting the conclusions we have  mentioned  above  were,  instead,  as
   follows:

    i) The report was based on inaccurate information, the most striking  of
       which was the suggestion that the appellant's wife would particularly
       struggle to manage now that she had five children,  whereas  she  had
       only had three children when the appellant was last  imprisoned.   In
       fact, as the judge noted at [119], the appellant  and  his  wife  had
       four children when he was last in prison; [A] was only six months old
       when he was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  by  East  Kent
       Magistrates' Court in 2017.  Mr Horrocks had seemingly considered the
       position during the appellant's 2013 term of  imprisonment,  but  not
       the more recent terms.

   ii) That weakness was  also  revealed  in  Mr  Horrocks'  conclusions  in
       respect of [L]: [120].  The eating problems which she  had  developed
       when the appellant was in prison, which had necessitated counselling,
       had developed in 2013 and there was no other evidence  to  show  that
       such problems had developed during the appellant's subsequent periods
       of imprisonment.  There was  consequently  little  basis,  the  judge
       concluded in this paragraph, for Mr  Horrocks'  assessment  that  [L]
       would be at major risk of developing long term eating problems.   The
       judge also noted  that  that  conclusion  was  inconsistent  with  Mr
       Horrocks' earlier acceptance that there had been no further  concerns
       about [L] since 2013.

  iii) Mr Horrocks had accepted what he had been told by the  appellant  and
       his wife, which was that it was always the appellant who took [Hm] to
       school and picked him up.  That statement was inconsistent  with  the
       letter from the school, however, in which  it  was  stated  that  the
       appellant 'periodically' collected [Hm]  from  school:  [121].   This
       inconsistency was thought by the  judge  to  undermine  Mr  Horrocks'
       concern that the appellant's wife would  be  unable  to  collect  the
       older children herself: [121].

   iv) The judge also considered Mr Horrocks' report to  be  speculative  in
       parts.  He noted that there was little reason to suppose, as  had  Mr
       Horocks, that the appellant's wife would be unable  to  provide  food
       and accommodation for the children in the event  of  the  appellant's
       deportation: [122].   She  was  dependent  upon  social  housing  and
       welfare  benefits  and  the  judge  could  see  no  reason  why  that
       entitlement would not continue if the appellant  was  deported.   For
       the same reasons, he considered  the  conclusion  that  the  children
       would suffer harm to their physical development was speculative.

21. Drawing those threads together, at [123], the judge  decided  to  attach
   little weight to Mr Horrocks' conclusions, firstly,  that  there  was  a
   major risk of family breakdown in the  absence  of  the  appellant  and,
   secondly, that the appellant's wife would be likely  to  develop  mental
   health problems as a result of the appellant's absence.

22. Ms Patyna  submitted  that  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  so
   concluding were inadequate, when set against what was said by Sedley  LJ
   and Stanley Burnton LJ in the two authorities we have cited  above.   In
   SS (Sri Lanka), Stanley Burnton LJ underlined that the weight,  if  any,
   to be given to expert evidence is a matter  for  the  trial  judge.   He
   stated that a judge's decision not to accept expert  evidence  does  not
   involve an error of law,  provided  he  approaches  that  evidence  with
   appropriate care and gives good reasons for  his  decision.   He  stated
   that the two aspects of  the  test  were  inter-related,  and  that  the
   judge's 'reasons demonstrate his care': [21].  In that case, the  Senior
   Immigration Judge was held to have given full  and  cogent  reasons  for
   rejecting the view of a Consultant Psychiatrist.  Those reasons included
   the 'fundamental differences' between the account given  to  the  doctor
   and the findings reached by the Tribunal: [24].

23. In concluding that the Senior Immigration Judge in SS  (Sri  Lanka)  had
   not erred in his approach to the medical evidence in that case,  Stanley
   Burnton LJ drew on what had been said by Sedley LJ in Y & Z (Sri Lanka).
    Like Stanley Burnton LJ, we consider the following sections  of  Sedley
   LJ's judgment to be worthy  of  reproduction  in  the  context  of  this
   appeal:

         "[11] While no tribunal is bound simply to accept  everything  that
         such experts say because they have gone uncontradicted, it is  well
         established that the tribunal must have, and must give,  acceptable
         reasons for rejecting such evidence. ...

         [12] ... where the factual basis of  the  psychiatric  findings  is
         sought to be undermined by suggesting that the appellants have been
         exaggerating their symptoms, care is required. The factuality of an
         appellant's account of his or her history may be so controverted by
         the  tribunal's  own  findings  as  to  undermine  the  psychiatric
         evidence. This happens from time to time, but  it  did  not  happen
         here. What happened here was that the designated immigration  judge
         himself formed the view that the appellants (who had not given oral
         evidence  before  him)  had  been  calculatedly  exaggerating   the
         symptoms they recounted to the expert witnesses.  That  is  in  the
         first instance a matter for the experts themselves,  a  fundamental
         aspect of whose expertise is the evaluation of  patients'  accounts
         of their symptoms: see R (M) v IAT  [2004]  EWHC  (Admin)  582  per
         Moses J. It is only if the tribunal has good and  objective  reason
         for discounting that evaluation that it can be modified or  -  even
         more radically - disregarded."

24. Adopting that approach, we have no difficulty  in  concluding  that  the
   judge in this appeal  gave  legally  acceptable  reasons  for  attaching
   little weight to Mr Horrocks' report.  He concluded, as had  the  Senior
   Immigration Judge in SS  (Sri  Lanka)  that  the  factual  basis  of  Mr
   Horrocks' report was incorrect.  Mr Horrocks had been concerned that the
   appellant's wife was in a drastically different position from that which
   obtained when she was last deprived of his assistance, but that was  not
   so.  Mr Horrocks had been particularly concerned by the eating  problems
   [L] had developed when the appellant was imprisoned  but  there  was  no
   medical evidence to show that these  had  occurred  again  when  he  was
   imprisoned on two subsequent occasions.  The evidence from [Hm]'s school
   gave an account which differed from that provided to Mr Horrocks by  the
   appellant and his wife.  And there was no basis in fact, the judge held,
   for Mr Horrocks's suggestion that the appellant's  wife  would  be  less
   able to provide food and shelter for her children in the event that  the
   appellant were to be deported.  These were legally adequate and  logical
   reasons, in our judgment, for the ultimate  conclusion  reached  by  the
   judge.  The weight to be attached to the expert report was a matter  for
   him and he was entitled to attach little weight to Mr  Horrocks'  report
   for the reasons that he gave.

25. It follows that we  do  not  accept  Ms  Patyna's  submission  that  the
   judge's assessment of the 'harshness' of the family remaining in the  UK
   without the appellant is flawed by legal error.  As  she  accepted,  the
   fact  that  ground  one  is  made  out  does  not  suffice,   in   those
   circumstances, to undermine the judge's  ultimate  conclusion  that  the
   appellant's deportation would not be contrary to Article  8  ECHR.   The
   decision to dismiss the appeal will accordingly stand.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision  of
the FtT will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                              11 December 2019
                           -----------------------
[1]  Whether "it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country
to which the person is to be deported"
[2] Whether "it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
without the person who is to be deported"

