
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11169/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2018                   |On 28 February 2018                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                               ABDELMAJID [T]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECREARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appeal

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on [ ] 1974. He claims  to
       have entered the UK illegally, using a false identity, in March 1998.
       For five years between  2010  and  2015  he  held  a  residence  card
       acknowledging his right of residence as the  extended  family  member
       (partner) of an  Irish  national.  He  has  two  children  from  that
       relationship. However, he has not seen his children since an incident
       in June 2014 which led to the permanent breakdown of his relationship
       with his partner. On 20 January 2017 the Worcester Family Court  made
       a Child Arrangements Order whereby the appellant was to have indirect
       contact with his children on a monthly basis.

    2. On 22 January 2016 the appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the
       UK  on  the  grounds  of  his  private  life  (10-year  route).   His
       application was refused on 15 April 2016 because he did not meet  any
       of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules
       and there were no exceptional circumstances to  warrant  a  grant  of
       leave outside the rules. The indirect contact  he  enjoyed  with  his
       children could continue if the appellant were in Algeria.

    3. The appellant appealed and his appeal was  heard  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 5 October 2017 at Taylor House,  London.  The  judge  was
       told that, two days earlier, the appellant had applied to the Central
       Family Court for a new contact order. He was not legally  represented
       but he had been advised by the campaign group, Fathers for Justice.

    4. The judge dismissed the  appeal.  He  found  the  appellant  did  not
       satisfy the rules.  With  respect  to  the  children,  he  noted  the
       appellant's residence in the UK had been unlawful for the majority of
       the time and found at paragraph [17] that:

           "It follows,  therefore,  that  much  of  the  relationship  the
           Appellant has formed with his children occurred at a  time  when
           he was  unlawfully  in  the  UK  and,  in  accordance  with  the
           provisions of section 117B, I am required to give little  weight
           to that relationship. The prospects of a different contact order
           are, for the purpose of this  appeal,  merely  speculation.  The
           Appellant is capable of exercising  the  current  contact  order
           from Algeria."

    5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal relied on MH (pending family
       proceedings - discretionary leave) Morocco [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC)  and
       MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133 to the effect that a decision to
       remove an applicant in the process of seeking  a  contact  order  may
       violate article 8 if it would deny the applicant the  possibility  of
       meaningful involvement in the proceedings. The grounds  asserted,  as
       had the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that  a  Cafcass
       report had concluded that the appellant's presence in his  children's
       lives was crucial. Ms Reid could not show me that  any  such  wording
       had ever been used.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
       respondent filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal  because  the
       judge appeared to find the application for a contact order  had  been
       made two days before the hearing.  In  order  for  the  appellant  to
       qualify for leave, the contact order application would have  to  have
       been made for genuine  reasons  and  not  to  frustrate  the  removal
       process.

    7. Mr Jarvis helpfully confirmed he would not be relying on the line  of
       argument set out in the rule 24 response. The judge had not taken the
       point that the  appellant  had  made  the  application  in  order  to
       frustrate removal.

The submissions

    8. Ms Reid argued the judge had failed to ask himself the questions  set
       out in paragraph 43 of RS (immigration and family court  proceedings)
       India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC). He had been told  that  the  appellant
       was not satisfied with the outcome of the hearing in January 2017 and
       had taken advice leading to his further application. Whilst the judge
       was right to have directed himself not to speculate about the outcome
       of the new contact proceedings, he had failed to ask himself  whether
       the proceedings  were  likely  to  be  material  to  the  immigration
       decision. Ms Reid submitted it was clear they would.  The  issue  was
       whether the appellant's removal would effectively deprive him of  the
       opportunity of participating effectively in the proceedings.

    9. In reply, Mr Jarvis focused on the duty of the judge to consider  the
       factors set out in  paragraph  43(iv)  of  RS  (India).   Unlike  the
       factual position in the authorities, the judge in this  case  already
       knew what the Family Court's assessment was of  the  children's  best
       interests. His approach was therefore correct.

   10. Ms Reid pointed out that there were materials before the judge  which
       led up to the January decision on contact but there was  no  reasoned
       judgment of the court.

   11. I raised with the representatives the question of whether the court's
       decision should be read as finally determining the issue or  whether,
       as it appeared to me, it was likely to be the case that what  was  in
       the best interests of the children would evolve over time. There  was
       agreement that there was a difference if, for example,  an  appellant
       had made a series of unsuccessful applications in  rapid  succession.
       Such applications would be likely to fall into the category of  those
       made purely to frustrate removal.

   12. I reserved my decision as to whether the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal should be set aside for material error of law in  accordance
       with section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.
       The representatives were in agreement that, if I found  an  error  of
       law, I could remake the decision myself.

Decision on error of law

   13. In RS (India), the panel provided the following guidance:

           "43.   In our judgment, when a judge sitting in  an  immigration
           appeal has to consider whether a person with a  criminal  record
           or adverse immigration history should  be  removed  or  deported
           when there are family proceedings contemplated the judge  should
           consider the following questions:

                 i) Is the outcome of the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                    likely to be material to the immigration decision?

                ii) Are there compelling public interest reasons to  exclude
                    the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the
                    outcome of the family proceedings or the best  interests
                    of the child?

               iii) In the case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
                    appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any  reason
                    to  believe  that  the  family  proceedings  have   been
                    instituted to delay or  frustrate  removal  and  not  to
                    promote the child's welfare?

                iv)  In  assessing  the  above  questions,  the  judge  will
                    normally want to consider: the degree of the  claimant's
                    previous interest in and contact  with  the  child,  the
                    timing of contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with
                    which they have been  progressed,  when  a  decision  is
                    likely to  be  reached,  what  materials  (if  any)  are
                    already available or can be made available  to  identify
                    pointers to where the child's welfare lies?"

   14. This guidance is clearly flexible enough to apply in  non-deportation
       cases because the weight to be given to  the  public  interest  under
       (ii) can be adjusted. The guidance was subsequently approved  by  the
       Court of Appeal in Mohan v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1363.  The  Court
       traced the origin of the point to Ciliz v The Netherlands  (29192/95,
       11 July 2000) in which the ECtHR said a decision to expel a person in
       such circumstances prejudged the outcome of the access proceedings by
       denying  the  applicant  all  possibility   of   meaningful   further
       involvement in the proceedings. This failed to afford  the  applicant
       sufficient protection for his article 8 interests. Ciliz informed the
       domestic decision in MS (Ivory Coast). The Court in Mohan, noting the
       decision in Nimako-Boateng  (residence  orders  -  Anton  considered)
       [2012] UKUT 00216 (IAC), explained that  the  Family  Court  is  best
       placed to evaluate the best interests of children. Both the  decision
       itself  and  the  reasons  for  the  outcome  are  material  to   the
       consideration of the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise.

   15. In this case, it is clear the judge was shown various documents, such
       as a Cafcass assessment and an application for contact,  as  recently
       submitted by the appellant. Ms Reid was unable to  confirm  that  the
       Worcester Family Court had consented to the disclosure  of  documents
       relating to the contact proceedings. That is no criticism of  her  or
       those  now  instructing  her.  The  firm  of  solicitors  which   had
       previously represented the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       has, it seems, been closed down. It is  not  known  what  steps  they
       took.  In  any  further  proceedings,  such  materials  must  not  be
       disclosed unless consent has been obtained.

   16.  Having  carefully   considered   the   submissions   made   by   the
       representatives, I have concluded the judge's decision does contain a
       material error and should be set aside.  The  authorities  show  that
       there is a wide spectrum of cases in which, at the one end,  removing
       the applicant would deprive him of the possibility of making his case
       for contact and also make it almost impossible for him to obtain  the
       benefit of any successful application. At the other  end,  there  are
       cases in which absentee fathers, having shown next to  little  or  no
       interest  in  their  children,  make   an   application   or   serial
       applications with very little prospect of success. In such case there
       is no breach of article 8.

   17. Judges hearing such appeals should follow the  approach  set  out  in
       paragraph 43 of RS  (India)  in  order  to  establish  where  on  the
       spectrum the case lies.  I agree with Ms Reid that the judge did  not
       do so and did not even begin to answer the first question. By  noting
       that the outcome of the application was a matter of speculation,  the
       judge was right but he also appears to have held back from  assessing
       the  impact  the  outcome  of  the  application  could  have  on  the
       proportionality question.

   18. Mr Jarvis's submission regarding the fact this  was  the  appellant's
       second application for contact and, furthermore, one which  was  made
       within a year of the previous order, does not mean the judge was  not
       obliged to consider  the  impact  nonetheless.  I  do  not  read  the
       authorities as  ruling  out  the  applicability  of  the  RS  (India)
       guidelines in second or multiple  application  scenarios.  The  judge
       could only rationally conclude there was no or negligible impact  if,
       having had the benefit of  reading  a  full  set  of  documents  and,
       perhaps, a reasoned judgment of the Family Court, it  was  clear  the
       prospect of the appellant succeeding in upgrading  his  contact  with
       his children to direct supervised contact was negligible.  The  judge
       had some documents  and  appears  to  have  taken  a  view  that  the
       appellant was  undeserving  of  contact.  In  any  event,  his  final
       approach was to disregard  the  application  as  being  a  matter  of
       speculation.

   19. It is right to point out, as Mr Jarvis did,  that  the  Family  Court
       decided that the children's best interests  did  not  require  direct
       contact with the appellant to be allowed. As said, the  Family  Court
       is best placed to make that assessment.  However, I do not think that
       means the tribunal can ignore the fact a further application has been
       made. There is evidence that the appellant was dissatisfied with  the
       order and immediately took steps to obtain advice about  what  to  do
       next. This is not a case of a man who has not had  any  role  in  his
       children's lives. Evidently, his  relationship  with  his  ex-partner
       became "toxic" but the appellant lived with his children until  2014.
       He has expressed concern that  his  ex-partner  might  take  them  to
       Ireland without informing him. There was material  before  the  judge
       showing the appellant had a genuine interest in his children and  his
       application was not purely a means of frustrating removal.

   20. The appellant's appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal is set aside.

Remaking the decision

   21. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal. I accept the  appellant
       is committed to seeking to obtain direct contact with  his  children.
       He is actively pursuing this through the proper channels  and,  if  a
       favourable order were made, it is  likely  he  would  participate  in
       contact in order to make a success of it. This is the only reason  he
       has for remaining in the UK but I do not consider  he  is  using  the
       contact proceedings purely to frustrate removal.  He  has  a  genuine
       interest in the outcome.

   22. It is clear the outcome of the current Family Court proceedings might
       have a significant impact on family life in this case as between  the
       appellant and his children. If the court decides,  having  looked  at
       the current  position,  that  the  children's  best  interests  would
       require them to have direct contact with the appellant, that would be
       a significant matter  of  weight  in  the  proportionality  balancing
       exercise. By the time the case has  been  resolved,  sufficient  time
       will have elapsed since the previous order to consider there might be
       a different outcome. The children will be older  and  therefore  more
       mature. The respondent's argument that the contact can be  maintained
       while the appellant is abroad would fall away. The  appellant  has  a
       poor immigration history but not one which would inevitably  outweigh
       the best interests of children.

   23. As matters stand, removing the appellant to Algeria  would  deny  him
       the possibility of pursuing contact proceedings which may not  be  in
       his children's best  interests.  That  would  be  a  disproportionate
       interference with family life and in breach of article 8.

   24. In terms of how to give effect to  this  decision,  the  tribunal  no
       longer has power to direct  the  respondent  to  grant  a  period  of
       discretionary leave in order to enable the appellant  to  participate
       effectively in the proceedings. I must therefore leave  this  to  the
       respondent to determine. A grant of one  year's  discretionary  leave
       would enable him to work and fund his legal representation so that he
       has a fair opportunity to  make  his  case  to  the  court.  This  is
       preferable to adjourning the appeal pending the outcome of the Family
       Court proceedings.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

    The following decision is substituted:

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

    An anonymity direction has not been made.




                               Signed   Dated 9 February 2018


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Froom
