
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11672/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2021 via Skype for     |On 24 February 2021                  |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                          BAKSHU AHMED RASHED ADNAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Fazli, Counsel, instructed by Barclay
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in the appellant's bundle from  the
first-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal,  and  written  submissions  from
the appellant and respondent, the contents of which I have recorded.
The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content  the  proceedings
had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cameron dated 17 January 2020 dismissing an appeal by the appellant,  a
    citizen of Bangladesh born on 5 May 1992, against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 24 June 2019 to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. The essential issues are whether the judge erred in  finding  that  the
    appellant's removal would be proportionate for the purposes of  Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,  and  whether  the  judge
    erred in relation to his analysis of  the  appellant's  claimed  family
    life with a non-blood relative.

Factual background

 3. In 2008, the appellant's parents brought him to this country on a visit
    visa. They left him under the care of a friend of the family,  Mr  Ali,
    and returned to Bangladesh shortly thereafter. The appellant  was  aged
    13 at the time. He has lived here ever since, with no leave to  remain.
    Between 2012 and 2017, he made a number of attempts to  regularise  the
    status, each of  which  was  unsuccessful.  On  28  January  2019,  the
    appellant made further submissions in support of his human rights claim
    which were treated as a fresh claim, the refusal of which gave rise  to
    the proceedings before the judge below.

 4. The appellant's human rights claim, and his case before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, was based on the private and family life links he claimed  to
    have established during his residence here.  He also  claimed  to  have
    lost all contact with his family in Bangladesh, as he  was  angry  with
    them at having been abandoned by them here.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and a friend of his, Foyzul
    Islam.  Mr Ali, it was said, was unable to attend as he had been called
    to Bangladesh due to  a  family  emergency.   The  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that he no longer had any contact with his  family
    [60], and also rejected the appellant's evidence that he had  not  seen
    his father during two return visits his father made to this country  in
    2010 [61]. The judge rejected Mr Ali's written evidence  that,  as  the
    appellant's guardian, he had not been aware of the need  to  regularise
    the appellant's immigration status [63].

 6. The judge accepted that the appellant had lived  in  this  country  for
    over half his life. The judge did not accept that during that  time  he
    had established "family life" with Mr Ali for the purposes  of  Article
    8(1) of the ECHR. That was because  he  was  "not  satisfied  that  the
    [appellant's] family would have simply ceased  contact  with  him  when
    they brought him over here for  specific  reasons..."  See  [64].   The
    judge, did however, accept that the appellant would  have  "established
    very close ties to Mr  Ali  and  his  family  which  would  be  a  very
    significant element of his private life." Earlier in the decision,  the
    judge had expressed concern that, although Mr  Ali  was  overseas,  had
    attended to speak to the appellant's relationship with the family as  a
    whole [57].

 7. The judge found the appellant would be able to speak Bengali  upon  his
    return, and would be able to learn to read and write  in  the  language
    within a relatively short period [69].  The appellant would  return  to
    Bangladesh with the benefit of having  studied  in  this  country,  and
    would be  able  to  use  his  qualifications  to  assist  with  finding
    employment in Bangladesh [70].  Both Mr Ali and Mr Islam had family  in
    Bangladesh, and would  be  able  to  assist  the  appellant,  at  least
    initially [71].   Although the judge  did  not  say  so  expressly,  it
    appears his analysis from [59] to  [72]  seeks  to  address  the  "very
    significant obstacles" test that features in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
    the Immigration Rules; the judge cited Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ  813,  which  is  often  cited  as
    authority on the concept of "integration" for the purposes of paragraph
    276ADE.

 8. The judge found that the appellant's immigration status was relevant to
    the weight his private life attracted.  His "position was  precarious",
    found the judge [76]. The judge accepted that the appellant had  formed
    a "substantial private life" both with Mr Ali and his family, and  also
    with friends such as Mr Islam. Those factors attracted weight, but  the
    appellant's position "has always been precarious although I accept that
    he was not responsible for being left here as a child and I also accept
    that he has attempted since 2012 to regularise his status" [78].

 9. At [79], the judge said:

         "The fact however is that the appellant came to this country  as  a
         visitor and overstayed. He has not had leave to  remain  since  his
         visit visa expired in 2006. I am not satisfied that he has lost all
         contact with his family or that even  if  he  has  not  had  recent
         contact that  he  could  not  re-establish  contact  on  return  to
         Bangladesh. He has  friends  in  this  country[,]  Mr  Ali  and  Mr
         Islam[,] who have ties  in  Bangladesh  and  who  could  assist  in
         providing him with at least initially some support on his return."

10. Then at [81]:

         "After taking into account all of the evidence available before  me
         I am not satisfied that the appellant  has  shown  that  there  are
         compelling circumstances which  would  warrant  a  grant  of  leave
         outside the rules."

11. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

12. The grounds of appeal contend that,  first,  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of the public interest and the factors that weighed  against
    the appellant in the proportionality assessment, and secondly, that the
    judge erred in relation to whether the appellant  enjoyed  family  life
    with Mr Ali.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?.

14. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Keki? directed that the parties
    make written submissions on the issue of whether an oral hearing  would
    be required,  and  gave  directions  for  an  exchange  of  submissions
    concerning the substantive grounds of appeal.  The  appellant,  through
    different counsel, Adeel Malik, made written submissions on  27  August
    2020. The respondent served written  submissions  in  response  on  for
    September 2020.

15. On 20 October 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul directed that a remote
    oral hearing should take place.

Submissions

16. Mr Fazli submitted that the judge  treated  the  appellant's  initially
    precarious, and later unlawful, immigration status as a "straitjacket",
    and failed to address the flexibility inherent to section 117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    The   appellant's
    situation was unique; having arrived age 13, he was forced  into  being
    an overstayer by his parents and could not (as the  judge  accepted  at
    [78]) be held responsible for his immigration  status  when  he  was  a
    child.  By the time he reached the age of majority, he had  established
    a significant private and family life in this country, and by the  time
    of the hearing, had been resident for  over  half  of  his  life.   The
    judge's assessment of "precariousness"  featured  too  heavily  in  his
    analysis, Mr Fazli submits, without any recognition of the  flexibility
    inherent to section 117B, nor the difference of approach in relation to
    the analysis of "family life" under that same provision.

17. Secondly, Mr Fazli submitted  that  the  judge  fell  into  error  when
    finding that "family life"  did  not  exist  between  Mr  Ali  and  the
    appellant for the purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  judge  based
    his analysis, submits Mr Fazli, on the erroneous  premise  that  family
    life could either  exist  between  the  appellant  and  his  family  in
    Bangladesh, or between Mr Ali and his family in this country,  but  not
    both. Although the judge had expressed some reservations about the fact
    that neither Mr Ali nor any members of his family had attended to  give
    evidence, the judge accepted that there were  "very  close  ties"  (see
    [65]) between the appellant and Mr Ali and  his  family,  and  accepted
    that there was a "substantial private  life...  with  Mr  Ali  and  his
    family" (see [77]).  The judge appeared to ascribe significance to  the
    fact that Mr Ali was not a member of  the  appellant's  "blood  family"
    when finding that "family life" did not exist, which  was  incompatible
    with the jurisprudence on Article 8: see Uddin v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 338 at 34, per the Senior President
    of Tribunals.  Mr  Fazli  also  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings
    concerning the appellant's claimed loss of contact with his  family  in
    Bangladesh were not open to him.

18. For the respondent, Ms Isherwood contends  that  the  judge  reached  a
    decision open to him on the facts of the case.  The judge was  entitled
    to find the appellant had lost contact with his family, and to  observe
    that, as an adult  with  ties  to  Bangladesh,  he  would  be  able  to
    integrate upon  his  return.  The  judge  accepted  at  [65]  that  the
    appellant had "very close" ties with Mr Ali and his family, and so  was
    aware of the nature of the links being claimed.  Ms Isherwood urged  me
    to uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Legal framework

19. Sections 117A - D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    contain statutory public interest considerations to which  a  court  or
    tribunal must have regard when determining whether a decision under the
    Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to private and  family  life
    under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
    operative duty is contained in section 117A(2)(a):

         "(2) In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
         117B..."

20. Where relevant, section 117B provides:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                   that is established by a person at a time when the person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious."

21. In Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC
    58, the Supreme Court held that section 117A(2)(a) features an inherent
    degree of flexibility.  Lord Wilson put it this way, at [49]:

         "...the effect of section 117A(2)(a) is clear. It  recognises  that
         the provisions of section 117B  cannot  put  decision-makers  in  a
         strait-jacket which  constrains  them  to  determine  claims  under
         article 8 inconsistently with the article itself. Inbuilt into  the
         concept of 'little weight' itself is a small degree of flexibility;
         but it is in  particular  section  117A(2)(a)  which  provides  the
         limited degree of flexibility recognised to be necessary in para 36
         above...   [S]ection   117A(2)(a)   necessarily    enables    their
         applications occasionally to succeed. It is impossible  to  improve
         on how, in inevitably general  terms,  Sales  LJ  in  his  judgment
         described the effect of section 117A(2)(a) as follows:

             '53.  ... Although a court or tribunal should have  regard  to
             the consideration  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to
             private life established in [the specified] circumstances,  it
             is possible without violence to the language to say that  such
             generalised  normative  guidance  may  be  overridden  in   an
             exceptional  case  by  particularly  strong  features  of  the
             private life in question ...'"

Discussion

22. In relation to the judge's findings of fact, it is necessary to  recall
    that an appeal to this tribunal may only be brought on the basis of  an
    error of law, not of fact.  Certain findings of  fact  are  capable  of
    being infected by an error of law, as notably summarised in R (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [9].
    There are many judgments of  the  higher  courts  which  underline  the
    distinction between errors of fact and law.  I can do  no  better  than
    rely on the oft-quoted judgment of Lewison LJ in Age UK Ltd. v  Chobani
    UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at [114]:

         "114.  Appellate courts have  been  repeatedly  warned,  by  recent
         cases at the highest level, not to interfere with findings of  fact
         by trial judges, unless compelled to do so... The reasons for  this
         approach are many. They include

             i.  The expertise of a trial  judge  is  in  determining  what
             facts are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what
             those facts are if they are disputed.

             ii.  The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the  first  and
             last night of the show.

             iii.  Duplication of the trial judge's role  on  appeal  is  a
             disproportionate use of the limited resources of an  appellate
             court and will seldom  lead  to  a  different  outcome  in  an
             individual case.

             iv.  In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard
             to the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him,  whereas
             an appellate court will only be island hopping.

             v.  The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any  event,  be
             recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts  of
             evidence).

             vi.  Thus even if it were possible to duplicate  the  role  of
             the trial judge, it cannot in practice be done.

         115.  It is also important to have in mind the role of  a  judgment
         given after trial. The primary function of a first  instance  judge
         is to find facts and identify  the  crucial  legal  points  and  to
         advance reasons for deciding them in a particular  way.  He  should
         give his reasons in sufficient detail to show the parties  and,  if
         need be, the Court of Appeal the principles on which he  has  acted
         and the reasons that have led him to his decision. They need not be
         elaborate. There is no duty on a judge, in giving his  reasons,  to
         deal with every argument presented by counsel  in  support  of  his
         case. His function is to reach  conclusions  and  give  reasons  to
         support his view, not to spell out every matter as if summing up to
         a jury. Nor need he deal at any length with matters  that  are  not
         disputed. It is sufficient if what he says shows the basis on which
         he has acted. These are not controversial observations: see Customs
         and Excise Commissioners v A [2002] EWCA Civ  1039;  [2003]  2  WLR
         210; Bekoe v Broomes [2005] UKPC 39; Argos Ltd  v  Office  of  Fair
         Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318; [2006] UKCLR 1135"

23. The judgment in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd is seven years  old,  but
    it continues to represent a useful summary of the law on  the  approach
    to findings of fact, and the deference owed by appellate tribunals  and
    courts to first instance judges.  See the  Supreme  Court  in  Perry  v
    Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5 at [52], and most recently in the Court
    of Appeal in Lowe v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2021]
    EWCA Civ 62 at [29].

24. Mr Fazli's submissions concerning the judge's findings of fact  do  not
    demonstrate that the judge reached findings that  no  reasonable  judge
    could  have  reached.   The  judge  gave  adequate  reasons   for   the
    appellant's evidence that he had not enjoyed contact with his family in
    the last ten years [60].  The judge noted that the appellant  had  been
    brought to this country in order  to  obtain  a  better  education  and
    employment, in order to support his family in Bangladesh in the future.
    Against  that  background,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reject   the
    appellant's evidence of having lost all  contact  with  his  family  in
    Bangladesh. Similarly, at [61] the judge  accepted  evidence  from  the
    respondent that the appellant's father had applied for a visa to  visit
    this country twice in 2010. Those applications, noted  the  judge,  had
    been made in order for the appellant's father to visit family  in  this
    country. The appellant had not, highlighted the judge, referred to  any
    other family members in this country. The  judge  noted  at  [62]  that
    there was nothing in Mr Ali's statement  detailing  levels  of  contact
    with the family of the appellant at home, observing  that  he  was  not
    satisfied with that evidence, as the appellant's case was that  Mr  Ali
    had been a close friend of his parents, and had been willing to  accept
    the appellant into his care in 2006.

25. These were all factors the judge was entitled  to  take  into  account.
    There is nothing in the analysis of the judge which was not open to him
    on the evidence before him. The appellant may well disagree with  those
    findings, but they were not findings which no  reasonable  judge  could
    have reached, and I declined to interfere with them.

Article 8 analysis

26. Against that factual background,  I  turn  to  the  judge's  Article  8
    analysis.

27. Mr Fazli relies the judge's reference to  the  appellant  not  being  a
    member of Mr  Ali's  "blood  family"  at  [64],  submitting  that  that
    demonstrates the judge impermissibly imposed  a  requirement  of  blood
    relations,  inconsistent  with  the  Article  8  jurisprudence,   which
    recognises that family life may exist between non-blood  relations.  He
    also submits that the  judge  impermissibly  treated  the  question  of
    whether Article 8 family life exists as being the  binary  question  of
    whether  the  appellant  enjoyed  family  life  with  his   family   in
    Bangladesh, on the one hand, or whether he enjoyed family life with  Mr
    Ali and his family in this country, on the other. Article 8 features no
    such requirement for exclusivity, he submits.

28. I reject these submissions. The judge did not find that, simply because
    Mr Ali and the appellant were not blood relations, they could not enjoy
    Article 8 family life with each other. Rather, the judge was  correctly
    addressing the fact that family life cannot be  presumed  between  non-
    blood relations, meaning something more would have  been  required  for
    family life to exist between Mr Ali and his family and  the  appellant.
    Mr Ali, of course, had not attended the hearing to give  evidence,  and
    nor had any members of his family.  The judge was entitled to find,  as
    he did at [65], that there were "very close ties" to  Mr  Ali  and  his
    family on the part of the appellant, and that that would form  a  "very
    significant element" of his private life, but in the absence of further
    evidence, was  entitled  to  conclude  that  that  fell  short  of  the
    threshold for family life under Article 8.

29. Nor do I accept the submission that the judge  impermissibly  concluded
    that the appellant's continued relations with his family in  Bangladesh
    precluded the possibility of family life existing with Mr Ali  and  his
    family. At [64] when the  judge  said,  "given  my  findings  at  least
    initially", he was plainly referring  to  the  initial  period  of  the
    appellant's residence in this country, which had been  specifically  at
    the behest of his family to further his education and later  employment
    prospects. His father had visited the country twice in 2010, and on the
    judge's findings, contact had been retained. At those initial stages of
    the appellant's  residence  in  this  country,  family  life  with  his
    Bangladeshi family would undoubtedly have  continued,  on  the  judge's
    findings. In turn, that was a  relevant  factor  which  the  judge  was
    entitled  to  take  into   account   when   considering   whether   the
    (unsubstantiated, written only) evidence in  relation  to  the  claimed
    family life links with Mr Ali and family were sufficient to  reach  the
    Article 8 family life threshold.

30. In concluding that family life did not exist between the appellant  and
    Mr Ali and his family, the judge reached a finding that was open to him
    on the evidence, having considered all relevant factors,  in  light  of
    the correct legal framework. It was  not  an  irrational  decision  and
    there is no basis for this tribunal to interfere with it.

31.  The  remaining  submission  of  Mr  Fazli  contends  that  the   judge
    impermissibly treated the public interest considerations  contained  in
    section  117B  as  a  "legal  straitjacket".  The  appellant's   unique
    circumstances, he submits, called for  a  more  flexible  approach.   I
    reject this submission.  The judge's decision was careful and balanced.
     It did not treat section 117B as a rigid framework, within which there
    was no room for judicial  manoeuvre.   At  [74],  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself concerning the approach to proportionality assessments
    under Article 8 pursuant to Agyarko v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC  11,  noting  that  the  essential  question  is
    whether a "fair balance" had been struck.  At [76] he  noted  that  "in
    normal circumstances" those who remain  here  without  leave  would  be
    expected to remain, indicating that there may be some cases in which an
    other than normal approach was required or justified.   It was in  that
    context that he addressed the appellant's arrival here as a  child,  in
    circumstances when he was not responsible for his  immigration  status:
    [78].  The judge's  operative  reasoning  rightly  did  not  completely
    disregard the appellant's status  as  an  overstayer,  approaching  the
    significance of that fact alongside his  findings  that  the  appellant
    still had family and ties in  Bangladesh,  as  well  as  the  potential
    support of Mr Ali and Mr Islam who had links to Bangladesh.  Those were
    rational considerations.  See [80].   And  then  finally,  the  judge's
    overall proportionality  analysis  was  anchored  to  "the  appellant's
    specific circumstances", concluding that it would be  proportionate  to
    remove  the  appellant.   In  the  final   analysis,   there   was   no
    impermissible - or any - rigidity in the judge's assessment.   This  is
    not a case, for example in contrast to the factual matrix in  Rhuppiah,
    where the judge felt bound by section 117B to dismiss an appeal that he
    may otherwise have been minded to allow.  Rather, this was  a  decision
    which considered all relevant factors, demonstrated flexibility in  its
    approach to the unique situation of the of the appellant, and reached a
    decision which was rationally open to the judge  on  the  facts  as  he
    legitimately found them to be.

Conclusion

32. The decision of Judge Cameron did not involve the making of an error of
    law.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Cameron did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of
law.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                         Date 10 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


