
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11903/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th February 2018                     |On 28th February 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             md ali akber kader
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan of Counsel, instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Page promulgated on 9 November 2017, in which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his application for indefinite leave  to
    remain dated 24 April 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 13 April  1971,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom in 2005 with entry clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 general student valid to 31 May 2009.  Applications for  further
    leave to remain made on 18 May 2009 and 24 June 2009 were  rejected  as
    invalid.  Further to  an  application  made  on  14  August  2009,  the
    Appellant was granted further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  general
    student to 1 December 2012.  An application made on 1 December 2012 for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was rejected as invalid  on
    14 May 2013 (albeit the Appellant disputes that he ever received notice
    of this).  Most recently, the Appellant applied on 6 November 2015  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence.

 3. The Respondent refused the latest application on 24  April  2016  on  a
    number of grounds.  First, the application was refused under  paragraph
    322(10) of the Immigration Rules for failure to attend an interview  on
    15 April 2016.  Secondly, the application was refused on the basis that
    the Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules as he had not had  at  least  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  did  not  have
    leave to remain between 19 June 2009 and 2  October  2009  (incorrectly
    stated as 2012 in the decision letter), nor from 14 May 2013.  Thirdly,
    the application was refused on the basis that  the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276B(iv) of the Immigration Rules as
    he had not provided a satisfactory English  language  test  certificate
    from an approved provider listed  in  Appendix  O  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. Judge Page dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 9 November
    2017 on human rights grounds.  In doing so, he  first  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's claim that he had remained in the United  Kingdom  lawfully
    until the date of refusal, his leave to remain having been extended  by
    virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  by  his  application
    made on 1 December 2012, of which he never received  any  response  and
    therefore sought to vary his application on 6 November 2015 to one  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residency.  Judge  Page
    found, on the balance of probabilities, that the  Respondent  sent  the
    letter dated 14 May 2013 rejecting his application made on  1  December
    2012 as invalid; that the  Appellant  knew  his  application  had  been
    rejected and that the Respondent had also sent the request to attend an
    interview which the Appellant had also denied ever receiving.   In  any
    event, it was recorded that the Appellant's solicitor accepted that the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of indefinite leave to remain because  he
    had not provided an ESOL certificate from a recognised  test  provider.
    The Appellant's claim in these circumstances was  that  the  Respondent
    should have exercised her discretion differently.

 5. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    Judge Page noted that the Appellant had not submitted any  evidence  to
    show that Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules was engaged.   The
    Appellant had not established any family life in  the  United  Kingdom,
    although it was accepted that he had friends here.  Overall, Judge Page
    found that Article 8 was not engaged and there was no arguable  Article
    8 case to consider.



The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to make a material finding on a significant point of law (as to whether
    the Respondent had proved that the  notice  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    application made on 1 December 2012 had been communicated to him) which
    was material to the outcome of the appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on 13 December 2017 on
    all grounds.

 8. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the error  was
    contained in paragraphs 18 and 19 of Judge Page's decision which relied
    upon an assumption that there was no reason why  the  Respondent  would
    not have served the notice on 14 May 2013 and that could not  have  led
    to  a  finding  that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential
    requirements of service.  The Appellant relies  on  the  provisions  in
    Appendix SN of the Immigration Rules, although accepted that these were
    not in force on 14 May 2013 so are not  directly  applicable.   Counsel
    for the Appellant  was  unable  to  specify  what,  if  any,  rules  or
    requirements as to service of a notice of  invalidity  applied  to  the
    Appellant's case on 14 May 2013.  In the alternative, Counsel relied on
    the decision of Neil Garnham QC in Javed [2014] EWHC  4426  (Admin)  to
    the requirements of service under section 4(1) of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 as guidance of general principles of whether something  is  "sent"
    and "given" by the Respondent.  Further, reliance  was  placed  on  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Syed (Curtailment of  Leave)  [2013]  UKUT
    00144 that a decision had to be "communicated" to a person.

 9. When asked how any error in the findings as to service was material  to
    the outcome of a human rights appeal  in  circumstances  where  it  was
    found that there was no arguable case  to  consider  under  Article  8,
    Counsel made  no  substantive  submissions  and  instead  stated  that,
    despite the concession before the First-tier Tribunal, the  Appellant's
    instructions were that he had submitted a valid English  language  test
    certificate and even if he did not,  then  evidential  flexibility  may
    have applied as the Appellant has  since  passed  an  English  language
    test.

10. The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that there  were  technical
    requirements as to service  of  a  decision  but  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal engaged with the evidence before it and made a  finding  which
    was open to Judge Page on the evidence  that  was  available.   Further
    documents from GCID together with a copy of the  letter  dated  14  May
    2013 were available but it was accepted that these were not before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and were therefore only relevant if an error of law
    was found - there was no application to rely on these documents at  the
    hearing before me.

11. In any event, it was submitted that even if an error of law  was  found
    in relation to service, it was not material in circumstances where  the
    Appellant conceded before the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  set  out  in  paragraph
    276B and had provided no evidence of family life  and  very  little  on
    private life such that there was no arguable  Article  8  claim.   This
    conclusion was unarguably unaffected even if there was an error in  the
    findings in relation to service of the decision dated 14 May 2013.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find that any error, if made,  by  Judge  Page  in  his  findings  in
    relation to  whether  the  Respondent  served  the  notice  of  invalid
    application dated 14 May 2013 is wholly immaterial to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal for one or both of the following reasons.

 2. First, the Appellant's claim that he had  continuing  leave  to  remain
    pursuant to section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 from the date of his
    application on 1 December 2012 (whilst he still  had  extant  leave  to
    remain) until a decision rejecting or refusing that application (either
    as it was or as varied by  his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 6 November 2015)  was  communicated  to  him  is  made  on  a
    mistaken premise.  For the reasons given by the Supreme Court in  Mirza
    v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  63,  an
    application which was invalid from the outset (for  failure  to  comply
    with the requirements of paragraph 34A of the  Immigration  Rules,  for
    example because of failure to pay a fee, use the correct form or as  in
    the  present  case,  failure  to  complete  a  mandatory  part  of  the
    application form) is insufficient for the purposes of  extending  leave
    to remain pending determination of  such  an  application  pursuant  to
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  There is nothing in this  case
    to suggest that the Appellant's application made on 1 December 2012 was
    anything other than invalid from the outset for failure to complete all
    of the mandatory sections of the application form (despite being  given
    the opportunity to rectify the omission).  As such, whether or not  the
    notice of invalidity was communicated to the Appellant is irrelevant as
    either way his leave to remain ended on 1 December 2012 and at the time
    of his latest application, he had no leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This is the same factual scenario  as  found  by  Judge  Page
    albeit  for  different  reasons  relating  to  the  notice  of  invalid
    application on 14 May 2013.

 3. I am however aware that neither party dealt  with  this  point  at  the
    hearing before me and that in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the
    Respondent refers to the Appellant having no leave to  remain  from  14
    May 2013 rather than the earlier date.  For the second reason  set  out
    below, the appeal inevitably fails  on  human  rights  grounds  in  any
    event, but for completeness, I deal with the communication point in the
    alternative if Respondent had somehow treated the Applicant  as  having
    leave to remain until 14 May 2013.

 4. At the hearing, neither party could identify the relevant  requirements
    for communication of the notice of invalidity in this appeal.   In  the
    grounds of appeal,  the  Appellant  relied  upon  Appendix  SN  of  the
    Immigration Rules but that significantly post-dates the  relevant  date
    of 14 May 2013 and is not applicable.  As a notice of invalidity,  this
    is not a communication which falls under either  section  4(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, nor under the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations
    2003.

 5. At the relevant time, 14 May 2013,  the  only  provision  dealing  with
    notice of invalidity of an application was contained in  paragraph  34C
    of the Immigration Rules which provided (at that date) as follows:

         "Where an application or claim in connection with  immigration  for
         which an application form is specified does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements in paragraph 34A, such application will be invalid and
         will not be considered.

         Notice of invalidity will be given in  writing  and  deemed  to  be
         received on the date it is given, except where it is sent by  post,
         in which case it will be deemed to be received on  the  second  day
         after it was posted excluding any day which is not a business day."

 6. In this instance, there is provision for deemed postal  receipt,  which
    is contrary to the factual situation in Syed and Javed in  which  there
    was no provision for service by post for  notices  to  be  given  under
    section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The decisions in those cases
    turned upon statutory construction of the word "given" in section  4(1)
    and it is important to note that where section 4(1) applies,  decisions
    only take effect when notice  of  the  decision  is  "given".   In  the
    present case, there is a different type of communication - notice  that
    a decision is  invalid  (as  opposed  to  an  immigration  decision,  a
    curtailment of leave and so on) and will not be considered, although it
    is likely that the fundamental principle in R (Anufrijeva) v  Secretary
    of State in the Home Department [2003] UKHL 36  would  still  apply  to
    require as a matter of fairness  that  a  decision  takes  effect  upon
    communication.

 7.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there   was   no
    representative on behalf of the Respondent  and  the  only  information
    before Judge Page as to the 14 May 2013 notice was the reference in the
    decision letter to the application being refused.  In  addition,  there
    was evidence from the Appellant about his address, other  communication
    received from the Respondent, and about the Appellant's  situation  and
    whether he chased up a decision on his application made on  1  December
    2012.  For cogent reasons set out  in  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    decision, Judge Page found the Appellant not  to  be  credible  in  his
    claim never to have received the notice dated 14  May  2013.   Although
    there was a lack of specific evidence from the Respondent as to if  and
    when that notice was posted and  some  assumption  that  there  was  no
    reason why the notice dated 14 May 2013 had not been sent and  received
    when other documents were, I find that the adverse credibility findings
    were sufficient for the finding made.  In these circumstances,  I  find
    that  Judge  Page  made  sustainable  findings,  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities, on the evidence before him.

 8. Secondly, in any event, the only possible difference that the issue  of
    whether the Appellant had leave to remain beyond 1 December 2012 or  14
    May 2013 would be as to the weight to be attached to  any  private  and
    family life established during that period pursuant to section 117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for  the  purposes  of
    undertaking the balancing exercise under Article 8 to determine whether
    the decision was a disproportionate  interference  with  the  right  to
    respect for private and family life.  In the present case,  that  stage
    was not reached because of the unchallenged finding that Article 8  was
    not engaged on the facts.  Whether or not a  person  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully for all of his time here, or most of it  (which
    are the alternative situations in this appeal depending on the  outcome
    of the 1 December 2012 application) can not affect the issue of whether
    he had established sufficient private life to engage Article 8 at  all.
    At most, it goes to the weight to be attached to various factors in the
    balancing exercise.

 9. At its highest, the Appellant's Article 8 claim before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that he had built a strong  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom with some of his British friends and their families.  There was
    no detail as to that private life at all and  nothing  to  support  the
    claimed quality or strength of it.  There was also no  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as to why the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to
    continue and/or re-establish his private life  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  In these circumstances, it is unarguable that  Article  8  is
    not engaged at all and the appeal  would  inevitably  be  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds as a result.  Whether or not the Appellant  had  a
    greater or lesser period of  lawful  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom is irrelevant and could not possibly have made  any  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         25th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

