



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11299/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 17 October 2018                     |On 9th November 2018              |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                               MS GRACE OWUSU
                      (Anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipi, Counsel for Templeton Legal Services,
Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 13 July 1961.  She appealed
    the respondent's decision of 13 April 2016 refusing her entry clearance
    to the United Kingdom on the grounds of at  least  20  years  residence
    here.  Her appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Lawrence  on  16  February  2018  and  was  dismissed  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 7 March 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the Upper Tribunal Allen.   The  permission  states
    that the appellant claimed to be entitled to succeed under Article 8 on
    the basis of her lengthy residence under  paragraph  276ADE.   Although
    the respondent has not accepted that that has been made out,  this  was
    still a matter before the Judge and he has made no  reference  to  that
    aspect of the claim  in  his  decision,  other  than  noting  that  the
    previous long residence application had been refused.  It  is  arguable
    that there is a material error of law as the Judge did not address this
    issue.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

 4. Counsel for the appellant submitted that there is an error  of  law  as
    the Judge did not address the 20 years long residence in his  decision.
    He submitted that what I require to decide is whether it is a  material
    error.  Counsel submitted that it is a material error.

 5. He submitted that the appellant's evidence, both oral and  in  her  two
    written statements, and in the statements of the two  witnesses  it  is
    stated that the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom started  in
    1992.

 6. He submitted that there is no documentary evidence of  the  appellant's
    stay in the United Kingdom from 1992 until 2002. He submitted that this
    is because during that period she moved about a lot and did not realise
    she should keep documents to prove this.  I was referred  to  paragraph
    23 of her second statement in which she states that she has never  left
    the United Kingdom since arriving in 1992  as  she  has  no  place  and
    nobody to return to in Ghana.  He submitted that there is evidence from
    2002 onwards but the Judge makes  no  mention  of  this  and  makes  no
    mention of the 20-year rule.  He submitted that had the Judge  accepted
    the appellant's evidence the appellant would have  been  successful  in
    her appeal, but the Judge does not say he  has  considered  it  or  has
    accepted or rejected it.  He submitted that the Judge has focussed only
    on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules and  this  was  not  the  issue
    before him.

 7. He submitted that it must be material whether the  Judge  accepts  that
    the appellant has been here for 20 years. If she has  she  can  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has not  mentioned  the
    appellant's residence of 20 years in the United Kingdom in the decision
    and this must be an error of law.

 9. He submitted that there is a preliminary point  here.  On  the  day  of
    hearing the appellant had  a  different  representative  and  the  Home
    Office had a different representative.   He  submitted  that  there  is
    nothing on file about what grounds were  submitted  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge and it is not clear how this claim was argued before the
    First-Tier Tribunal.

10. I was referred to the refusal  letter.   This  states  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant has been here  for  20
    years.  He submitted that  the  appellant  accepts  that  there  is  no
    evidence from 1992 until 2002 apart from her oral evidence but there is
    the evidence of two witnesses  who  state  that  they  have  known  the
    appellant from being in the United Kingdom since  1992.   He  submitted
    that as that is the only evidence of her being in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 1992 and  2002  it  is  unlikely  that  the  claim  would  have
    succeeded.
11. I was asked to find that this error of law is not material.

12. Counsel for the appellant submitted that  the  respondent  states  that
    there is  insufficient  evidence.  The  matter  was  heard  before  the
    Tribunal and although this point was argued the Judge did  not  mention
    20 years residence in his decision.  Counsel submitted that if  someone
    comes to the United Kingdom illegally it is unlikely that there will be
    much evidence of them being here apart from oral evidence for the first
    few years.  He submitted that  it  was  up  to  the  Judge  whether  he
    believed the appellant or not and the Judge has  not  said  whether  he
    believed her or not on this issue.

13. He submitted that this must be a material error of law.

Decision and Reasons

14. This is a case where the appellant made a long  residence  application.
    She had previously made long  residence  applications  which  had  been
    rejected. The basis of this application is her long stay in the  United
    Kingdom and the Judge makes no mention of it  throughout  the  decision
    apart from making reference to the previous rejected applications.

15.  The  Judge  makes  his  decision  based  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  has  not  been  considered  anywhere  in  the
    decision. Although there is  not  any  documentary  evidence  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom between 1992 and  2002,  the  Judge
    had the appellant's oral evidence and her statements and  the  evidence
    of two other witnesses who state they have known her  from  1992  until
    2002 from the United Kingdom.

16. The Judge should have considered this and accepted or rejected the  20-
    year application and appeal. There is  evidence  of  her  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom after 2002.

17. I find that this is a material error of  law  and  I  direct  that  the
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its findings
    are to stand other than as a record of what was said on that  occasion.
    It is appropriate in terms of Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the First-Tier  Tribunal
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

18. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are
    not to include Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal N M K Lawrence.

19. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                       Date 1 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray
