
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11593/2017
     HU/11599/2017
     HU/11607/2017
     HU/11610/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                          |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                   mrs jK
                                    mr jS
                                   miss hK
                                  master sS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  E
    Barrowclough which was promulgated on 22 February 2018. The  appellants
    are all India nationals and comprise a mother,  father  and  two  minor
    children.  Because two of the appellants are children and  in  relation
    to one there are mental  health  considerations  I  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

2.   The appellants appeal the Secretary  of  State's  decision  made  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, whereby  their  applications
    were dismissed.

3.   The judge in a lengthy  and  detailed  decision  reviewed  all  of  the
    evidence and gave consideration at paragraph 34 to the children's  best
    interest considerations under section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009. He then proceeded to weight  in  the  balance
    the countervailing statutory public  interest  considerations.  In  due
    course he came to the conclusion that  the  family  as  a  unit  should
    return to India.  The judge accorded considerable weight  to  the  fact
    that, for a substantial period of  time,  the  appellants'  immigration
    status had been precarious.

4.   Permission to appeal that decision was given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer in the following terms.

         "Although the decision is detailed  and  carefully  drafted  it  is
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  attaching
         little weight to the children's  private  lives  having  apparently
         accepted that significant weight should be attached to their length
         of residence in the United Kingdom.  See MA (Pakistan) v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and MT and  ET
         (child's best interests extempore pilot (Nigeria) [2018] UKUT 00088
         (IAC).

    Judge Plimmer directed that all grounds were arguable.

5.   The grounds of appeal are lengthy and detailed, having been settled  by
    Counsel who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   Mr  Sharma,  who
    acts for the appellants are before me, adopted those grounds but with a
    degree of nuance and careful selectivity.

6.    Ground  1  deals  with  the  issue  of  section  55   best   interests
    considerations.  Mr Sharma properly concedes that  these  matters  were
    the subject of consideration and assessment by the judge and  does  not
    press me to consider ground 1 on  a  stand-alone  basis.   He  submits,
    however, that these considerations feed into some of the other  grounds
    of appeal. Ground 2 deals  with  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    children's private lives and the significant  passage  of  time  passed
    since an earlier  decision.  Again  these  matters  not  of  sufficient
    significance, without more, to be dispositive if this appeal.

7.   Mr Sharma placed particular reliance on the manner in which  the  judge
    dealt with the expert evidence such as it related to the attempt by the
    daughter to end her life. He drew to my attention a dissonance  between
    the judge's recital of the evidence and what was to  be  found  in  the
    expert medical evidence. Because those  matters  are  not  recorded  in
    decision I shall set them out in full.

8.   In a letter dated 4 January 2016 the following is recorded:

         "[H] reported that she continues to  experience  suicidal  thoughts
         but wants to get better.  Currently H is saying that if  she  finds
         out that she needs to go back to  India  she  prefers  to  end  her
         life."

9.   The next in time is a letter of  24  June  2016  which  states  that  H
    reported that her mood had deteriorated and she  was  experiencing  low
    mood daily with thoughts of self-harm and suicide. It continues:

         "H worries about her family a lot. In particular she worries  about
         her family being attacked.  She  relates  this  to  incidents  that
         happened in India (intrafamily conflict on  paternal  side  of  the
         family) [...] H said that she has started to worry about this a lot
         within  the  last  year  since  she  found  out  about  changes  in
         immigration status of the family."

10.  Finally in a letter of  26  October  2016,  it  is  again  recorded  by
    another practitioner that the immigration status of the family continue
    to have a significant impact on the daughter's mental health as well as
    that of the family as a whole.

11.  The judge fully addresses the issue of the daughter'  suicide  attempt.
    It is to be found at paragraph 49 of the decision.

             "As noted [the daughter's] self-harm/suicide attempt was on 20
             September 2015, that was approximately eighteen  months  after
             the  appellants'  first  appeals   had   been   dismissed   by
             Immigration Judge Greasley  and  looking  at  the  immigration
             history  shortly  after  the  appellants'  submission  of   an
             application for judicial review  following  the  rejection  of
             their further submissions in June that year that before the JR
             application was refused in January 2016.  [The daugher's] oral
             evidence was that she drank the  cleaning  fluid  because  she
             then saw some sort of decision letter  that  she  thought  was
             critical for her future and that her high hopes were dashed by
             what she read.  While she was not questioned about  that  part
             of her evidence I have great difficulty  in  accepting  it  if
             what is being suggested is that the letter [the daughter] then
             saw for the first time that an official communication  to  the
             effect that she would have to go back to India.  I do not  see
             how  what  she  then  read  can  have  been  the  March   2014
             determination and reasons the effect of which at  least  would
             have been well-known to her by then and from the chronology no
             other letter really fits. Additionally [the daughter's]  later
             account and her evidence of why she then  drank  the  cleaning
             fluid contradicts and is undermined by what she  was  recorded
             as saying  at  the  time  namely  that  she  drank  the  fluid
             impulsively because of an argument between her parents  (which
             her mother confirms). I cannot rule out the  possibility  that
             [the daughter's] later account may  have  been  fabricated  to
             bolster the appellants' appeals."

12.  For completeness, paragraph 50 reads as follows:

         "I have borne in mind [the daughter's] attempt at suicide was as  I
         find taken on the spur of the moment and whilst in the presence  of
         her parents and was  triggered  by  their  apparently  furious  and
         prolonged argument.  Whilst I certainly accept that as recorded  in
         the various  reports  since  she  has  suffered  repeated  suicidal
         thoughts from time to time and  has  indeed  said  that  she  would
         rather die than go back to India, thankfully  there  have  been  no
         further attempts since September 2015  and  as  such  that  was  an
         isolated event."

13.  In reviewing the evidence, the judge did not refer to  the  content  of
    the medical evidence which I have rehearse. The judge apparently formed
    an adverse view of the daughter, even to the extent of  suggesting  her
    evidence may have been fabricated notwithstanding that this was not put
    to her in cross-examination during the hearing. Further, no reasons are
    given for apparently rejecting the expert medical evidence.

14.  Were this matter taken in isolation,  it  might  be  possible  to  find
    support elsewhere in the decision, sufficient to satisfy me that it was
    otherwise robust. However, I cannot find  such  support.  The  delicate
    balancing exercise between a qualifying  child's  best  interest  under
    section 55 and the countervailing public policy considerations has  not
    been conducted with the thoroughness to be expected.  It  would  appear
    that the judge gave undue weight to the precarious  immigration  status
    of the children.  It is well-established that the  immigration  history
    of parents should not as a general rule act to the prejudice  of  their
    children.

15.  I am satisfied that this decision cannot survive the  anxious  scrutiny
    test.  The judge's assessment of the evidence overall is flawed and  it
    would not be appropriate for any findings  of  fact  to  be  preserved.
    Notwithstanding that this is already  a  stale  case  and  one  with  a
    lengthy procedural history, the only proper course is to  remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal so that the matter can be heard afresh.  Whilst
    the same conclusion may be reached, justice demands that  any  decision
    is expressed with a  clarity  which  was  singularly  lacking  in  this
    instance.

Notice of Decision


      1) This appeal allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
         set aside;


      2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to
         be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge R E Barrowclough.


      3) No findings of fact are preserved.


      4) An anonymity direction is made as follows.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Mark Hill                      Date         19 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
