
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/11319/2016

                                             HU/11327/2016

                                             HU/11328/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 24 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JBO
                                     SAO
                                     EAO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The respondents, (hereinafter the  claimants)  are  citizens  of  Ghana
    born in July 1999, June 2002 and May 1998 respectively.   They  applied
    for entry clearance to the UK as the children of a  person  settled  in
    the UK, their mother, HD.  On 6 April 2016 the appellant (hereafter the
    Entry Clearance Officer or ECO)  refused  their  applications  and  the
    claimants appealed.  On 5 March  2016  Judge  Birk  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed their appeals on human rights grounds.

2.   The ECO's grounds contend firstly that the judge failed  completely  to
    deal with the issue in question, namely an application under  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules as the three children of a sponsor present
    and settled in the  UK;  and  secondly  that  the  judge  made  several
    mistakes of fact giving rise to real doubt that the judge had the right
    claimants in mind.

3.   I heard brief submissions from the parties.

4.   I consider the grounds are fully made out.  It is true that  the  judge
    correctly identified in several paragraphs that the  appeals  concerned
    were against a refusal of entry clearance (see paragraphs 4, 6 and 11),
    but when it comes to the judge's findings as set out at  paragraphs  11
    onwards, there is no consideration whatever of paragraph 297.  There is
    a clear finding based on the  DNA  evidence,  that  the  claimants  are
    related as claimed and that there is family life between them  and  the
    sponsor: see paragraphs 16 - 18.  But once one gets  to  paragraph  17,
    the judge has moved away from  considering  the  claimants  and  refers
    thereafter to "the Appellant" in terms that can only denote the sponsor
    and proceeds on the erroneous basis that the claimants are  in  the  UK
    and that the issue to be decided is whether the  sponsor  could  remain
    with them in the UK.  At paragraphs 19 - 21 the judge stated:

         "19.  In   balancing   the   various   factors   when   considering
             proportionality, I consider the factors in respect  of  public
             interest under paragraph 117A and 117B I find that these weigh
             heavily in her favour in that she speaks English  and  she  is
             not dependent upon  the  state.   The  Appellant  entered  and
             remained in the UK lawfully and  so  she  did  not  build  her
             private life on a precarious basis.  I rely  on  the  findings
             that I have already made above in respect of her  family  life
             which I find are substantial and compelling in her favour when
             considering their  weight.   I  find  that  it  is  also  very
             compelling that she meets Paragraph  301  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  I find that it would be very harsh and that she  would
             face serious obstacles in  her  trying  to  re-integrate  into
             Nigerian society because all her family are  in  the  UK,  she
             would struggle to find employment and education even with  the
             financial support from her family in the UK.


         20.  I also consider the impact of her removal  from  her  siblings
             and although they are too  young  to  formally  express  their
             opinions, it is clear from  her  evidence  that  she  is  very
             closely attached to them and is part of their family group.  I
             find however, that there is a high likelihood that they  would
             be adversely impacted upon them, especially  the  eldest  two,
             but that this would over the long-term diminish with the  care
             and attention of their  parents.   The  children  are  British
             nationals who would remain residing in the UK.


         21.   My  assessment  on  proportionality   is   that   it   weighs
             overwhelmingly in favour of the Appellant to remain in the  UK
             in order to maintain her family and private life and  that  it
             would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  her  from   the   UK.
             Therefore, I allow this appeal."

5.   As can be seen from paragraph 19, there is the further mistake of  fact
    in the form of the judge's reference  to  the  sponsor's  reintegration
    into Nigerian society.

6.   I am left in no  doubt  that  either  the  judge  simply  confused  the
    claimants' case with another or wholly misunderstood or forgot that the
    appeal concerned an application for entry clearance and not  an  appeal
    against refusal of leave to the sponsor (who  is  a  British  citizen).
    Either way the decision is  manifestly  erroneous  in  law  and  cannot
    stand.

7.   I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Birk).

8.   The ECO makes no  challenge  to  the  judge's  finding  (based  on  DNA
    evidence) that the claimants are related as claimed or to  the  judge's
    findings that they have a family life relationship  with  the  sponsor.
    However, neither of these findings are sufficient to establish  whether
    the ECO's refusal was a proportionate interference or (as an element of
    that) whether they met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  under
    paragraph 297.  Both  the  issue  of  whether  the  claimants  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  297  and  whether  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was proportionate will be live before the next FtT judge.

9.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (note  before  Judge  Birk),  the  only
    facts to be preserved being that the claimants are related  as  claimed
    and that there is a family life relationship  between  them  and  their
    mother.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 19 April 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
