
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11847/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2020                   |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               mr kenneth [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F. Allen, Counsel instructed by Paul, John & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the  respondent  dated  3  July
    2019 to refuse the appellant's human rights  claim  and  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order made against him  on  22  April  2009.   The
    appellant's appeal against the 3  July  2019  decision  was  originally
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain, in a decision and reasons
    promulgated on 21 January 2020.  At a remote hearing on 16 July 2020, I
    held that the decision of Judge Hussain involved the making of an error
    of law, and set it aside in its entirety,  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.  I  directed  that  the  matter  be  reheard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and it was against  that  background  that  I  conducted  the
    resumed hearing, on a face-to-face basis.

 2. My error of law decision is in the Annex.

Factual background

 3. The appellant, Kenneth [S], is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14  January
    1964. I set out the procedural background to the proceedings at [2]  of
    my error of law decision in these terms:

         "Mr [S] has a history of entering the United  Kingdom  using  false
         documents.  He claims to have done so for the first time  in  2000.
         He did so again in January 2007 and was detained  and  removed  the
         next day.  That process was repeated in early  February  2007.   He
         returned.  It is not  clear  when.   On  28  August  2008,  he  was
         convicted of two counts of the possession of  false  or  improperly
         obtained ID documentation and sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment.
          That conviction triggered the automatic deportation provisions  in
         the UK  Borders  Act  2007  ["the  2007  Act"]  which  led  to  the
         deportation order under consideration in  these  proceedings  being
         made.  The appellant claimed asylum; his claim was refused, and  an
         appeal against that refusal was  dismissed.  The  appellant  became
         appeal rights exhausted on 10 July 2009.  He did not leave."

 4. On 30 January 2019, the appellant made further submissions  in  support
    of a human rights claim to remain in the country, based on his  private
    and family life. The Secretary of State treated that application as  an
    application to revoke the deportation order made against him,  refusing
    the application, and refusing to revoke the deportation order on 3 July
    2019. It is that decision which the appellant now challenges  in  these
    proceedings.

 5. It is common ground that the automatic deportation provisions contained
    in the 2007 Act are engaged by the  appellant's  2008  convictions  and
    concurrent sentences of 15 months' imprisonment for document fraud. The
    issue  in  these  proceedings  is  whether  Exemption  1  to  automatic
    deportation, contained in section 33(2) of the 2007 Act, is engaged  on
    the basis of the appellant's rights under the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights ("the ECHR"),  in  particular  Article  8,  the  right  to
    private and family life.

 6. The appellant relies on the family life he has with his partner Gladys,
    and their four adult children, whose ages range from 19 to 26. His case
    is that they live together as a family unit,  and  have  strong  bonds,
    such that it would be  unduly  harsh  on  both  Gladys  and  the  adult
    children for him to be removed. None of the family would be willing  or
    able to relocate to  Nigeria,  and  the  appellant  himself  is  deeply
    concerned about the prospect of doing  so,  on  account  of  what  they
    describe as the  "security  situation"  there.  In  this  respect,  the
    appellant relies on the narrative he  advanced  in  his  failed  asylum
    claim, which was based on the risk to him from militants with  whom  he
    refused to cooperate to engage  in  kidnapping  and  extortion  in  the
    Nigerian oil fields.  He remains at risk from the  same  militants,  he
    claims.  He also contends that he has lost all  ties  to  Nigeria,  and
    that he would face significant obstacles  to  his  integration.  He  no
    longer has significant use in his right arm, due to having been stabbed
    in the shoulder, which would make obtaining work harder. He is 55 years
    old and will struggle to  find  work  in  any  event.  He  has  led  an
    unblemished life since his imprisonment in 2008 and presents no risk of
    reoffending.  He is reformed. His children would  be  deprived  of  the
    father figure they currently enjoy.

 7. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Lindsay submits  that  the  appellant's
    deportation is in the public interest, and none of the matters outlined
    above amount to the required "very compelling circumstances"  necessary
    to defeat the public interest in the deportation of the appellant as  a
    foreign criminal.

Legal framework

 8. Section 32 of the 2007 Act defines those, such as this  appellant,  who
    have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12  months
    as a "foreign criminal". Pursuant to subsection (5), the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation  order  in  respect  of  such  a  foreign
    criminal. There are a number of exceptions contained in section 33,  of
    which the  only  relevant  exception  is  "Exception  1",  namely  that
    "removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance of the deportation  order
    would breach - (a) a person's [ECHR] rights..." (see section 33(2)(a)).

 9. The essential issue for my  consideration  is,  therefore,  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellant to be deported to Nigeria.  This issue  is
    to  be  addressed  primarily  through  the  lens  of  public   interest
    considerations contained in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, in particular section 117C (additional  considerations
    in cases  involving  foreign  criminals):  see  section  117A(2).   The
    Immigration Rules also set out the Secretary of  State's  views  as  to
    where the public interest balance lies in relation to matters  relating
    to Article 8.

10. While, as is  her  practice,  the  Secretary  of  State  addressed  the
    appellant's human rights application as  an  application  to  revoke  a
    deportation pursuant to paragraphs 390 to 392 of the Immigration Rules,
    it was common ground at the hearing that my assessment must be pursuant
    to the considerations in Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.   When  deciding
    whether to revoke a deportation  order,  paragraph  390A  requires  the
    factors contained in paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to be  considered.   Those  paragraphs  replicate  the  statutory
    framework contained in section 117C of the 2002 Act which, pursuant  to
    CI (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 2027 at [21]  meant  that  it  is,  "generally  unnecessary  for  a
    tribunal or court in a case in which a decision to  deport  a  "foreign
    criminal" is challenged on article 8 grounds to refer to paragraphs 398-
    399A of the Immigration Rules, as they have no additional part to  play
    in the analysis."

11. The parties therefore agreed that  paragraph  390A's  requirement  that
    there be "exceptional circumstances" to outweigh the public interest in
    maintaining a deportation order where paragraphs 399  or  399A  do  not
    apply corresponds to the requirement in section 117C(6) for there to be
    "very compelling circumstances."

12. It is for the appellant  to  establish  his  case  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities standard. It is for the Secretary of State to demonstrate
    that any interference with the Article 8 rights of the appellant or his
    family would be justified.

The hearing

13. At the hearing, which was conducted  on  a  face  to  face  basis,  the
    appellant gave evidence, and was followed by his  partner  Gladys,  and
    their children Udeme (19), Esther (22), and Blessing (25).  All adopted
    their witness statements and  were  cross  examined.   The  appellant's
    eldest daughter, Hope, was unable to attend due to confusion  with  the
    hearing date (I make no criticism of her for  this).   She  provided  a
    statement.  I will outline the salient aspects of their evidence to the
    extent necessary to reach and give reasons for my findings.

14. Shortly after I rose having  conducted  the  hearing  and  reserved  my
    judgment, I was informed by the clerk that the  appellant,  Gladys  and
    Udeme had mistakenly given incorrect  addresses  at  the  beginning  of
    their evidence.   I  recalled  the  parties  into  court,  and  it  was
    confirmed by Ms  Allen  that  the  appellant  and  all  witnesses  live
    together at an address in London.  Mr Lindsay accepted  that  they  all
    live together at the revised address provided, and it was not necessary
    to hear any further oral evidence on the point.

Documentary evidence

15. The appellant relied on the bundles he  prepared  for  the  proceedings
    before Judge Hussain.  The respondent relied on her bundle from  below.
    Ms Allen prepared a helpful skeleton argument, which I have considered.

Discussion

16. I reached the following findings have considered all  evidence  in  the
    case, in the round.

17. Section 117C(1) of the  2002  Act  provides  that  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is in the public interest.  The  appellant  satisfies
    the definition of foreign criminal as he is not a British citizen,  and
    has been convicted of an offence which led to a period of  imprisonment
    of at least 12 months: see section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act.

18. The appellant's convictions fall into section 117C(3) of the 2002  Act;
    he has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or
    more,  with  the  effect  that,  if  Exception  1  or  2  applies,  his
    deportation will not be in the public interest.  Those exceptions are:

         "(4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,
             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

19. Subsection (6) also applies to foreign criminals sentenced to less than
    four years' imprisonment, it has been held.  The  extent  to  which  an
    individual satisfies the criteria in Exceptions 1 and 2,  even  if  not
    meeting their requirements fully, is  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    "very compelling circumstances..."  See NA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

Exception 1

20. I deal first with exception 1. It was common ground that the  appellant
    is unable to satisfy the letter of this exception; he  has  never  been
    lawfully resident in this country, still less for "most" of his life.

21. As to whether the appellant has  "socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into the United Kingdom", there is evidence of cultural integration  in
    the materials before me. The appellant writes at [38] of his  statement
    dated 24 September 2019 that he is an active  member  of  the  Redeemed
    Christian Church of God, and has been for 10 years. The family are  all
    involved, and Esther and Udeme are in the choir.  He  writes  that  the
    family grew up in the church community. The four  children  all  either
    study or work, and write in glowing terms about the positive  influence
    their father has had in their lives, and continues to do  so,  even  as
    the children have now all reached the age of  majority.  Following  his
    convictions in 2008, the  appellant  has  not  been  convicted  of  any
    further offences. I will consider below the full impact of the  absence
    of convictions since the  appellant's  release  from  prison,  but  for
    present purposes I simply highlight it as a facet  of  the  appellant's
    integration.

22. I accept, therefore, that the  appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated.

23. I do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in  Nigeria.   His  reliance  on  what  he
    describes to be "the security situation" in Nigeria is not supported by
    any evidence. The specific claims that he made concerning the risk that
    was said to be posed  to  him  from  militants  was  found  not  to  be
    reasonably likely to exist by a different constitution  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 23  June  2009.  While  the
    panel on that occasion accepted that the scarring  on  the  appellant's
    shoulder was likely to have been caused by a knife wound, they did  not
    accept that it had been caused as described by the militants. They  did
    not accept the appellant's account  to  be  credible,  and  found  that
    Gladys, who gave evidence to support the appellant  on  that  occasion,
    had embellished her evidence to support the  appellant's  account.  See
    [53] of the decision of Judge Bryant and Mrs RM Bray JP. At  [54],  the
    panel rejected the appellant's account of  having  been  approached  by
    militants in Nigeria, and rejected his contention that he  was  at  any
    form of risk from them. The panel noted that the appellant had returned
    to Nigeria from the United  Kingdom  at  least  twice,  despite  having
    subsequently claimed to be at risk of being persecuted upon his return.
    While I note the appellant's renewed evidence in these  proceedings  is
    that he continues to be at risk on that  basis,  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 June 2009 is the  starting  point
    for my analysis. The appellant has not provided any additional evidence
    subsequent to the earlier decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    provides grounds to revisit the conclusions of  the  tribunal  on  that
    occasion.  He  has  not  provided  any  evidence   concerning   Nigeria
    generally, such that his overall  concerns  surrounding  the  "security
    situation" may properly be said to amount to an obstacle,  or  a  "very
    significant obstacle" to his integration.

24. The appellant is a man of working age, and although he has impaired use
    of his right arm, still has a degree of mobility. He  accepted  in  his
    evidence that he would not be prevented altogether  from  finding  some
    form work due to the difficulties he has with his right arm He would be
    able to find some work, and I find that he would not, on  the  evidence
    provided to me, be destitute. The appellant spent most of his  life  in
    Nigeria before coming to this country, and, pursuant to the findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 23  June  2009,  still  has  access  to  his
    military pension there. The appellant has not sought to challenge those
    findings, or to demonstrate that there have been changes  in  the  time
    that has passed since then. Indeed, in his evidence before the tribunal
    on that occasion, the appellant  explained  that  the  reasons  he  had
    returned to Nigeria following his initial arrival here in 2000  was  in
    order to activate his military pension: see [33]. I find the  appellant
    would have some financial resources available to him  in  Nigeria  such
    that the difficult impact of his enforced return  could  be  mitigated,
    and that he would, in time, be able to establish a private life of  his
    own, and integrate.

25. I  find,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  would  not  encounter  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria.

26. Exception 1 is met only on the basis that the appellant is socially and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  I accept that his  return
    to Nigeria  would  be  difficult,  but  he  would  not  encounter  very
    significant obstacles to his integration.

Exception 2

27.  Turning  to  Exception  2,  I  will  address  first  the   appellant's
    relationship  with  Gladys  and   their   children   individually   and
    collectively.

28. The respondent  accepted  in  the  refusal  letter  at  [15]  and  [19]
    respectively that the  relationships  the  appellant  enjoys  with  the
    children and with Gladys are genuine and  subsisting.   I  accept  that
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR  exists  between  Gladys
    and the appellant, and the children.  They are a  single  family  unit,
    living together.  The support they  provide  to  each  other  is  real,
    committed, and effective.

29. Gladys is not "a  qualifying  partner",  as  she  is  neither  British,
    settled, nor here with refugee status:  see  the  criteria  in  section
    117D(1). Although at [20] of the refusal letter, Gladys is referred  to
    as being "settled", that must be a mistake as Ms Allen confirmed to  me
    at the outset of the hearing that  she  holds  only  limited  leave  to
    remain, and has a renewal application pending.  It appears that she was
    granted leave to remain on the basis of her human rights,  following  a
    successful appeal against a separate refusal decision by the  Secretary
    of State: see [3.bb] of the refusal letter.  I have not  been  provided
    with details concerning her allowed appeal, or  the  basis  upon  which
    renewal application was submitted.  At [21] of Judge Bryant's decision,
    there is a suggestion that the family applied "based on the seven  year
    concession for a child".

30. None of the children is  a  "qualifying  child",  for  they  have  each
    attained the age of majority, albeit, in the case of Udeme,  relatively
    recently (December 2018).

31. Even though neither Gladys nor the children  are  "qualifying",  it  is
    still  necessary  to  address  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh", either for them  to  stay  without
    him, or go with him.

32. Gladys writes at [6] of her statement dated 23 September 2019 that  she
    cannot imagine being separated from the  appellant,  and  that  if  she
    were, her life would be a state of complete disorder  and  frustration,
    and  that  she  would  lose  herself.  It  would,  she  writes,  be   a
    "catastrophe". The appellant provides meaning and purpose to  her,  and
    supports her emotionally, psychologically, mentally and financially  (I
    observe that the source of the appellant's  financial  support  is  not
    clear, as he is not permitted to work).

33. Each of the children write  in  similar  terms  about  the  impact  the
    appellant's deportation would have on them individually, and the family
    collectively. Udeme's evidence is that he remains at a crucial stage in
    his development, and requires the presence of his father  in  order  to
    avoid being drawn into crime and "illegal activities such as fraud, the
    selling of drugs and other illegal activities." In  cross  examination,
    Udeme emphasised the protective nature of his father's  role,  and  the
    corresponding pressure that he would face if,  following  his  father's
    departure, he would be the only  male  in  the  household.  Gladys  had
    provided a similar explanation when  she  was  cross  examined,  saying
    that, simply because the children are adults, it  does  not  mean  that
    they do not look to both parents for advice, and how to live every day,
    in particular concerning gangs and knife  crime.   In  her  handwritten
    statement dated 23 September 2009, Esther writes that a  lot  of  other
    young black men the same age as Udeme are drawn into  crime,  and  fall
    into that lifestyle due to the absence of  a  father  figure  in  their
    lives, including the bitterness, emptiness and pain  of  not  having  a
    father figure.

34. The term "unduly harsh" conveys an elevated threshold.

35. In order to meet the enhanced threshold, it is necessary to demonstrate
    that the deportation of the individual concerned would have  an  impact
    on the qualifying  partner  (or,  as  set  out  below,  the  qualifying
    child(ren), applying the criteria by analogy to the  children  in  this
    case) which meets the elevated threshold of  "unduly  harsh".   See  HA
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1176 at [44] and following for a  recent  discussion  of  the  evolving
    understanding of the meaning of the term.  See also [51] in HA, and the
    discussion at [12] of AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296.

36. In relation to Gladys, I do not consider that the evidence demonstrates
    it would be "unduly harsh" for her to remain in  this  country  without
    the appellant. I accept that his departure would be a very  great  loss
    to the family life they enjoyed together. They have been  together  for
    at least three decades, or the best part of.  I  do  not  underestimate
    the impact that the appellant's departure would have, but there  is  no
    evidence that the enhanced threshold would be met  if  Gladys  were  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.  The reasons  given
    by Gladys for seeking to resist the deportation of the appellant relate
    to the "mere  undesirability"  of  him  being  removed  (to  adopt  the
    terminology of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) at [51]),  rather  than
    providing any substantive basis to conclude that the  enhanced  "unduly
    harsh" threshold is met.

37. Similar considerations apply  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  adult
    children.  The  reasons  they  have  each  provided,  individually  and
    collectively, do not demonstrate that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for
    them to remain in this country without their father. I accept that  his
    departure would be a significant loss, but not a loss of the  magnitude
    necessary to engage the elevated threshold involved in this assessment.



38. I note the candidness with which Udeme  has  spoken  of  the  potential
    impact of his father being removed, a sentiment which is  shared  among
    the siblings, as is  demonstrated  by  Esther's  letter,  and  that  of
    Blessing.   Deportation  can,  sadly,  have  tragic  consequences.  The
    reality is that it drives a wedge through the lives of  many  families,
    and it is often the innocent members of the family  who  are  the  most
    affected. The family fear for Udeme's future life without his father in
    this country, as set out above.  While life without the appellant would
    be difficult for  Udeme  and  his  sisters,  the  harshness  that  will
    necessarily follow will not surpass that which is "due"  following  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.  Without wishing to sound glib, it is
    by no means certain that he would be  destined  for  a  life  of  crime
    without his father.  In August 2019, he was offered a  place  to  study
    Foundation Engineering at a respected English university (see page  25,
    appellant's bundle).  He has the support of a loving family  here;  his
    mother and sisters evidently care deeply for him.  There is  no  reason
    why, in the absence of sufficient resolve,  and  a  commitment  to  the
    academic potential he clearly has, he would be destined for such a life
    of crime.  And, of course, in the event that his father is  removed  to
    Nigeria, they will be able to stay  in  touch  using  modern  means  of
    communication.

39. Hope, Blessing and Esther write of  the  tragedy  that  their  father's
    deportation would be.  Esther writes of the positive influence  he  has
    been in her live, and that of the family.  Hope I accept their evidence
    that it would be very difficult, harsh indeed.   But  the  question  is
    whether the elevated threshold of being unduly harsh would be met.   On
    the evidence before me, there is nothing to support that contention.

40. Each of the witnesses said that it would not be possible  for  them  to
    return to Nigeria with the appellant. I reject the  reasons  they  gave
    for this. Gladys said that it would not be possible for any of them  to
    return due to the safety situation, and the fact that none of them have
    lived in Nigeria for some time.  Judge Bryant dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds, and those findings of fact  demonstrate  that
    the appellant does not have an  objective  fear  of  being  persecuted.
    There are no background materials that have been provided demonstrating
    that the general security  situation  is  so  bad  as  to  prevent  the
    appellant from being accompanied by his family to Nigeria.

41. I accept that Gladys and the children have been granted  limited  leave
    to remain on the basis of their human rights. I have not been  provided
    with the allowed appeal which led to the grant of leave  to  remain  to
    Gladys. Hope and Esther currently  enjoy  extant  grants  of  leave  to
    remain on  human  rights  grounds;  Gladys,  Udeme  and  Blessing  have
    submitted further applications, in time, which are pending  before  the
    Secretary of State.  The fact that Gladys and the  children  have  each
    been granted limited leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  is  a
    factor of some significance. However, the precise bases upon which they
    were granted such leave are not before me.  I accept that it  would  be
    highly disruptive for the children to leave the United Kingdom,  having
    spent most of their lives and education here.  However, addressing  the
    elevated threshold of what is unduly  harsh,  there  is  nothing  about
    their situations which demonstrates  that  the  harshness  which  would
    inevitably follow should they choose to accompany the  father  back  to
    Nigeria would meet that threshold.  The family's  immigration  statuses
    are precarious, in the sense that none is  settled.   While  settlement
    may well be a future option for them, the possibility of  their  return
    to Nigeria is entirely consistent with the precarious quality of  their
    immigration status.

42. Drawing the above analysis together, neither  Gladys  nor  any  of  the
    children would suffer "unduly harsh" consequences if the  appellant  is
    deported. I accept that that  would  be  hardship  if  they  stay  here
    without him, or choose to accompany him there, but that  would  not  be
    hardship that reaches the elevated "unduly harsh" threshold.

Very compelling circumstances

43. In addition to the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  claims  to  meet
    exceptions 1 and 2, he relies additionally on the delay he  claims  has
    infected the Secretary of State's conduct, and  the  fact  he  has  not
    reoffended since the commission of the index offences in 2008.

44. I accept that there is a degree of delay on the part of the respondent.
    I also accept that the appellant  did  not  seek  to  "go  underground"
    following his exhaustion of all available avenues of appeal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  23  June  2009.  He
    remained in touch with the respondent, to an  extent,  and  those  then
    representing him engaged in  extensive  correspondence  concerning  the
    position of the children, who were minors at that stage. The respondent
    initially acted with a degree  of  expedition,  arranging  a  telephone
    interview with the Nigerian High Commission on 6  July  2011,  for  the
    purposes  of  confirming  the  appellant's  Nigerian  nationality.  The
    refusal letter records the appellant  being  invited  to  an  emergency
    travel document telephone interview in December 2014, stating  that  he
    did not attend. The appellant  provides  an  explanation  for  this  at
    paragraph 25 of his witness statement dated 24  September  2009,  which
    states that he was invited to attend Becket House, but that one of  the
    respondent's officials realised that  Hope  and  Blessing  already  had
    leave to remain "and apologised for the mistake".  It is not clear  how
    the position of Hope and  Blessing  was  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    emergency travel document, but seeing as Mr Lindsay  did  not  seek  to
    challenge the above account in cross-examination, for the  purposes  of
    this analysis, I will not hold this issue against the appellant.

45. Thereafter, the refusal letter records a number of applications made by
    the appellant, Gladys and the children in 2015, 2016,  2017  and  2019,
    with no attempts at removal.

46. I accept that there has been delay on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, in the sense that she has not initiated enforced removal.  There
    is a sense in which the respondent tolerated the appellant's  presence.
    However, the legal duty was on  the  appellant  to  leave  the  country
    pursuant to the deportation order. This he  failed  to  do.  While  the
    respondent is responsible for the maintenance  of  immigration  control
    and associated enforcement matters,  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    expect the appellant to comply with the obligation to leave the country
    to which  he  was  subject.   The  delay  in  this  case  is  primarily
    attributable to the actions of the appellant who accepted  under  cross
    examination that he knew that he has never had a right to  be  in  this
    country. He could have been in no doubt about  that  in  light  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in June 2009.

47. I find that it is the appellant who is ultimately responsible  for  the
    length of his residence in this country.   That  the  respondent  could
    have removed him at an earlier stage is a factor of minimal  relevance.
    He was under an obligation at all times to leave yet chose  not  to  do
    so.

48. A further factor which the appellant contends demonstrates  that  there
    are "very compelling  circumstances"  is  the  fact  that  he  has  not
    committed any further  criminal  offences  following  the  sentence  of
    imprisonment imposed in August 2008. He contends that he is a  reformed
    man, and that he is remorseful for his past actions.  There  is  little
    information concerning the  details  of  the  offences  for  which  the
    appellant was sentenced in the Crown Court in August 2008,  however  it
    is clear that it was for the possession of  false  identity  documents.
    Some indication is given by the decision of Judge Bryant at  [36];  the
    appellant said he used a false passport in order to obtain work.   What
    is less clear is whether he did so on a separate occasion, not captured
    by the indictment to which he pled guilty before the  Crown  Court,  or
    whether the offences for which he was imprisoned related  to  the  same
    underlying conduct as he admitted before Judge Bryant. The  distinction
    does not matter. The appellant has used false documentation  to  obtain
    work unlawfully and has been imprisoned for  the  possession  of  false
    identity documentation.

49. It is, in principle, relevant to the  public  interest  in  deportation
    that an appellant has not committed further offences for a considerable
    period, in this case 12 years. However, the nature of  the  appellant's
    underlying offence is relevant. Mr Lindsay submits that the appellant's
    offending  propensity  relates  to  the  use   of   false   immigration
    documentation in order to obtain an immigration advantage to  which  he
    was not otherwise entitled. So much is clear, submits Mr Lindsay,  from
    the appellant's track record of entering the country illegally, and re-
    entering following his previous removals. The appellant's entire period
    of residence in this country  has  been  pursuant  to  entry  that  was
    unlawful, and has been sustained, at least initially,  through  working
    unlawfully, using false documents. The advantage the  appellant  sought
    unlawfully to obtain for himself has enabled him to establish a private
    and family life in this country. Put simply, he has obtained everything
    he reasonably could sought to have achieved through his unlawful  entry
    and use of false documentation.  That he has not need to commit similar
    or other offences since is of minimal relevance, submits Mr Lindsay, as
    the appellant  is  already  enjoying,  the  benefits  of  his  criminal
    conduct. It matters not, therefore, that he has not seen fit to  commit
    further offences, for he has had no need to do so.

50. It is necessary to assess  the  appellant's  post-imprisonment  conduct
    holistically.  He has not committed  further  offences.   There  is  no
    suggestion that he is a danger to the public; his conduct has not  been
    violent or sexual,  and  nor  does  it  relate  to  drugs.   Those  are
    important factors to take into account.  But the extent  to  which  the
    appellant  can  legitimately  claim  to  be  at  no  risk  of   further
    immigration misconduct is limited, for at least two reasons.  First, as
    Mr Lindsay submits, the appellant has already reaped  the  benefits  of
    his unlawful immigration conduct and has had no need to commit  further
    immigration offences.  Secondly, and more significantly, the  appellant
    has demonstrated that he is willing repeatedly  to  commit  immigration
    offences.  He entered unlawfully at least in 2000, twice in early 2007,
    and again in 2008.  Judge Bryant's decision reveals that  there  was  a
    further departure from, and unlawful re-entry to, the country in  2004:
    see [20] and [29].  The appellant has demonstrated that he  is  willing
    to commit further immigration offences; he has had less of a need to do
    so during his current unlawful stay in this country, save for the index
    offences.  I find that the circumstances of the appellant's immigration
    misconduct mean that, despite the relatively lengthy crime-free  period
    following his release from custody, it is  difficult  to  ascribe  much
    significance to the submission that he is unlikely to reoffend.

51. The appellant did not  rely  on  any  health-based  reasons  to  resist
    deportation.

52. In order to draw the above analysis together, I will  adopt  a  balance
    sheet  approach  to  determine  whether  there  are  "very   compelling
    circumstances" over and above the Exceptions.

53. Factors in favour of the appellant's deportation include:

      a. The  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals
         (section 117C(1));

      b. The deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  less  than  four
         years' imprisonment is in the public interest, unless  Exception  1
         or 2 applies (section 117C(3)).  Neither Exception applies.

      c. The appellant does not meet the substance of Exception 1.  While  I
         accept that he is socially and culturally integrated,  he  has  not
         lived here lawfully for more than half his life,  or  at  all,  and
         will not face very significant obstacles to his return to  Nigeria.
         He does not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted and  there
         is no evidence that the "security situation" will present  barriers
         to his integration.

      d. The appellant does not meet the substance of Exception  2.   Gladys
         is not a qualifying partner, and it would not be  unduly  harsh  on
         her to remain here without him, or to return to Nigeria with him.

      e. None of the appellant's children are minor children and so none are
         "qualifying  children".   While  family  life  exists  between  all
         children and the appellant and Gladys, it would not be unduly harsh
         for any of the adult children to remain here without the appellant,
         or to relocate to the  country  of  their  citizenship  with  their
         father.

      f.  There  is  minimal  significance  to   the   appellant's   claimed
         rehabilitation, in view of the nature of his underlying  offending,
         and his past repeated immigration misconduct, for the  reasons  set
         out above.

54.  Factors mitigating against the appellant's deportation include:

      a. The family enjoy  family  life  together,  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 8 ECHR.  There is a deep bond of love and affection between
         the appellant, Gladys and  the  adult  children.   The  appellant's
         deportation, while not unduly harsh, would rupture family  life  as
         the family know it.  Udeme has particular fears of facing life as a
         fatherless young man in South East London.

      b. The children have grown up here and have been granted limited leave
         to remain by the Secretary of State, in recognition of their  links
         here.

      c. The appellant has a subjective, albeit not objective, fear of  harm
         in Nigeria.

      d. There was a delay in the enforcement of the  deportation  order  by
         the Secretary of State, and the appellant's tolerated presence  has
         enabled him to forge a private life, and  develop  a  family  life,
         during that time.

      e. The offence was at the lower end of the spectrum  by  reference  to
         the penalty imposed.

      f. The length of time  for  which  the  appellant  has  not  committed
         further offences, and he has not committed any offences of violence
         or of a sexual nature, and nor were drugs involved.

      g. While the appellant will not encounter very  significant  obstacles
         to his integration in  Nigeria,  relocation  will  nevertheless  be
         problematic for him, at least initially.

      h. The appellant speaks English and, in the  sense  that  he  has  not
         relied on public funding, he is financially independent.

      i. The appellant has remained in contact with the Secretary  of  State
         at various points during the chronology of his  unlawful  residence
         here.

55. Weighing the factors in favour of the appellant's  deportation  against
    those mitigating against it, I find that those in favour of deportation
    outweigh those against.  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the
    public interest.  This appellant does not meet either of the  statutory
    exceptions and cannot claim to  do  so  partially  to  any  significant
    extent, for the reasons set out above.   The limited  extent  to  which
    the appellant even partially meets some elements of the  exceptions  is
    minimal, and does not go a significant way towards  demonstrating  that
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.

56. While the Secretary of State could have acted with  greater  expedition
    by removing the appellant, that does not have the effect  of  absolving
    the appellant from the obligation to which he has always  been  subject
    to leave the country, which he has failed to do.  This is not a case of
    the  Secretary  of  State  delaying  taking  a  decision;   she   acted
    expeditiously in doing  so.   As  the  appellant  accepted  during  his
    evidence, he has always known that he has not been here lawfully.

57. The appellant's offence-free period since being released  from  custody
    must be viewed in the context of the nature of his convictions, and the
    fact that he has repeatedly, albeit some time ago,  committed  offences
    to breach immigration control requirements.  His financial independence
    and English skills are of neutral weight.

58. For the above reasons, informed by the balance sheet exercise above,  I
    find that there are no "very compelling circumstances, over  and  above
    those  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2"  mitigating  against   the
    appellant's deportation, with  the  effect  that  the  public  interest
    requires his deportation.   Accordingly,  the  appellant's  deportation
    would be  proportionate  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  ECHR,  and
    "Exception 1" to the automatic deportation regime in section  33(2)  of
    the 2007 Act is not engaged.

59. This appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss this appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith Date 15 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11847/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2020 via Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Kenneth [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
                    Co. Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because it  was  not  practicable,  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were  primarily  in  the  form  of  the
Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and the decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, and I also had access to the entire case file.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

Neither party indicated any concerns with the fairness of the remote  nature
of the proceedings or raised any other concerns.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  In a decision promulgated
    on 21 January 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain allowed an appeal
    by the respondent, Kenneth [S], a citizen of Jamaica born on 21 January
    2020, against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 3 July 2019 to
    refuse his human rights  representations  taken  in  the  course  of  a
    decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order dated 22 April 2009.

Factual background

 2. Mr [S] has a  history  of  entering  the  United  Kingdom  using  false
    documents.  He claims to have done so for the first time in  2000.   He
    did so again in January 2007 and was detained and removed the next day.
     That process was repeated in early February 2007.  He returned.  It is
    not clear when.  On 28 August 2008, he was convicted of two  counts  of
    the possession of false or improperly  obtained  ID  documentation  and
    sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment.  That  conviction  triggered  the
    automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007  which  led
    to the deportation order under consideration in these proceedings being
    made.  The appellant claimed asylum; his  claim  was  refused,  and  an
    appeal against that refusal was dismissed. The appellant became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 10 July 2009.  He did not leave.

 3. On 6 July 2011, the appellant participated  in  a  telephone  interview
    with the Nigerian High  Commission  regarding  a  travel  document.   A
    further appointment was scheduled for 5 December 2014.   The  appellant
    did not attend.  The appellant applied, unsuccessfully, for recognition
    as an extended family member of his sister  and  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted from that process in December 2016.

 4. On 23 January 2017, the appellant submitted an application for leave to
    remain on the basis of his private  life,  and  family  life  with  his
    partner and her daughter.  That was refused on 3 July 2019.  It was the
    refusal of that application that led  to  the  proceedings  before  the
    judge below.

 5. Throughout the period covered by the appellant's  immigration  history,
    his own partner had engaged with the Secretary of State  to  regularise
    her status.  She, along  with  Udeme,  one  of  the  appellant's  adult
    children, now have limited leave to remain, valid until 21 August 2020

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge heard evidence from the appellant, his partner, and his  four
    adult children.  The judge noted that the respondent  had  treated  the
    appellant's human rights application as an application  to  revoke  his
    deportation order, and that she had considered  the  application  under
    paragraphs 390  and  390A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (revocation  of
    deportation orders), even though the  appellant  had  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom at all relevant times.  The judge noted  that  paragraph
    390A incorporates the criteria contained in  paragraphs  398,  399  and
    399A concerning the  making  of  deportation  orders,  identifying  the
    operative provisions of those  paragraphs  to  which  he  was  to  have
    regard: see [41].  The judge observed that neither  of  the  exceptions
    available in paragraphs 399 or 399A were available  to  the  appellant.
    He does not have a relationship with a child under the age  of  18  and
    nor was he in a relationship with a British citizen, settled person, or
    person with refugee  status  (para  399),  nor  had  he  been  lawfully
    resident for more than half of his life  (para  399A).   As  such,  the
    judge correctly identified that  only  "very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above  those  described  in  paragraphs  399  or  399A"  could
    outweigh the public interest in the appellant's deportation.

 7. The judge noted at [46] that paragraph 391A of the  Immigration  Rules,
    again  concerning  the  revocation  of  deportation  orders,   ascribes
    potential significance to the "passage of time  since  the  person  was
    deported..."  Although this appellant had not been deported, the  judge
    said, "the sentiments expressed in these provision [sic] must blunt the
    otherwise harshness of the 'very compelling circumstance' [sic] test in
    Paragraph 398..."  He added that:

         "Despite signing the  deportation  order  on  22  April  2009,  the
         Secretary of State, inexplicably  has  not  sought  to  remove  the
         appellant pursuant to that. This lapse of time between the  signing
         of the order and lack of practical action at removal must  somewhat
         undermine the imperative of immigration  control  in  removing  him
         from this country."

 8. There was no suggestion, said the judge at [47], "that the  appellant's
    children must uproot themselves from this country in order to  continue
    the family life, the respondent accepts  they  enjoy  between  them..."
    The adult children continue to enjoy family life for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 with the appellant, found the judge: [48].  The appellant was
    a positive influence on his children "and a strong  pivotal  figure  in
    the household" [49].  He had not reoffended since the  2008  conviction
    [50], and "the ultimate question", at [51],  was  whether  family  life
    with  his  wife  [sic]  and  children  "should  be  ruptured".  It  was
    unreasonable to expect the adult children to leave the country and  opt
    for a life in Nigeria "which they left behind when they were  young..."
    As such, found the judge, there were very compelling Circumstances over
    and above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A, and he allowed the
    appeal: [52].

Grounds of appeal

 9. In her grounds of appeal, the Secretary  of  State  contended  that  be
    reasons given by the judge for finding that there were "very compelling
    circumstances" fell short of meeting the "very high threshold"  imposed
    by that test. The judge had  failed  properly  to  apply  the  relevant
    provisions of the immigration rules and section 117 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). The judge  failed  to
    address himself concerning what amounts to "unduly harsh",  and  failed
    to consider the extent to which the appellant was able to  satisfy  the
    substantive requirements of either  of  the  exceptions,  in  order  to
    calibrate what was meant by "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above", pursuant to NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  The  grounds  also  contend  that  the
    judge fell into error in his reliance on paragraph 391A of  the  rules,
    given the appellant had never left the country, and the 10  year  timer
    had not, therefore, begun to run.  Delay does not mitigate  the  public
    interest "in cases where the public interest favouring the  deportation
    of an immigrant is potent and pressing...": see RLP  (BAH  revisited  -
    expeditious justice) Jamaica [2017] UKUT 00330 (IAC).

10. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting  as  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that,  "it  is
    arguable that the judge erred in finding very compelling  circumstances
    over and above those contained in paras 399 and 399A of the Immigration
    Rules when the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  those
    paragraphs."

Submissions

11. Mr Walker relied primarily on the written grounds of appeal  and  Judge
    Martin's grant of permission to appeal.

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Richardson resisted the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the grounds of appeal mischaracterised the judge's decision.
     This was not, he submitted, a decision  where  the  judge  reached  an
    irrational  decision  finding   the   presence   of   very   compelling
    circumstances when the facts  could  not  justify  that  finding.   The
    operative reasoning on the part of the judge was, in fact, the issue of
    the Secretary of State's delay, submitted  Mr  Richardson.   The  judge
    adopted the spirit of paragraph 391A of the rules, reflecting the broad
    approach of the Secretary of State's regime in reaching  his  decision.
    Not only was the judge right to take that into account, he was bound to
    do so, in Mr Richardson's submission.  There was a lack  of  action  by
    Secretary of State in attempting to enforce removal, and the  appellant
    had sought to regularise  his  status  under  the  EEA  regime  in  the
    meantime.   The  overall  passage  of  time  was  a   very   compelling
    circumstance.  As the Court of Appeal noted in Akinyemi v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (No. 2) [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, the  public
    interest in deportation is  flexible,  meaning  that  there  can  be  a
    corresponding reduction in the  public  interest  of  this  appellant's
    deportation given the passage of time.  This was not a case  where  the
    appellant's deportation was  "potent  and  pressing"  in  view  of  the
    seriousness of the offence, as was the case in RLP (Jamaica),  and  the
    judge was entitled to identify the lack of enforcement  activity  as  a
    relevant factor.  It was legitimate  for  the  judge  to  consider  the
    appellant's rehabilitation since  the  2008  offence,  given  that  the
    Supreme Court  in  Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 noted that the risk of re-offending, and  the
    success  of  rehabilitation,  were  factors  relevant  to  the   public
    interest: see Lord Kerr at [64].  Pursuant to EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
    41, delays in enforcement result in (i) further ties  being  developed;
    (ii)  an  expectation  of  being  permitted  to  remain;  and  (iii)  a
    diminished public interest in removal.

13. Towards the end of the hearing,  when  responding  to  Mr  Richardson's
    submissions, Mr Walker stressed that  the  Secretary  of  State's  main
    objection to the decision was  that  it  did  not  disclose  sufficient
    reasons. In response to a question  from  me,  Mr  Walker  appeared  to
    suggest that, with sufficiently expressed reasons, it would be possible
    for a person the appellant's position, with the same factual matrix, to
    succeed  in  their  appeal,  provided  the  reasons  were  sufficiently
    cogently expressed.  I  was  concerned  that  this  appeared  to  be  a
    departure  from  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which  were  essentially  a
    rationality-based challenge. The Secretary of State contended at [4] of
    the grounds of appeal that the reasons given by the judge  for  finding
    that there were "very compelling circumstances" could not, on any view,
    meet  that  threshold.  In  response  to   my   further   request   for
    clarification, Mr Walker stressed that he did not seek to  resile  from
    the grounds of appeal, clarifying what he said  to  mean  that,  if  it
    could be shown by  this  appellant  that  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances, then his appeal should succeed.

Discussion

14. As set out above, the judge below allowed the appeal  on  a  number  of
    bases.  They were (i) the delay in enforcement; (ii) the impact on  the
    appellant's family; and (iii) his rehabilitation.  Delay  was  not  the
    only factor.  But it was a factor.

15. Mr Richardson is correct to point out that the judge was, in principle,
    entitled to take into account delay on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It is right that "delay" can diminish the  public  interest  in
    removal.

16. While not all judges would characterise the chronology in  this  matter
    as delay at the fault of the Secretary of State,  the  judge's  overall
    observations on delay were open to him on the evidence before him.  The
    most recent emergency travel document interview appears to have been in
    December 2014, and the Secretary of State does not appear to have taken
    further enforcement steps since then.  The application which led to the
    impugned decision was submitted in January 2017, and the  decision  was
    not taken until July 2019, a period of  two  and  a  half  years.   The
    Secretary of State had not exactly moved at pace,  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the findings he did (although not  all  judges  would
    have laid the blame at the feet of the Secretary of State in that way).



17. The question then arises as to whether it was  open  to  the  judge  to
    characterise the delay, along with the other  facts,  as  amounting  to
    "very compelling circumstances over and above..."

18. I consider the judge fell into error with his application of  paragraph
    391A, in particular with his  reliance  on  it  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that the Secretary of State's "sentiment" was  to  diminish
    the public interest in deportation in where the deportation  order  was
    made over ten years ago, with the effect that the  "harshness"  of  the
    very compelling circumstances test was "blunted".

19. Paragraph 391A only applies where a person has  been  deported  and  is
    able to point to a period of (at least) ten years  outside  the  United
    Kingdom as a possible change in circumstances.  There is no support  in
    the rules, or in any policy of the Secretary of State, which  indicates
    that the "sentiment" of the Secretary of State towards a person who has
    remained in defiance of a  deportation  order,  even  in  circumstances
    where there was a degree of "delay" on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, is that the public interest in deportation  is  diminished.   So
    much is clear from the wording of paragraph 391A itself:

         "391. In the case of a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of  the
             deportation order when, if an application  for  revocation  is
             received, consideration will be given on a case by case  basis
             to whether the  deportation  order  should  be  maintained..."
             (Emphasis added)

20. Paragraph 391A must be read in the context  of  an  individual  already
    deported.  By definition, the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals (see section 117C(1) of the 2002  Act)  will  already
    have been served to a certain extent in  such  a  case.   The  removal,
    pursuant to a deportation order, of the person concerned will have been
    in the public interest, and their continued absence  from  the  country
    for ten years may mean that the public interest has been served to  the
    extent that their return could be countenanced. That  is  provided  the
    individual  meets  the  requirements  for  entry  clearance;  all  that
    revocation does is pave the way for the person to demonstrate that they
    meet separate requirements  of  the  rules  for  their  subsequent  re-
    admission: see paragraph 392 of the rules.  This appellant's  situation
    could not be more different; far from reflecting the public interest in
    the deportation of foreign criminals, this appellant  has  remained  in
    the United Kingdom in defiance of the  legal  obligation  upon  him  to
    leave.  Even if, as the judge found, there was some delay on  the  part
    of the Secretary of State, the appellant's own obligation to leave  the
    country was undiminished throughout.  Not only was the public  interest
    in his deportation not honoured by the actions of this  appellant,  the
    appellant  undermined  the  requirements  of  immigration  control   by
    remaining here, continuing to build a private  and  family  life,  even
    though he had no right to do so.

21. As such, to the extent that the judge considered paragraph 391A  to  be
    authority for  the  proposition  that  there  is  a  diminished  public
    interest for the enforcement of a deportation order made over ten years
    ago, that was an error of law.

22. I reject Mr Richardson's submission that the delay was the  main  focus
    of the  judge's  reasoning.   A  simple  reading  of  the  decision  is
    sufficient to reject  that  contention.   It  was  a  factor,  but  the
    operative reasoning of the judge, in addition to  the  delay,  was  the
    impact of the appellant's deportation on his family (see [47] to  [49])
    and the reform, or rehabilitation, of the appellant (see  [50]).   That
    led to  the  judge's  global  conclusion  at  [51]  (in  which  I  have
    highlighted the judge's  description  of  the  family  factors  as  the
    "ultimate question", as it reveals the focus of the decision  as  being
    broader than mere delay):

         "In summary I find that the appellant has family life with his wife
         and children.  The ultimate question is whether  that  family  life
         should be ruptured, because that is what I am inclined to find will
         happen, if he is not allowed to remain in this country.   It  seems
         to me wholly unreasonable to expect the children, some of whom  are
         in full time education, at least  one  is  studying  at  university
         level, whilst the others are in employment,  to  suddenly  give  up
         their lives in this country and opt for a  life  in  Nigeria  which
         they left behind when they were young."  (Emphasis added)

23. While the judge was correct to note that neither paragraphs 399 or 399A
    were engaged in this case, it was incumbent upon the judge  to  address
    the substantive exceptions contained within each provision,  to  assess
    the extent to which the appellant was able  (even  partially)  to  meet
    those requirements.  In turn, that informs and calibrates whether there
    are "very compelling circumstances over and  above..."  the  exceptions
    for the purposes of paragraph 398 (or, more accurately, section 117C(6)
    of the 2002 Act).  Features falling outside  the  exceptions  are  also
    potentially relevant, but they have to be  especially  strong  (see  NA
    (Pakistan) at [29]).  Mr Richardson did not suggest that there was  any
    material difference between paragraph 390 of the rules' requirement for
    "exceptional circumstances" to  be  required  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the deportation of a person subject to a deportation  order
    and the "very compelling circumstances"  threshold  in  paragraph  398,
    which sets out the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.  The statutory regime underpinning these rules, namely  Part
    5A  of  the  2002  Act,  uses  the  terminology  of  "very   compelling
    circumstances", and that is the statutory  framework  that  guides  the
    approach of tribunals to this issue.

24. At the heart of paragraph 399, which corresponds to section 117C(5)  of
    the 2002 Act, is whether the deportation  of  the  appellant  would  be
    "unduly harsh" on a qualifying (minor) child or partner.  The judge was
    concerned about the impact of the appellant's deportation on  his  non-
    qualifying children and partner,  so  it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to
    consider the extent to which the children and partner  would  have  met
    the unduly harsh test, were the exception engaged.

25. A certain amount of harshness is "due",  or  to  be  expected,  when  a
    person is  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  level  of  "due"
    harshness is that set out in section 117C(1) of the 2002  Act,  arising
    from the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.   The
    judge did not direct himself concerning  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals in this regard.  The  level  of  "due"
    harshness does not correspond to the seriousness of the offending.  But
    when considering the  threshold,  "one  is  looking  for  a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with  the  deportation  of  a  parent...":  see  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 at [23].

26. The judge did not have regard to the elevated threshold concerning what
    amounts to "unduly harsh",  which  is  a  concept  to  be  assessed  by
    reference to the amount of harshness that is "due".  The  concerns  the
    judge had concerning the impact of deportation on the appellant's adult
    children and partner were, with respect,  the  sort  of  concerns  that
    arise in most if not all deportation cases.  There were  no  additional
    factors which were capable of reaching the unduly harsh threshold:  the
    judge did not say there were any such additional factors,  nor  did  Mr
    Richardson draw my attention to any in the  evidence.   The  impact  of
    having to choose to continue adult life here, or return to Nigeria,  as
    an adult, with the appellant was not, on the evidence before the judge,
    something that could amount to being "unduly harsh".

27. The inability of the appellant's  children  and  partner  to  meet  the
    "unduly harsh" test should have been factored into his wider assessment
    of whether there were "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"
    the exceptions.  By failing to  account  for  that  factor,  the  judge
    failed to take into account a relevant consideration when reaching  his
    findings.

28. I accept that, in principle, the rehabilitation of the appellant  is  a
    factor which is of some relevance.  The judge  was  not  irrational  to
    take it into account, and questions of weight are for the judge and not
    this tribunal.  However, while the judge was entitled to  ascribe  some
    significance  to  the  appellant's  good  character  since   the   2008
    conviction, the fact he did so is not capable  of  curing  the  defects
    identified above.

29. Drawing this analysis together, the judge erroneously purported to rely
    on paragraph 391A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that a deportation order made (but not acted  upon  by  the
    appellant or otherwise enforced) over ten years ago carried  diminished
    weight.  He failed to direct himself concerning  the  amount  of  "due"
    harshness which can be expected by the family of foreign criminals,  by
    failing  to  consider  section  117C(1)  of  the  2002  Act,  which  is
    applicable in all cases where a court or tribunal has to  consider  the
    proportionality for Article 8 purposes of the deportation of a  foreign
    criminal: see section 117A(2).   The  judge  made  findings  concerning
    rehabilitation that were open  to  him,  but  those  findings  are  not
    capable of curing the above defects, which fail to reflect  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, as set out in section
    117C of the 2002 Act, and the regime of  exceptions,  as  contained  in
    section 117C(5) (corresponding to  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules) and 117C(6) (very compelling circumstances over and above).

30. I consider that these errors of law are such that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.  I set the decision  aside  with
    no findings of fact preserved.  The matter will be reheard in the Upper
    Tribunal.

Postscript

31. I do not consider anything that  Mr  Walker  said  in  response  to  Mr
    Richardson's submissions, as set out at paragraph 13,  above,  to  call
    for a different conclusion.  Mr Walker's  final,  considered,  position
    was  that  if  the  appellant  could   demonstrate   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above" the  exceptions,  then  the  appeal  must
    succeed.  I agree: so much is clear from section 117C(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.  However, for the reasons set  out  above,  the  judge's  analysis
    concerning the presence of "very compelling circumstances"  was  flawed
    and must be set  aside.   His  finding  that  such  circumstances  were
    present was not sustainable.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Hussain involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside in its entirety.

The matter will be reheard in the Upper Tribunal and will  be  suitable  for
rehearing by any judge (including a deputy judge) of the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 17 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

