
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/11345/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 October 2017                       |   On 16 November 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                isata jabbie
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, I continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born in 1942.  On 31
    March 2016 the respondent made a decision to refuse entry clearance  as
    an  adult  dependent  relative.   The  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not established that she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules in  terms  of  paragraph  EC-DR.1.1.(d)  and  E-ECDR.2.4-2.5.  of
    Appendix FM.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ") at a hearing on  6  July  2017,
    following which  the  FtJ  allowed  the  appeal,  although  incorrectly
    expressing  her  decision  as  having  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The purpose  of  the  application  for  entry  clearance  was  for  the
    appellant to join her daughter (sponsor),  Fatmata  Kamara,  a  British
    citizen, who had arrived in the UK  on  15  September  2007.   The  FtJ
    referred to the respondent's conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that the appellant  required  long-term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks as a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability.
    Similarly,  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  it   had   been
    established that the required level of care could not  be  obtained  in
    Sierra Leone because it was not available, and there was no person that
    could reasonably provide it, or because it was not affordable.

 5. The FtJ heard evidence from Ms Kamara which included evidence that  the
    appellant suffered from arthritis and  had  difficulty  moving  around,
    needed help to take a shower and even to get up and wash her face.  The
    neighbours helped but they came when  they  wanted  to,  and  were  not
    family.  The evidence from Ms Kamara was also that the appellant  could
    not shop, suffered from high blood pressure and diabetes and  when  she
    sent money to her, she had to speak to someone to go to the  shops  for
    her to get the money.  Her  mother  had  no  fridge  or  lighting,  and
    although there was electricity it was not constant.

 6. Ms Kamara gave evidence that the appellant could not cook, and that the
    cooking was done over a fire.  Although the medical  evidence  did  not
    explain all her medical conditions and the other circumstances, it  was
    explained by Ms Kamara that it was  difficult  to  get  the  doctor  to
    understand what was  wanted.  That  was  why  she  could  not  get  the
    documentary evidence she needed.  The doctor had said that he could not
    provide another letter because one had already been provided.

 7. At [16] the FtJ recorded  Ms  Kamara's  evidence  that  she  could  not
    arrange care for her mother in Sierra Leone, and that only family could
    look after someone in Africa.  She said that she wanted to care for her
    mother.  She had not been able to go to Sierra Leone since 2013 because
    of the war and Ebola.  She was only able to speak to her mother on  the
    phone, she said.

 8. At [18] the evidence was recorded that it was not  possible  to  get  a
    lady to live with her mother and look after and there was no-one in the
    family who could do so.  She could not take someone to look  after  her
    whom she did not know, and her mother could not  get  the  proper  help
    that she needed.  At [19] it was recorded that she could  not  pay  the
    neighbours.  She gave them money but  not  regularly.   The  neighbours
    took her mother to the doctor in a taxi.  If she brought someone in  to
    care for and live with her mother, she would  not  know  that  person's
    background or character and what she might be capable of doing.

 9. In submissions on behalf of  the  respondent  before  the  FtJ  it  was
    contended that there was no real evidence of the appellant's  need  for
    long-term personal care, or that it could not be  provided  by  someone
    other than the sponsor.  The medical evidence did not say as much, even
    though the sponsor said that she had spoken to him.  It  was  contended
    that there were facilities in Sierra Leone and Ms Kamara could  arrange
    private care.

10. The FtJ found the evidence of Ms Kamara to be credible.   She  referred
    to her as a witness of probity and reliability, and she said  that  she
    accepted her evidence without reservation.

11. Referring to the medical evidence,  she  concluded  that  although  the
    doctor had stated that  the  appellant's  current  clinical  status  is
    stable and she is constantly  on  anti-hypertensive  and  anti-diabetes
    medication, as well as  active  physiotherapy,  it  appeared  from  the
    appellant's results  that  neither  treatment  had  proved  successful,
    except to the extent of stabilising her conditions.

12. At [28] the FtJ concluded that  the  appellant  did  require  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks, accepting Ms Kamara's evidence
    that the appellant was unable to  wash  or  dress  herself,  or  to  do
    shopping and cooking,  and  that  she  relies  on  her  neighbours  for
    assistance with these tasks.  Noting that the evidence from the  doctor
    did not include such confirmation, she said that had  it  done  so  his
    statement would have been based on  the  appellant's  account,  not  on
    physical examination, and it would therefore have been likely  to  have
    been disregarded as self-serving.

13. At [13] the FtJ said that she accepted the sponsor's evidence that when
    the neighbours failed to appear  the  appellant  is  left  without  any
    assistance.  She found that given the importance of regular  meals  for
    anyone with diabetes, it is not surprising that  their  absence  caused
    the appellant a significant degree of distress, and that  it  may  also
    have had a negative affect on her health generally.

14. At [32] she found  that  the  medical  evidence  established  that  the
    appellant's conditions  have  affected  her  for  some  years  and  are
    unlikely to be cured.  Accordingly, they are conditions that give  rise
    to a need for long-term personal care.

15. The FtJ referred to the Country of Origin Information Report for Sierra
    Leone dated November 2010 in terms of the health service  and  the  low
    geographic coverage of state-run health facilities.

16. She went on to conclude that Ms Kamara's account fits in well with  the
    background evidence.  She said that  she  accepted  that  she  and  the
    appellant have been unable to find  anyone  to  assist  the  appellant,
    other than her neighbours, who provide some help on an ad hoc basis, at
    their convenience, and not in accordance with  the  appellant's  needs.
    At [35] she accepted the sponsor's evidence that she has not been  able
    to identify anyone who could live with her  mother  and  provide  daily
    assistance.  That was the reason she  decided  she  had  to  bring  her
    mother back to the UK.

17. At [36] it was accepted that the sponsor assessed the risk of  harm  to
    the appellant as serious, particularly given that  her  mother  is  now
    nearly 75, and in view of the difficulty of keeping an eye on  a  care-
    giver so far away on another continent.   She  had  not  been  able  to
    identify anyone trustworthy to provide her mother with personal care on
    a long-term basis.

18. She concluded at [37] that the  appellant  had  demonstrated  that  she
    requires long-term personal care and that due to age and disability she
    is unable to perform everyday tasks without  assistance.   She  further
    concluded that the appellant  and  Ms  Kamara  are  unable  to  arrange
    suitable care for her in Sierra Leone because it is not available.

    The grounds and submissions

19. The respondent's grounds contend that the evidence did not support  the
    FtJ's conclusions that the requirements of the  Rules  were  met.   The
    sponsor's evidence was that she could not take someone she did not know
    and put her in with her mother, and that in Africa  only  family  could
    look after someone.  There was no evidence of the appellant's  daughter
    seeking out a local personal carer.   Thus,  the  sponsor's  assertions
    alone could not be relied on.

20. It is also argued that the FtJ having failed to consider s. 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  in
    particular in terms of the considerable burden on the NHS that would be
    imposed by the appellant coming to the UK.  Furthermore, there  are  no
    findings on her ability to speak English.   She  may  not  be  able  to
    integrate successfully into British society.

21. The grounds also rely on the decision in EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

22. In submissions, Mr Clarke relied on the grounds, also  submitting  that
    the medical evidence did not support the conclusions that the FtJ  came
    to.  Furthermore, it was submitted that the evidence did not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of Appendix FM-SE, in particular  at
    paras 34 and 35.

23. There was no identification by the FtJ of any attempt on  the  part  of
    the appellant and her daughter to seek help and then  to  consider  any
    reasons as to why such help may not be  available.   Indeed,  the  last
    paragraph of the medical evidence suggests that such care is available.

24. Before me Ms Kamara explained that the doctor had said  that  he  would
    not send any more evidence.  There are no nursing agencies.  They tried
    in 2014 to obtain help but it was not successful.

25. She said that she wanted the appellant to stay with  her.   Her  mother
    only has her to help her.  She, Ms Kamara, is now expecting  her  third
    child.  She had not seen her mother for five years and is only able  to
    speak to  her  on  the  phone.   There  are  no  other  siblings.   She
    reiterated the health conditions that her mother has in terms  of  high
    blood pressure and diabetes.







    Conclusions

26. It is as well to set out the relevant requirements  of  the  Rules  for
    entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent  relative.    The   relevant
    requirements are as follows:

         "E-ECDR.2.4.  The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                      are  the  sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,   the
                      applicant's partner, must as a result of age, illness
                      or disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to
                      perform everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                      are  the  sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,   the
                      applicant's partner, must be unable,  even  with  the
                      practical and  financial  help  of  the  sponsor,  to
                      obtain the required level  of  care  in  the  country
                      where they are living, because-

                      (a)  it is not available and there is  no  person  in
                           that country who can reasonably provide it; or

                      (b)  it is not affordable."

27. There are also  requirements  in  terms  of  specified  evidence.   The
    relevant paragraphs of Appendix FM-SE are as follows:

         "34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term personal  care  should  take  the
             form of:

             (a)   Independent  medical  evidence  that   the   applicant's
                  physical  or  mental  condition  means  that  they  cannot
                  perform everyday tasks; and

             (b)  This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
             the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to
             obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they
             are living should be from:

             (a)  a central or local health authority;

             (b)  a local authority; or

             (c)  a doctor or other health professional."

28. The medical evidence that was before the FtJ is contained in  a  letter
    from a Dr Sankoh, dated 24 April  2017  (page  11  of  the  appellant's
    bundle).  It gives the appellant's age as 75 years.  It states that she
    is a non-hypertensive and diabetic (Type II).  It states that  she  has
    been under observation and monitoring since 2005.   It  refers  to  her
    having  presented  with  headache,  dizziness  and   generalised   body
    weakness, lower back pain and joint pains  swelling.   A  diagnosis  of
    severe (malignant) hypertension and Type II diabetes is given.  It then
    goes on to state that:

         "Her current clinical status is now stable and she is constantly on
         anti-hypertensive   and   anti-diabetics   as   well   as    active
         physiotherapy.

         Due to her current clinical status, she is therefore  advice  (sic)
         to seek proper home  help  and  management  which  requires  psycho
         social and emotion  (sic)  support.   This  will  aid  her  gradual
         recovery and improve her general condition."

29. There is no doubt but that the medical evidence from Dr Sankoh does not
    establish  that  the  appellant,  as  a  result  of  age,  illness   or
    disability, requires long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.
     It is necessary that the medical evidence should demonstrate that that
    requirement of the Rules at E-ECDR.2.4. is met, because of the terms of
    para 34 of Appendix FM-SE.

30. The FtJ relied on the evidence of Ms Kamara to supplement  the  medical
    evidence in terms of establishing the need for long-term personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.  However, that was an impermissible approach
    to the evidence in the light of the need to provide specified  evidence
    of the matters in issue.

31. Furthermore, specified evidence needed to be provided,  with  reference
    to para 35 of Appendix FM-SE, in  terms  of  the  availability  of  the
    required level of care said to have been needed.  That evidence must be
    from a central or local health  authority,  a  local  authority,  or  a
    doctor or other health professional.  Such evidence was not provided.

32. It is apparent that the need to provide evidence from certain specified
    sources ensures that there is concrete and  reliable  evidence  of  the
    lack of availability of the relevant care.  Whilst the FtJ was entitled
    to find that the sponsor was a  credible  witness,  what  she  was  not
    entitled to do was to conclude that the appellant met the  requirements
    of the Rules as an adult dependent  relative  in  the  absence  of  the
    required, and specified, evidence.

33. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in  her
    conclusion that the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    Accordingly, I set aside her decision.

34. Furthermore, given that  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  the
    appellant is able to meet the requirements of the  Rules  as  an  adult
    dependent relative, the only conclusion that can be reached is that the
    appeal with reference to the Rules must be dismissed.

35. The Rules are an aspect of Article 8.  I have considered whether  there
    are compelling circumstances which warrant a consideration of Article 8
    outwith the confines of the relevant Rules.

36. I approach the wider Article 8 issue in terms of the  five-step  Razgar
    structure.

37. I am satisfied that there is family life between the appellant and  the
    sponsor because although they are both adults,  there  is  evidence  of
    emotional ties over and above the usual ties between  adult  relatives.
    Those further elements of dependency include the appellant's ill-health
    and her obvious dependence on her daughter for emotional and  financial
    support.  Her daughter is plainly concerned to ensure that she receives
    health and support in Sierra Leone.

38. The decision of the respondent does represent a  lack  of  respect  for
    that family life,  and  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of  Article  8.   The  respondent's
    decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  pursues  an  obvious
    legitimate aim.

39. The issue is then  one  of  proportionality.  In  that  context  it  is
    relevant to take into account that the appellant is not  able  to  meet
    the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   That  is  a  significant
    factor.

40. Furthermore, although I entirely accept that both the appellant and her
    daughter would prefer her to live in  the  UK  where  they  would  have
    direct and close personal contact and where the sponsor could  directly
    ensure her care and wellbeing, it is, as suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, a significant proportionality factor that it is likely that
    the appellant would require substantial  NHS  care  for  a  significant
    period of time.  Not only is her age relevant in that respect but also,
    and more particularly, her several health conditions.

41. It is in the nature of the adult dependent relative Rule  that  persons
    seeking entry clearance with reference to that aspect of the Rules  are
    likely to have health conditions.  They are also in many  cases  likely
    to be elderly.  If the answer to the proportionality question based  on
    those factors alone would always be in favour  of  an  adult  dependent
    relative coming to live in the UK with the UK based relative, the Rules
    themselves would be redundant.  However, the need for  compliance  with
    the Rules is a significant one.

42. The extent to which the appellant has failed to meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules is also relevant in that  there  is  no  evidence  at  all
    before me to support any contention that efforts have been made to find
    paid carers in Sierra Leone.  Although the evidence before me  from  Ms
    Kamara was that in 2014 she had tried to provide a carer, that was  not
    the  evidence  given  before  the  FtJ,  and  nor  is  there  any  such
    information in either her or the appellant's witness statements.

43. The FtJ said that she accepted that the appellant and her daughter  had
    been unable to identify anyone who could  assist  the  appellant  apart
    from neighbours who provide help only on  an  ad  hoc  basis.  However,
    there was no evidence as to what efforts had been made in that respect.
    The real import of the evidence was that the  sponsor  would  not  wish
    anyone else to care for her mother and that she is the one  that  needs
    to do that.  However, that is not a satisfactory basis  upon  which  to
    conclude that the proportionality question must be resolved  in  favour
    of an appellant, where apparently little effort has been made, in terms
    of the Rules, to seek the care that the appellant is said to  need,  in
    her own country.

44. Furthermore, the provisions of s.117B of the 2002 Act tell against  the
    appellant  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality,  for  the  reasons
    advanced in submissions before me, as set out at [20] above.

45. In those circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent's
    decision amounts to a disproportionate interference or lack of  respect
    for the appellant's family life with her daughter.  The respondent  has
    established that the  decision  is  a  proportionate  response  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued.

46. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            Dated 15/11/17








