
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11096/2018
                                                           HU/11089/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2021                     |On 2 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          OYINKASOLA AMINAT OLAJIRE
                           OLAYINKA TOMIWA OLAJIRE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by Axis Solicitors
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens  of  Nigeria.   They  are  siblings.   Miss
    Oyinkasola Aminat Olajire's date of birth is 24 May 2002.  Mr  Olayinka
    Tomiwa Olajire's date of birth is 20 August 2000.  They  are  both  now
    adults. Their mother, Omolola Mufuliat Razak, is the Sponsor. She  came
    here in 2007. She is  settled  here.  She  was  granted  permanent  ant
    residence on 13 January 2017.

 2. The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas to  dismiss  the
    Appellants' appeals against the decision of the ECO on 17 April 2018 to
    refuse to grant them entry clearance to come to the UK  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules  to  join  their  mother,  the  Sponsor,  a
    citizen of Nigeria, was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 2 June 2020.   The  salient  parts  of
    Judge Kekic's decision read as follows: -

         "9.  For ease of reference, I refer to the Appellants'  submissions
             as AS1, to the Respondent's  submissions  as  RS  and  to  the
             Appellants' response to the Respondent's submissions as AS2.

         10.  The Appellants' case focuses  solely  on  the  issue  of  sole
             responsibility and it appears to be the case as pointed out in
             the RS, and not challenged in the AS2,  that  it  is  accepted
             that Article 8 is not engaged if the requirements of paragraph
             297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules cannot be met.

         11.  The Appellants argue that the  judge  based  his  decision  on
             assumptions of supposition and disregarded key evidence  (AS1:
             4), although there is no clarification in the submissions what
             evidence was not taken into account.  It is  argued  that  the
             judge erred in his finding that  the  Appellants'  father  was
             involved in their  lives  and  that  he  (the  judge)  wrongly
             diminished the Sponsor's evidence of sole responsibility.

         12.  Turning to the grounds for permission, the case is put in more
             detail.  It is maintained that  the  Sponsor  established  her
             sole responsibility by way of money transfer receipts,  ticket
             receipts  (presumably  airline  tickets),  school  bills   and
             invoices.  It is maintained that she made the decision to send
             the children to boarding school, that she paid  the  fees  and
             was the only parent to  communicate  with  the  school.   (The
             Appellants have  since  completed  their  education).   It  is
             argued that the fact that the children were left in  the  care
             of their aunt supports the claim that their father was not  in
             Nigeria.  It is maintained that the fact that  he  is  outside
             the country means he could not  be  involved  in  their  lives
             (although of course the Sponsor is also outside Nigeria).   It
             is maintained that no weight was given to the Appellants'  own
             statements in which they confirmed that their mother  was  the
             only parent in their lives.  The judge is criticised  for  his
             adverse assessment of the Sponsor's  oral  evidence  where  he
             found that she had sought to alter her evidence when  she  was
             'caught out' in cross-examination and it is maintained that he
             misunderstood her evidence.

         13.  The Respondent's reply to AS1 is that there was no information
             at all in the VAF about the Appellants'  father's  whereabouts
             or any indication that he  had  given  his  consent  to  their
             settlement application.  It  is  argued  that  the  judge  was
             entitled to find that the Sponsor had altered her evidence  as
             her initial claim as put in her witness statement as well, was
             that she had received her former partner's UAE residence  card
             after a call in 2017 and not 2018, after  the  application  as
             she subsequently claimed.  It  is  also  maintained  that  the
             account of how they made contact so  many  years  after  their
             alleged separation was implausible and that no  evidence  from
             him about his place of residence or involvement  or  otherwise
             in  the  lives  of  the  Appellants  was   forthcoming.    The
             Respondent also points out there was no copy of  the  WhatsApp
             message in which he was said to  have  attached  his  identity
             card.  It  is  maintained  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
             conclude that the Sponsor had not been honest and  open  about
             the situation regarding the Appellants' father.  With  respect
             to the witness statements of the Appellants it  is  maintained
             that the weight that could be attached to them was reduced  by
             the fact that the evidence could not be tested.  The fact that
             the Appellants attended boarding school and that  the  Sponsor
             paid the fees did not mean that sole responsibility  had  been
             established.

         14.  In AS2, it is accepted that the Sponsor made an error  in  her
             evidence  and  that  she  corrected  herself   during   cross-
             examination but that this did not mean  that  the  father  was
             involved in the Appellants' lives.   An  absence  of  evidence
             from him also did not mean that he was involved in  some  way.
             The judge  had  erred  by  not  indicating  that  the  witness
             statements of the Appellants had been taken into account  when
             reaching  his  conclusions  on  the  father's  position.   The
             Appellants'  attendance  at  boarding  school  supported   the
             assertion that the Sponsor retained responsibility for  making
             significant decisions as did the fact that she supported  them
             financially.

         15.  Although there are numerous serious issues  arising  from  the
             documentary evidence on file (and which I shall come to  later
             in this determination), I am of the view that the judge  erred
             in his interpretation of the Sponsor's evidence as to  contact
             with the  Appellants'  father,  and  that  this  impacted  his
             assessment of the evidence as a whole.

         16.  I have carefully considered the Sponsor's  witness  statements
             which the judge maintained were in line with her initial  oral
             evidence at the hearing, but which  contradicted  her  amended
             oral evidence in cross-examination.  The judge states:

                  'The Sponsor has got into some confusion  with  regard  to
                  the status and role of the father of the Appellant  (sic).
                  Both in  her  witness  statement  and,  initially  in  her
                  evidence at this appeal, she stated that she  obtained  an
                  ID document from him after a telephone call in  2017.   It
                  was  pointed  out  to  her  that  she  therefore  had  the
                  information before she (sic) made the application in  2018
                  but had not included  within  that  application.   Clearly
                  caught out, she then corrected this assertion  and  stated
                  that she was able to  contact  her  ex-husband  after  the
                  application in 2018 in order to obtain the  ID  card  from
                  the UAE' (at paragraph 28).

             This is what led him to conclude that the Sponsor had not been
             'open and honest about the role of the father of the  children
             in their lives' (at 31).

         17.  At paragraph 19 of the determination, the judge summarises the
             oral evidence of the Sponsor on this issue.  He  writes:  'She
             stated that she had met a friend of her former husband in 2017
             and obtained his number ... She had corrected her evidence and
             stated that she had obtained the number  after  she  made  the
             application'.

         18.  The Sponsor has prepared two  witness  statements.   They  are
             virtually  identical  apart  from  a  major   discrepancy   in
             paragraph 3 and 4 which I shall deal with  later.   The  first
             statement is dated 15 May 2019 and was sent to the Tribunal on
             24 May 2019.  The second is dated 23  September  2019  and  is
             contained in the Appellants' supplementary bundle submitted to
             the Tribunal on 23 September  2019.   The  passages  in  both,
             relating to the issue of contact with the Appellants'  father,
             are identical and state the following: 'It was in 2017 that  a
             common friend gave me his new number.  I called him a few days
             ago and luckily he was on the phone and agreed to provide me a
             copy of his UAE identity card by WhatsApp but no more  details
             and did not provide his residence card for UAE'  (paragraph  2
             in both statements; added emphasis).

         19.  There are problems with the contents of these  two  paragraphs
             cited  from  the  judge's  determination  in  that  they   are
             contradictory, and a further problem is that the  contents  of
             paragraph 28 conflicts with  the  contents  of  the  Sponsor's
             written evidence.

         20.  At paragraph 19 the judge correctly summarises  the  Sponsor's
             oral evidence as recorded in the Record of  Proceedings.   She
             stated that she had met a mutual friend in 2017  and  obtained
             the Appellants' father's contact details in 2017.  When it was
             put to her that she would have had these details  and  the  ID
             card at the time of the application, the Sponsor  then  stated
             that she had met the mutual friend after the refusal (in April
             2018).  Had  the  judge  stopped  there  and  relied  on  that
             discrepancy in his adverse findings, I would  not  have  found
             any problem with his finding that the Sponsor had changed  her
             evidence  when  caught  out.   However,  this   is   not   the
             discrepancy he relied on in paragraph 28.  There he refers  to
             contact being made in 2018 after the application (no reference
             to when she got the contact details from the friend) and  this
             conflicting with her written evidence that  she  made  contact
             and obtained the card in 2017.  As can be seen, however,  from
             the Sponsor's witness statement, that  is  not  what  she  had
             said.  While she did state that the meeting  with  the  friend
             took place in 2017, she also said that she had called her  ex-
             partner 'a few days ago'.  Both statements are dated  2019  so
             that would suggest that contact was made  in  2019  if  indeed
             they were prepared when dated.  It would appear that the judge
             himself, got confused about what had been  said  at  different
             stages  and  that  his  own  recording  of  the  evidence  was
             internally inconsistent and inconsistent  with  the  Sponsor's
             written evidence.  On that basis, his conclusions  are  unsafe
             as he appears to rely heavily on his paragraph 28  to  form  a
             view about the Sponsor's evidence.

         21.  He is also  criticised  for  his  finding  that  the  lack  of
             evidence from the Sponsor's former partner was  indicative  of
             his involvement in the lives of the Appellants  but  I  cannot
             see on what basis that assumption was made.  His  observations
             on what he considered 'obvious' are similarly poorly reasoned.



         22.  For these reasons,  I  set  aside  the  determination  in  its
             entirety except as a Record of Proceedings.  A fresh  decision
             is required and shall be made".

 3. Judge Kekic made a number of directions including as follows: -

             "No later than fourteen days after the decision is served, the
             Sponsor shall prepare and serve  a  statement  clarifying  the
             following matters arising from the evidence before the  First-
             tier Tribunal:

             (i)  whom she left her children  with  in  2007  as  differing
                  accounts are given in her witness statements.

             (ii) when her mother died as differing dates are given;

             (iii)    the date of her sixth visit (see paragraph  5  of  my
                  determination);

             (iv) why she did not visit her children between 2007 and 2014;

             (v)  the date her children were registered at boarding school;

             (vi) when she made  contact  with  her  former  partner,  with
                  evidence from WhatsApp to confirm this.

             (vii)    the basis of her  entry  and  subsequent  immigration
                  status.

         30.  The appellant shall serve on the Upper  Tribunal,  within  the
             same time limits,

             (i)  originals of the school receipts, photographs and medical
                  receipts contained in the bundle (given the  poor  quality
                  of the copies); and on the Tribunal and the Respondent:

             (ii) a clear, legible copy of the Sponsor's  passport  showing
                  the dates of her visit to Nigeria;

             (iii)    evidence of the Sponsor's immigration status;

             (iv) a copy of the WhatsApp correspondence between the Sponsor
                  and  the  Appellants'  father  showing  the  attached  UAE
                  identity card as an attachment;

             (v)  a skeleton argument identifying all relevant  issues  and
                  citing relevant authorities.

         31.  Within 28 days of the date that this decision is  served,  the
             Respondent shall file with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
             Appellants the Respondent's skeleton argument".

The Evidence

 4. The decision of the ECO was maintained by the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    (ECM) on 15 January 2019.  On 27 April 2019, the Appellants' solicitors
    emailed a screenshot of a UAE identity card is in the  name  of  Ishola
    Taiwo  Olajire  showing  a  photograph  and  indicating  the   holder's
    nationality is Nigerian.

 5. Before the First-tier Tribunal there was an  Appellants'  bundle  (AB1)
    containing witness statements from the Appellants and the Sponsor.

 6. As identified by Judge Kekic the statements of the Sponsor  of  15  May
    2019 and 23 September 2019 are more or less identical.   The  Sponsor's
    evidence in those two statements can  be  summarised.   She  started  a
    relationship with Ishola Taiwo Olajire, the father of the Appellants in
    1992.  The relationship broke down.  He left Nigeria for Dubai in 2001.
     He was occasionally in contact, but he never financially supported the
    children or took any interest in them.    In 2017 a common friend  gave
    the Sponsor his contact details.  She called him a few  days  ago.   He
    agreed to provide her with a copy of his UAE identity card by  WhatsApp
    group but he did not agree to give her any more  details  and  did  not
    provide his residence card.

 7. The Sponsor alone brought up the children.  She  moved  to  the  UK  in
    2007.  She then left the Appellants with her mother.  Her brother  then
    died and her mother died six months after that.  The  Sponsor  put  the
    children in the care of her sister.  She  sent  money  to  her  sister.
    However, it came to light that the money had been misappropriated.   As
    a result of this the Sponsor moved the Appellants to a boarding  school
    where she took care of them remotely  while  she  remained  in  the  UK
    working.  No one else in Nigeria helped her with the children.  She has
    visited Nigeria on eight occasions.

 8. The Sponsor married in the  United  Kingdom.  It  did  not  last.   She
    actively takes part in all the decision making for the  children.   She
    is in full-time employment.  She has regular contact with the children.
     She has lots of photographic evidence.  She did not  provide  all  the
    evidence with the application for entry clearance because she  was  not
    properly advised by her solicitors.

 9. In the Sponsor's witness statement of 23  September  2019,  she  states
    that her mother passed away in 2005.  In her witness  statement  of  15
    May 2019, she states that she left her  children  with  her  mother  in
    2007.

10. The Sponsor has made a supplementary witness statement  dated  29  June
    2020 in response to Judge Kekic's directions in which she  stated  that
    she contacted her ex-partner, the Appellants' father  on  5  May  2019.
    In 2007 she left her children with her sister.  They  stayed  with  her
    until 2014 when the Sponsor visited Nigeria  and  discovered  that  her
    sister had been misappropriating the money that she had sent to her  to
    maintain the children.  She decided to enrol them both into a  boarding
    school.  Her mother died on 12 June 2005.

11. There were five stamps supporting that she visited Nigeria  before  the
    appeal hearing:  on 12 January 2014, 30 October 2014, 16 March 2017, 19
    May 2018 and 18 February 2019.  There  is  one  stamp  which  has  been
    stamped twice when she missed a flight.  She visited Nigeria again on 1
    February 2020.  She has submitted evidence of this.

12. She did not visit the children between 2007 and 2014.  She was not able
    to leave the UK as she was regularising her status here.  She  did  not
    obtain a residence card until September 2013.  She was  concerned  that
    without the card despite having become the spouse of a European citizen
    in June 2010 she would encounter difficulties returning to the UK.

13. Although the Sponsor was working throughout that period  sending  money
    to the children her income was modest  and  she  could  not  afford  to
    travel to Nigeria, she had no family that would be able to support  her
    trip or anybody else that could afford to take care  of  the  children.
    Her focus was on making sure their needs were provided for even  if  it
    meant that she could  not  see  them  in  person.   The  children  were
    registered into boarding school on 10 November 2014 shortly  after  her
    second trip to Nigeria.

14. She came to the UK on a visit visa and overstayed.  She was  granted  a
    residence document as a family  member  of  a  UK  citizen.   This  was
    granted to her on 12 September 2013.  She now has  right  of  permanent
    residence which was confirmed by the Home Office on 13 January 2017.

15. The Sponsor attended the hearing before me and gave oral  evidence.  Mr
    Gajjar indicated that the Sponsor was content  to  proceed  without  an
    interpreter.  I understand that an interpreter had been  requested  but
    was not in attendance at the remote hearing.  Mr Gajjar indicated  that
    the Sponsor could understand the proceedings and the questions asked of
    her.

16. The Sponsor's oral evidence was that  during  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal she was confused. She thought  that  she  had  been
    asked when she was granted permanent residence when she was asked about
    having been given contact details for the Appellants' father. She  said
    2017 in answer to the question.  In oral evidence  she  referred  to  a
    letter that she said had given her then solicitors which confirmed that
    her husband was  not  involved  in  the  Appellants'  upbringing.   The
    solicitors were no longer instructed and, but they did not attach  that
    letter with the application.

17. The Sponsor confirmed in her latest statement that  she  had  said  she
    contacted her ex-husband on 5 May 2019, however she was  asked  why  if
    that were the case in her statement  of  23  September  2019,  she  had
    stated that she contacted him a few days ago.  The  Sponsor  said  that
    she did not understand.  She did not  remember.   She  met  a  lady  in
    London who gave her the number. Having checked  through  her  contacts,
    she called the Sponsor and gave her his details. She thinks  that  this
    was in 2019. The lady is a childhood friend.  At the time  the  Sponsor
    had called a lot of people that she knew to try to  make  contact  with
    her ex-partner.  There is no statement from this friend,  however,  she
    could obtain one if necessary.

18. The Sponsor said that a problem was her understanding  of  the  English
    language.  Mr Gajjar again confirmed that the  Sponsor  understood  the
    proceedings and the questions that she was being asked and did not need
    an interpreter.

19. She said that she obtained her  ex-partner's telephone number in  2019.
    She called him in 2019 (in the same week that she obtained his number).
     She told him that she needed his help and that is why he gave her  his
    ID card.  She does not know anything about him. She does not  have  any
    information about him.  She was asked what she spoke about  during  the
    conversations which lasted only for minutes.  She said  that  she  told
    him that she wanted to bring the children here.




20. After I heard submissions,  the  Sponsor  was  very  upset  and  raised
    evidence about her children not being safe in Nigeria

21. In the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal there are letters from the
    Appellants.  Their evidence  can  be  summarised.   Their  mother  left
    Nigeria in 2007 and they were left with  their  aunt.   They  were  not
    treated well there.  Their mother is very hardworking and  taking  care
    of them.  Their father was not responsible for them.

The Respondent's Skeleton Argument of 7 July 2020

22. In submissions Mr Tufan relied on the skeleton argument prepared by  Mr
    Chris Howells.  The only issue in the appeal is whether the Sponsor has
    sole responsibility for the  Appellants.   The  Appellants'  statements
    cannot  be  tested  in  cross-examination.    There   is   no   written
    communication between the Sponsor  and  the  Appellants'  father.   The
    photograph attached to  the  WhatsApp  message  shows  an  undated  UAE
    identity card in the name of Ishola Taiwo Olajire, a Nigerian national.
     The card is not a UAE residence card as  claimed  in  the  Appellants'
    skeleton argument dated 29 June  2020.   Although  the  telephone  code
    indicates that it was  sent  from  the  UAE  there  is  no  documentary
    evidence showing the Appellants' father sent  this  message  from  UAE.
    The date that the message was sent is not evident from  the  photocopy.
    The photocopy shows that the message was followed  by  an  exchange  of
    three sound recordings within 45 minutes (each of  between  three-  and
    four-minutes' duration) between the sender and  the  recipient  of  the
    message.  None of these have been produced as evidence.

23. There are credibility issues surrounding the claim that the Appellants'
    father moved from Nigeria to UAE  in  2002  thus  abandoning  them  and
    abdicating parental responsibility.  In the Appellants' entry clearance
    applications dated 11 January 2018 there is no information or  evidence
    about the whereabouts of their father.  At [22] of the decision  of  28
    May 2020, UTJ Kekic set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lucas except as a Record of Proceedings.  This  Record  of  Proceedings
    shows that the oral evidence of the Sponsor was that she  obtained  the
    contact details of the Appellants'  father  in  2017  after  meeting  a
    mutual friend in the  same  year.   When  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer put it to her that she would have had the contact  details  and
    identity card of the Appellants'  father  at  the  time  of  the  entry
    clearance applications she then stated that she had  in  fact  met  the
    mutual friend after the refusal of applications in April 2018.   It  is
    submitted that the Sponsor changed her evidence when she realised  that
    her  first  answer  was   inconsistent   with   the   entry   clearance
    applications.  This  undermines  the  Sponsor's  account  of  the  non-
    involvement of the Appellants' father in their upbringing.

24. There are further inconsistencies about the Sponsor's contact with  the
    Appellants' father.  At [2] of her written statement  of  23  September
    2019 (three days after she gave oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal), the Sponsor stated  that  she  had  called  the  Appellants'
    father "a few days ago" and he had agreed to provide his  UAE  identity
    card by WhatsApp.  Yet at [9] of her statement dated 29 June 2020,  she
    stated that she had contacted him on 5 May 2019.

25. The  Sponsor  has  given  four  different  times  concerning  when  she
    contacted the Appellants' father; 2017; 2018; September 2019;  and  May
    2019.  These discrepancies on a material issue go to the  core  of  the
    appeals.  They  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  claim  that   the
    Appellants' father has had no involvement  in  their  upbringing  since
    2002.  Even  if  he  is  resident  in  the  UAE,  which  has  not  been
    established, it is feasible for him to have shared  responsibility  for
    the upbringing of the Appellants with the UK-based Sponsor.

26. The school letter of 20 January 2018 refers to the  Appellants'  having
    attended school for four years, however according  to  the  Appellants'
    statements of 13 May 2019 they began studying at the school  after  the
    Sponsor's return to Nigeria on 30 October 2014.  Similarly,  in  answer
    to questions 21-22 of their Visa Application Forms dated  January  2018
    the Appellants stated that they had been living at Fesobeth College for
    four  years  [not  three  years].    It   is   submitted   that   these
    inconsistencies cast doubt on  the  assertions  made  in  the  skeleton
    argument dated 29 June 2020.

The Appellants' Skeleton Argument of 29 June 2020

27. Whilst there is limited evidence in relation to the  father,  there  is
    evidence that supports that he does not share  responsibility  for  the
    Appellants.  There is the evidence of the  Appellants  themselves  that
    they have no involvement  with  their  father.   There  is  the  recent
    communication between the Sponsor and the father and the residence card
    which shows that he resides in UAE.  All of these are  indicative  that
    the father has shed his parental responsibility and has  abandoned  his
    children.   As  such,  the  Sponsor  asserts   that   she   took   sole
    responsibility for them.

28. There is evidence in the Appellants' bundle  of  her  having  practical
    control and direction over the  Appellants'  lives.   There  are  money
    transfer receipts, school bills and invoices which demonstrate that she
    has financially provided  for  her  children  for  years.   The  school
    further confirms in their letter that the mother pays  the  Appellants'
    schooling and confirms that she is the sole parent on record and is the
    only person who communicates with the school regarding  the  children's
    progress and ongoing welfare.

29. The decision to send the Appellants to boarding school and remove  them
    from the care of their aunt is an important decision in their lives and
    demonstrates continuing control and direction  over  their  upbringing.
    They are both in their late teenage years and to a certain degree  have
    autonomy in their day-to-day living, which  is  natural  and  expected,
    however their mother remains their sole provider  and  responsible  for
    making critical decisions in their lives.

30. The Appellants' evidence makes it clear that they have no support  from
    their father who left them at a young age.  Their  evidence  about  the
    circumstances of their  early  years  support  that  he  abdicated  his
    responsibilities.  The abuse of day-to-day  decision  making  by  their
    aunt should not render her  rightly  responsible  for  the  Appellants'
    upbringing.

31. The Appellants rely on TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 and Nmaju  &  Ors  v
    Entry Clearance Officer [2002] EWCA Civ 505.  It is  not  necessary  to
    have held sole responsibility throughout the life of a child.   Periods
    in which responsibility was shared or held by another in  the  past  do
    not necessarily invalidate the Sponsor's  claim  of  currently  holding
    sole responsibility.

32. The Sponsor has been solely responsible for the children since at least
    2014.

Submissions

33. Mr Tufan submitted that the Sponsor has not  been  truthful  about  the
    Appellants' father.  She had given various different  accounts.   There
    was no evidence from the person whom she said  gave  her  his  details.
    There is no evidence  that  the  Appellants'  father  consents  to  the
    children settling here in the UK.  The total conversation time  between
    the Sponsor and the father from the  WhatsApp  was  ten  minutes.   The
    evidence does not establish that the Sponsor has sole responsibility.




34. Mr  Gajjar  invited  me  to  allow  the  appeal.   The  father  has  an
    association with UAE.  (Mr Tufan conceded  that  the  telephone  number
    shown on the WhatsApp group was a UAE number).   The  communication  is
    from the UAE.  The Sponsor has rectified the error that she made in her
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  evidence  from  the
    Appellants chimes with that of the Sponsor.  The  relationship  between
    he Sponsor, and the children's  father  must  have  broken  down.   The
    Sponsor came here in 2007.  She was granted permanent residence in 2017
    which supports her explanation for having confused the  questions  that
    were asked of her before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is no evidence
    that the father has had any contact with the Sponsor  or  his  children
    since 2002.  He is out of the picture; he does not play an active role.
     Little can rest on the discrepancies in the Sponsor's evidence.


The law

35. The only ground of appeal is under Article 8. If  the  Appellants  meet
    the requirements of the Rules, their  appeals  must  be  allowed  under
    Article 8.

36. Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules contains  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,
    parents or a  relative  present  and  settled  or  being  admitted  for
    settlement in the United Kingdom.  The part of the  Rule  in  issue  in
    this case is 297(i)(e) which reads as follows: "one parent  is  present
    and settled in the  United  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same
    occasion for  settlement  and  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    children's upbringing;".

37. It is not the Appellants' case that there are "serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for  the  child's
    care" namely that paragraph 297(i)(f) applies in the alternative.

Immigration Directorate Instructions of July 2012

38.  The  Appellants'   bundle   contains   the   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions of July 2012 which gives general guidance in  relation  to
    sole responsibility.  Mr Tufan  address  me  on  this.    It  reads  as
    follows: -

         4.   Sole responsibility  -  paragraphs  297(i)(e),  298(i)(c)  and
             301(i)(b)

             Where a child's parents  are  not  married,  or  his  parents'
             marriage subsists but they do not live together, or where  the
             parents' marriage has been  dissolved,  a  child  may  qualify
             under these paragraphs to join  or  remain  with  one  parent,
             provided that parent has had  'sole  responsibility'  for  the
             child's upbringing.

             The phrase 'sole responsibility'  is  intended  to  reflect  a
             situation where parental responsibility of  a  child,  to  all
             intents and purposes, rests chiefly with one parent.   Such  a
             situation is in contrast to the  ordinary  family  unit  where
             responsibility for a child's upbringing is shared between  the
             two parents (although not necessarily equally).

         4.1  Establishing that a parent has had 'sole responsibility'

             A parent claiming to have  had  'sole  responsibility'  for  a
             child must satisfactorily demonstrate that he has, usually for
             a substantial period of time, been the chief person exercising
             parental  responsibility.   For  such  an  assertion   to   be
             accepted, it must be shown that he has had, and still has, the
             ultimate responsibility for the major  decisions  relating  to
             the  child's  upbringing  and  provides  the  child  with  the
             majority of the financial and emotional support  he  requires.
             It must also be shown that he has had and  continues  to  have
             care and control of the child.  For example:

                  'A non-British citizen child born to a British citizen and
                  a  foreign  national  living  abroad.   The  couple   then
                  separate and the UK  national  wishes  to  return  to  the
                  United Kingdom to live with the child.  The UK parent  has
                  chief responsibility for the child, and the foreign parent
                  does not object to the child living in the United Kingdom.
                   In such a case the UK parent could be considered to  have
                  sole responsibility.

                  Two foreign nationals living abroad  have  a  child,  then
                  separate.  One parent comes  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
                  obtains settlement.  The child  remains  with  the  parent
                  abroad for several years, then at the age of 13+ wishes to
                  join the parent in the United Kingdom to take advantage of
                  the educational system.  There is no reason why the  child
                  should not remain with the parent who  lives  abroad.   In
                  this case the parent who lives in the United Kingdom would
                  not be considered to have sole responsibility'.

         4.2  Where the child and the parent  claiming  sole  responsibility
             are separated

             Where the child and parent are separated, the physical day-to-
             day care of the child must be entrusted to others, and  it  is
             expected that  where  the  child  is  being  looked  after  by
             relatives, they should be the relatives of the parent claiming
             'sole responsibility' rather than those of the  other  parent.
             Should  this  be  the  case,   the   parent   claiming   'sole
             responsibility' must  still  be  able  to  show  that  he  has
             retained  the  ultimate   responsibility   for   the   child's
             upbringing and provides the  majority  of  the  emotional  and
             financial support needed.

             If it is established that the child is being cared for by  the
             relatives of the father, but it is the mother who has  applied
             for the child to join her in this country (or vice versa), the
             application should normally be refused.

         4.3  Where it is not  clear  which  parent  has  established  'sole
             responsibility'

             Cases may arise where even though  one  parent  has  taken  no
             share of responsibility, or so  small  a  share  that  it  can
             effectively be disregarded, the other parent cannot  claim  to
             have had 'sole responsibility'.  This may be where  more  than
             the  day-to-day  care  and  control  of  a  child   has   been
             transferred to another person due, perhaps, to the  sponsoring
             parent being in this  country  and  not  maintaining  a  close
             involvement in the child's bringing etc.

             There are a number of  factors  which  should  be  taken  into
             account when deciding whether, for the purpose of the Rules, a
             parent  has  established   that   he   has   had   the   'sole
             responsibility' for a child to  the  exclusion  of  the  other
             parent or those who may have been  looking  after  the  child.
             These may include:

                . the period for which the parent in the United Kingdom  has
                  been separated from the child;

                . what the arrangements were  for  the  care  of  the  child
                  before that parent migrated to this country.

                . who has  been  entrusted  with  the  day-to-day  care  and
                  control of the child since the sponsoring parent  migrated
                  here;

                . who  provides,  and  in  what  proportion,  the  financial
                  support for the child's care and upbringing.

                . who takes the  important  decisions  about   the   child's
                  upbringing,  such  as   where  and  with  whom  the  child
                  lives, the choice of school, religious practice etc;

                . the degree of contact that has been maintained between the
                  child and the parent claiming 'sole responsibility'.

                . what part in the child's care and upbringing is played  by
                  the parent not in the United Kingdom and his relatives".

39. The case of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 0049  considered  sole  responsibility  and  concluded  as
    follows: -

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence. Where one parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  has  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including  making  all  the  decisions  in  the
         child's life.  However,  where  both  parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'".

40. In Nmaju & Ors v Entry Clearance Officer [2000] EWCA Civ 505 the  Court
    of Appeal expressed  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  held  sole
    responsibility throughout the life of the  child  or  that  periods  in
    which responsibility was shared or held by another  in  the  past  will
    invalidate   the   Sponsor's   claim   of   currently   holding    sole
    responsibility.  At paragraph 15 the Court of Appeal said: -

         "... that paragraph of the  Rule  makes  no  mention  of  any  time
         condition which has to be  fulfilled.   It  does  not  mention  any
         minimum period, nor does it indicate whether there is any  terminal
         date of any such period".

Findings and reasons

41. While I appreciate the difficulty of establishing that  another  parent
    has abdicated their responsibility, I am not satisfied that the Sponsor
    has provided a  coherent  account  on  which  I  can  rely,  and  which
    establishes that she has sole responsibility for the  Appellants.   The
    evidence does not establish that the Appellants' father is not involved
    in their lives.  I am satisfied that he has been at some  time  in  the
    UAE; however, this is not sufficient  to  establish  he  has  abdicated
    responsibility for his  children  and/or  that  the  Sponsor  has  sole
    responsibility.  While there is nothing inherently implausible about  a
    father abandoning his children, the Sponsor is not a credible  witness.
    Her evidence is not reliance.

42. I do not expect the Sponsor to have produced  a  letter  from  her  ex-
    partner confirming that he has abdicated responsibility. With reference
    to Mr Howell's skeleton argument, a letter confirming that he  consents
    to the children coming to the United Kingdom to live with their  mother
    live, could in my  view  support  that  he  has  involvement  in  their
    upbringing.  I understand that there  may  be  reasons  why  an  absent
    father may not wish to cooperate  with  an  such  an  application.  The
    Sponsor said that he did not agree to give her  more  information  over
    and above providing a copy of an UAE  identity  card.  While  there  is
    nothing inherently implausible about this,  it  is  undermined  by  the
    Sponsor being unable to provide a coherent account explaining when  and
    how she made contact with him.

43. The Sponsor has not been consistent about when she was  given  her  ex-
    partner's contact details (2017 or 2018). I have taken into account her
    evidence that she was confused about  the  question  asked  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. This may explain why she said that she  was  given
    his details in 2017 which is the year she was granted a residence card;
    however, at the same hearing she then said 2018. To muddy the waters in
    evidence before me she said that the lady, a childhood friend, gave her
    the details in 2019.  I understand that she  may  have  asked  for  the
    details and received them on different  dates,  but  no  where  in  her
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did she say that she was  given
    the details in 2019. Furthermore, the Sponsor in her statements  of  15
    May 2019 and 23 September 2019 says that a common friend gave  her  the
    contact details in 2017.   The  Sponsor  has  also  failed  to  give  a
    consistent account about when she spoke  with  her  ex-partner.   In  a
    statement of 23 September 2019, she said she made contact  a  few  days
    ago. However, in her most recent  statement  she  said  that  she  made
    contact on 5 May 2019. The Sponsor  has  raised  issues  regarding  her
    understanding  of  the  English  language;  however,  Mr  Gajjar  twice
    confirmed that she did not need an interpreter at  the  hearing  before
    me.

44. There is no evidence from the family friend who gave her  the  details.
    Moreover, I was also concerned by the Sponsor's evidence about a letter
    which she says that she gave her  then  solicitors  to  attach  to  the
    application. This has not been previously raised and indeed  Mr  Gajjar
    was unaware of it.  I  was  concerned  that  recordings  of  the  short
    conversations that  she  had  with  the  Appellants'  father  were  not
    disclosed in evidence. It does not assist the Sponsor that her evidence
    has not been consistent about the timing of her mother's death or  that
    at the conclusion of the case, she raised issues relating to the safety
    of the Appellants which is  not  a  matter  that  has  been  previously
    raised.   The  Appellants  have   been   represented   throughout   the
    proceedings.

45.  I  accept  that  there  is  evidence  capable  of  corroborating  sole
    responsibility; namely, the evidence  from  the  school  and  of  money
    transfers and of course the Appellants' own evidence. The  Sponsor  was
    clearly upset at the hearing. I have no doubt that she has worked  hard
    here to provide for her children. She has been separated from them  for
    economic reasons and is desperate to be reunited here.  However,  there
    are so many problems her evidence.  While it is  plausible  that  there
    could be problems with contacting the  father  and  obtaining  evidence
    about abdication of responsibility, it is reasonable to have expected a
    more coherent and consistent account from the Sponsor. The  failure  to
    provide this undermines the evidence that she has sole  responsibility.
    The Sponsor clearly has a degree of responsibility for the  Appellants,
    but I am not satisfied that their father is not involved in their lives
    or that his involvement  is  so  minimal  that  it  can  be  reasonably
    inferred that the Sponsor has sole responsibility.  Thus, the burden of
    proof has not been discharged. I am not satisfied that the Sponsor  has
    sole responsibility for the Appellants.

46. Taking into account the totality of the evidence I  conclude  that  the
    Appellants have not established on the balance  of  probabilities  that
    the Sponsor has sole responsibility.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  under
    Article 8 ECHR. The Appellants' case was not advanced  on  the  grounds
    that should they not meet the  Rules,  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outside the Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed         Joanna McWilliam                       Date18 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

