

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11892/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th March 2019                  |On 25th April 2019               |
|                                          |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                  ROQIA [A]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Anderson
Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Stuart Buchanan dismissing an appeal on human rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  She is married with two
      children, a daughter and a son.  The family all live together in
      Scotland.  At the date the human rights claim leading to this appeal
      was made, 3rd July 2015, the appellant's son (hereinafter referred to
      as "HA") was under 18 but at the date of the hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal on 22nd May 2018 he was over 18.

   3. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was largely based upon the
      position of HA, as a qualifying child who had been in the UK for more
      than 7 years at the time the human rights application was made.   At
      the age of 9 in 2008 he had entered the UK accompanied by his parents
      and sibling.  Upon consideration of the evidence the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied or that it would be
      disproportionate to require the appellant to leave the UK either with
      the rest of her family or even without her children, who were now
      adults.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal principally on
      the basis that following the decision of the Supreme Court in KO
      (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal arguably
      erred by taking into account his parents' immigration history in
      deciding whether it was reasonable to expect HA to leave the UK.

Submissions
   5. For the appellant, Mr Forrest relied on the grounds of the application
      for permission to appeal.  He submitted there were two reasons why the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal was wrong, based on the
      authorities of KO (Nigeria) and JG (s117B(6) "reasonable to leave" UK)
      Turkey [2019] UKUT 72.  The First-tier Tribunal erred by concluding
      that it was reasonable to expect HA to leave the UK and by the way
      that section 117B(6) was applied.

   6. In more detail, Mr Forrest submitted that the judge addressed the best
      interests of HA in relation to the exercise of private life in the UK
      but exactly the same reasoning applied to the reasonableness of
      expecting him to leave.  At paragraph 5.8 of the decision the judge
      found it was in HA's best interests to remain in the UK but the judge
      then looked at the immigration history of HA's parents, and
      particularly that of his father, and concluded that at the date of the
      human rights application HA did not meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of
      the Immigration Rules.  After looking at HA's father's circumstances
      the judge reached a different conclusion from what he had decided HA's
      best interests were.  In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was
      decided that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was a stand-alone provision and
      parents' misdemeanours should not be taken into account.  The grant of
      permission to appeal indicated that MA (Pakistan) was overruled by KO
      (Nigeria) but this was not strictly correct.  In addition to looking
      at KO (Nigeria) earlier Supreme Court decisions should be taken into
      account, namely ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

   7. Turning to JG, Mr Forrest submitted that, according to the headnote,
      in applying s 117B(6) the tribunal should hypothesise that the child
      would leave the UK.  If the parents were not liable to removal then
      there would be no public interest in removing the child.  Where the
      parents were liable to removal the starting point was whether the
      child should be expected to leave the UK.  Mr Forrest acknowledged
      that in the present appeal each member of the family had no more than
      temporary admission.  From paragraph 8.4 onwards the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal discussed the reasonableness of expecting HA to
      leave the UK but had earlier found that at the time the human rights
      claim was made, when HA was only 15, it was in his best interests to
      stay.  The judge failed to make any further finding in relation to the
      expectation that HA would accompany his mother.  The findings made
      from paragraph 8.4 onwards were not open to the judge given the
      earlier findings made.  The judge treated HA as if he was on a "gap
      year" whereas he had been in the UK for a long time.  The judge had
      assumed the position was different for someone aged 15 but time had
      passed while HA continued to study and the judge should have assessed
      the period after the age of 15.

   8. Mr Forrest acknowledged that para 276ADE(1)(v), which was mentioned in
      the application for permission to appeal, did not apply as HA was
      under 18 when the human rights claim was made.  This was an Article 8
      claim in which, instead of taking an unduly prescriptive approach, all
      the circumstances should have been looked at in the round, including
      the position when HA was under 18.    The judge did not mention
      educational certificates for HA's father and a psychologist's report
      which were before the tribunal.

   9. For the respondent Mr Govan supported the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal.  The decision in MA (Pakistan) was not overturned by KO
      (Nigeria). At paragraph 45 of MA (Pakistan) the Court of Appeal took
      the same approach to reasonableness as the Supreme Court in KO
      (Nigeria), as set out at paragraphs 11, 17,18 and 19.  The actions of
      the parents would not be taken into account in assessing the best
      interests of the child but would be relevant to the overall
      proportionality assessment.

  10. Mr Govan continued by saying that the present appeal was a good
      example of looking at the child's circumstances in the "real world"
      context referred to in KO (Nigeria) at paragraph 19.  There had been a
      protracted period between the human rights claim and the appeal.  It
      was necessary to look at the circumstances at the time of the original
      decision and on appeal.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had
      applied the correct test at paragraphs 5.2-5.8 by considering the best
      interests of HA without looking at outside factors.  The judge then
      considered those other factors at 5.9-5.13 and found it was not
      unreasonable to expect HA to leave the UK.  The judge had not given
      inappropriate relevance to past conduct.  The family would all return
      to Pakistan together.  There was no error of law.

  11. Mr Govan pointed out that although HA was not eligible to rely on
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) at the date of the human rights claim, because
      he was then under 18, he could make an application under this
      provision in his own right.

  12. Mr Govan commented on an important distinction between paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv), which applied to circumstances at the date of the human
      rights claim, and s 117B(6), which applied to the prevailing
      circumstances at the date of the application or when any subsequent
      decision was being made , whether by the Secretary of State or by a
      tribunal on appeal.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had
      considered Article 8 outside the rules as he was entitled to do and
      had assessed the family's circumstances in considerable detail, taking
      into account the degree of integration, languages spoken, family ties,
      and education.  The judge took into account the refusal of an asylum
      claim.  At paragraph 8.5 and 8.6 the judge looked at proportionality
      and reasonableness based on the facts of the case.  The judge did not
      accept there were no ties with Pakistan, such as a family home and
      financial interests there.  The judge noted that HA was not in
      education at the time of the hearing.  The family's immigration
      history included verbal deception and the family had no leave to
      continue residing in the UK.

  13. In response Mr Forrest submitted that at paragraph 5.8 the Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal found that at a certain point it was in HA's
      best interests to remain in the UK.  At that time HA's education was a
      critical factor.  The appeal did not succeed because of the passage of
      time between that point and the date of the hearing but this lapse of
      time was not the fault of the appellant.

Discussion
  14. I will begin my consideration of whether the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal erred in law by looking at the structure of his decision.
      The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal started his consideration at
      paragraph 5.2 by assessing the best interests of the appellant's son,
      HA, at the date of the human rights claim in July 2015.  As stated at
      paragraph 5.9, the judge had in mind the application at that time of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  The judge found
      that at that time the best interests of HA were served by remaining in
      the UK to complete his secondary education.  The judge observed at
      paragraph 5.8 that HA was at a critical stage of his education.

  15. Having found that in 2015 it was in the best interests of HA to remain
      in the UK, the judge then proceeded, from paragraph 5.9 onwards, to
      consider whether it would have been reasonable to expect HA to have
      left the UK with his parents at that time, seeking to apply the test
      in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  In considering this the judge took into
      account the family's immigration history and HA's father's two
      criminal convictions.  At paragraph 5.13 the judge concluded that it
      would not have been unreasonable to expect HA to leave the UK in July
      2015.  The reasons supporting this conclusion are based primarily on
      the family's immigration history.  The judge also took into account
      that HA spent the first nine years of his life in Pakistan and his
      parents still have business interests there.  The judge referred to an
      unsuccessful asylum claim based on grounds of religion and referred to
      an item of psychiatric evidence.

  16. Surprisingly I do not recall either party referring me specifically to
      paragraph 16 of KO (Nigeria), where Lord Carnwath stated as follows:

         "It is natural to begin with the first in time, that is paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv). This paragraph is directed solely to the position of
         the child.  Unlike its predecessor DP5/96 it contains no
         requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of a parent
         as a balancing factor.  It is impossible in my view to read it as
         importing a requirement by implication."


  17. This clearly shows that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in
      law by taking into account HA's parents' immigration history and his
      father's criminal convictions under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  It is
      fair to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to observe that the
      Supreme Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) was not given until October
      2018, some 5 months after the hearing of this appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal, but this does not alter the finding of an error of law.



  18. What is the significance of this error?  The answer is that it is not
      material to the outcome of this appeal.  This is not the appeal of HA
      but of his mother.  Were it HA's appeal then it might be that the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal would be set aside.  But as this
      is his mother's appeal there are further considerations to be taken
      into account.  The only finding in this appeal which would be altered
      as a result of this error is that in July 2015 HA should have been
      successful in an application on his own account under paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv).  If HA made such an application and it was refused by
      the Secretary of State, HA nevertheless did not pursue an appeal
      against it.  Instead this appeal was brought by HA's mother on her
      account.  At the time the appeal was decided by the First-tier
      Tribunal in May 2018, HA was approaching his nineteenth birthday and
      any entitlement he might have had under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was
      confined to a historical possibility.

  19. In passing I note Mr Forrest's submission that the lapse of time
      between the making of the human rights claim in July 2015 and the
      hearing in May 2018 was not the fault of the appellant.  Nevertheless,
      as will be seen, this passage of time is important in relation to
      section 117B(6) because HA reached 18 years of age in June 2017 and
      was then no longer a qualifying child for the purpose of this
      provision.  Mr Forrest also questioned why, if education was
      considered critical in assessing HA's best interests in 2015, it
      should not also have been critical in 2018.  The answer to this
      question, of course, is that by May 2018 HA was no longer a child and
      his best interests were no longer a primary consideration in his
      mother's appeal.  As Mr Govan pointed out, it is open to HA to make an
      application on his own behalf under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  If this
      is successful he will be entitled to remain in the UK as a an adult
      and may have the opportunity of proceeding to tertiary education in
      this country.

  20. Having considered the application of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in July
      2015, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then considered at
      paragraphs 6 to 7 of his decision how the Immigration Rules related to
      the jurisdiction he was exercising.  After this he proceeded, from
      paragraph 8 onwards, to consider the application of Article 8 outside
      the Immigration Rules, having regard to the facts and circumstances at
      the date of the hearing in May 2018.  The judge referred at paragraph
      8.4 to section 117B.  By May 2018, of course, as the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal recognised, HA was no longer a qualifying child as
      he had attained the age of 18 in June 2017.  The judge concluded that
      where the family was leaving together there would be no interference
      with family life and the interference with private life was not
      disproportionate.  Furthermore, both children were adults and there
      was no evidence of more than usual dependency between adult family
      members.  Even if the appellant left without the children any
      interference with family life would not be disproportionate.

  21. The proportionality assessment under Article 8 carried out by the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was carefully reasoned and took full
      account of all the relevant factors.  It has not been challenged save
      in relation to the best interests of HA and the reasonableness of
      expecting him to leave the UK.  By the time of the hearing in May
      2018, however, these matters were no longer relevant to this appeal as
      HA was an adult. The judge took into account the question of
      dependency by adult family members but he does not appear to have had
      before him evidence or submissions specifically directed to this.

  22. The position is that although a significant part of the reasoning of
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, in relation to the application
      of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), was based on an error of law, this was not
      material to the outcome of the appeal.  The important part of the
      judge's decision was the proportionality assessment under Article 8,
      in which the judge did not make any error of law.

  23. There is a further issue arising from the application for permission
      to appeal.  This is the question of whether the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal properly addressed whether there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Pakistan, in
      terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  It was pointed out that the
      appellant's father has been given refugee status in the UK on the
      grounds of religion.

  24. Mr Forrest had little to say on this issue at the hearing, for reasons
      which are apparent.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal addressed
      the issue initially at paragraph 5.14.  The judge noted that there was
      no appeal on protection grounds before him and an earlier asylum claim
      was unsuccessful.  The judge further noted that only selective
      documents from the unsuccessful asylum claim were lodged on behalf of
      the appellants.  These included an expert report, referred to in the
      application for permission to appeal, which the judge found was of
      little weight without the rest of the documentation relating to the
      claim.  The judge referred in similar terms to a psychologist's report
      from 2009 on the appellant.

  25. In the application for permission to appeal it is stated that the
      findings at paragraph 5.14 were made in respect of the position of the
      appellant's son, rather than the appellant herself.  However, the
      judge went on to consider at paragraph 5.18 whether there were very
      significant obstacles to integration for the appellant and her spouse.
       The judge specifically took into account recent medical evidence from
      2018 and found there was nothing to show the appellant would not
      receive effective treatment in Pakistan.  Subsequently, at paragraph
      8.7, the judge considered the ability of the appellant and her husband
      to provide for themselves on return to Pakistan and noted that if
      their property had been unlawfully acquired by other members of their
      family they could have recourse to the legal system.  In short, there
      is no substance in the contention that the judge did not adequately
      consider whether there would be very significant obstacles to
      integration by the appellant on return to Pakistan.

  26. Having considered the grounds of the application for permission to
      appeal and the submissions made before me, I am not satisfied that the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains any error of law which
      could have given rise to a different outcome.  Accordingly the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Conclusions
  27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error of law.

  28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal shall
      stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  I have not been
asked to continue this direction and I see no reason of substance for doing
so.



M E Deans
                                     16th April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


