

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11611/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2019                       |On 16 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AKIL [Z]
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A W Khan, of Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals (with permission of  FtT  Judge  Pickup)
    against the decision and reasons statement  of  FtT  Judge  Boylan-Kemp
    that was issued on 17 May 2018.

 2. Mr Mills conceded that he could no longer defend the grounds of  appeal
    given the Court of Appeal's judgment in SSHD  v  AB  (Jamaica)  &  Anor
    [2019] EWCA Civ 661 because it is clear that the hypothetical question,
    "Is it reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK?" must
    be determined irrespective of whether the child would have to leave the
    UK.

 3. Mr Mills accepted that on the facts in this appeal,  which  in  summary
    are that (i) the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his British citizen son, and  (ii) the appellant's son lives  with
    his mother and not with the appellant,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  As a result, even though there might
    be some merit in the detailed grounds relating to  suitability  factors
    and as to whether Judge Boylan-Kemp should have applied paragraph  EX.1
    of appendix FM to the immigration  rules,  there  could  be  no  public
    interest in removing  the  appellant  because  of  the  application  of
    s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002.
    Although Judge Boylan-Kemp did not come at the relevant issue directly,
    her decision and reasons are sufficient to show that  her  decision  is
    correct in law.

 4. Given this concession, there was no need to hear from Mr Khan.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and  reasons  of  Judge  Boylan-Kemp
and I uphold her decision.
The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                                       Date         13 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


