
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11618/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2019                   |On 08 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                             mr Suleyman Karakas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Collins of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  following  the  grant  of
    permission on a renewal application by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on
    3 December 2018.  That followed a refusal of permission  to  appeal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 12 October 2018.

2.   The background to this appeal is that the appellant arrived in  the  UK
    in 2006 and was given leave to remain as the partner of one  [Miss  CK]
    to September 2016.  Various applications were made to extend his leave.
      Unfortunately,  the  respondent  decided  that  he  had  used  forged
    documents in relation to one of those applications and  concluded  that
    he did not qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.

3.   The current application was made, it would seem, in September 2016.  On
    19 September 2017 the appellant was refused leave to  remain  based  on
    his private or family life in the UK under Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  In summary, having found  that  the
    appellant did not qualify under any of the Immigration Rules which were
    relevant to his case, the responondent went on to consider whether  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with either of  the
    stepchildren with whom he lived ([Ut] and [Ur]) and  whether  in  those
    circumstances he qualified as having established a family life  in  the
    UK. The respondent then considered whether  it  would  be  unlawful  to
    interfere with that family life by returning the appellant to Turkey.

4.   The respondent accepted that the  appellant  had  a  relationship  with
    [Ur], who was born on 26 June 2003 and is therefore aged 15, and  [Ut],
    who was born on the  23  January  2001.   However,  he  was  unable  to
    establish a parental relationship or that he had such degree of contact
    as would establish that he had  a  qualifying  relationship  with  [Ur]
    within Article 8.  Furthermore,  it  was  not  accepted  the  appellant
    qualified  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  specifically  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules,  either.  There  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his  re-integration  into  Turkey  if  he  was
    required to go there.  He was over the age of 18  and  had  spent  less
    than twenty years living in the UK, indeed, most of his life  had  been
    spent in Turkey, where he had very strong  social  and  cultural  ties.
    Obviously, he was able to speak the Turkish language and would be  able
    to return there, where he could continue to maintain contact  with  his
    stepchildren if he so desired. The respondent also considered  his  own
    obligation to consider the welfare of [Ur], who  at  the  date  of  the
    decision was still under 18, pursuant to Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

5.   At the hearing of the appeal against the respondent's  decision,  which
    came before, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  A.  M.  S.  Green  (the
    Immigration Judge), the appellant was represented by  Mr  Collins.   An
    initial application for an adjournment was rejected by the  Immigration
    Judge. Although he does not refer to  this  in  his  decision,  I  have
    considered his  notes  of  hearing,  which  suggest  that  because  the
    appellant's  stepchildren  had  not  attended  the  Tribunal  to   give
    evidence, he drew an adverse inference from their non-attendance.  This
    was the choice of the appellant or his representatives.  He  considered
    it to be in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the
    absence of those children.  Based on what Mr Collins  told  me  at  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, the application for an  adjournment  was
    only made on the morning of the hearing without any prior  notification
    being given that it would be made to the respondent  or  the  Tribunal.
    The Immigration Judge therefore decided it was appropriate  to  proceed
    with the hearing without granting an adjournment.

6.   The Immigration Judge went on to hear  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    partner and submissions by both representatives, but he held  that  the
    appellant was ineligible to apply under the  Immigration  Rules  having
    considered those Rules.  He inferred that the reason that the  children
    have not been present at the hearing must have reflected on their  lack
    of proper relationship with their stepfather.   No  written  statements
    had been provided for  those  children,  which  was  a  choice  of  the
    appellant  or  his  representatives.   He  considered  the  appellant's
    assertions as  to  his  degree  of  contact  with  his  step  children,
    including [Ur], but noted that  the  appellant  was  asked  during  his
    evidence whether he had any documentary evidence  of  his  relationship
    with those stepchildren, other than the photographs which were  in  the
    appellant's bundle.  He said that he had chosen the photographs from  a
    variety he had, and the photographs were taken at home at weekends  and
    would be a memento for him.  He was unsure how often the  children  saw
    their biological father. He was asked if he had any  other  documentary
    evidence that he wished to produce, but he was unable to produce any.

7.   His partner Miss [K] gave evidence and  said  that  the  appellant  was
    unemployed.  He saw the children three or four times a week.  Miss  [K]
    said the appellant never parents'  evenings  at  Highbury  Grove.   She
    usually goes with her ex-partner.  He was not listed  as  an  emergency
    contact  at  the  school.   Miss  [K]  made  the  important   decisions
    concerning the children with her ex-partner.  She sometimes  asked  the
    appellant his opinion.  She said that her children were not made  "like
    small babies"; they  had  their  natural  father  on  the  scene.   The
    Immigration  Judge  that  the  appellant  did  not  have   a   parental
    relationship with his stepchildren for the purposes of the  Immigration
    Rules.  Given the limited nature of the relationship  established,  the
    appellant could return to Turkey and maintain contact with the children
    by whatever modern means were available to him there.

8.   The Immigration Judge considered Section 117B of the 2002  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (2002 Act) generally  and  specifically
    section 117B (6). He concluded that the respondent's decision would not
    require  any  of  the  children  to  leave  the  UK.  Accordingly,  the
    Immigration Judge  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds. There was no substantive appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,
    as this case post-dated the introduction of the Immigration Act 2014.

The Upper Tribunal appeal

9.   The grant of permission  by  Judge  Chalkley  merely  states  that  the
    Immigration Judge had arguably erred in placing too  much  emphasis  on
    the absence of the appellant's children from the  hearing.   Permission
    was therefore granted, and all grounds could be argued.  Judge Chalkley
    made the point that he had no criticism of  the  Immigration  Judge  's
    decision to refuse an adjournment.

10.  Dealing with the last-mentioned ground of appeal first, I am  satisfied
    that  the  Immigration  Judge  was  required  to  have  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in determining  cases  fairly  and  justly.   This
    required him to consider the time that cases took to come  to  hearing.
    Normally only appropriate to grant an adjournment where it is necessary
    and in the interests of justice. An oral application for an adjournment
    was made before the Immigration Judge on the day of the hearing. It was
    clear from the submissions for the Upper Tribunal that that adjournment
    was that Mr Collins reached a different view of the importance  of  the
    oral  evidence  of  the  children  than  his  predecessors.   The  same
    solicitors who instructed Mr Collins then, also instructed  Mr  Collins
    before the Upper Tribunal. one assumes there is no conflict between the
    appellant and his current solicitors and therefore one assumes that the
    appellant continues to have confidence in his solicitors.  In any event
    it was perfectly within the Immigration Judge's case management  powers
    to refuse the adjournment and proceed with the hearing.  The  case  had
    been listed for a substantive hearing as long ago as  9  November  2017
    and it finally came on for hearing before the Immigration Judge  on  19
    July 2018. The hearing date had been in the diary  from  November  2017
    until July 2018 and it was too late to  apply  to  adjourn  the  appeal
    without there being a good reason.  Furthermore,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that it is necessarily appropriate to hear oral evidence from a 15  and
    17-year-old children. Letters in  support  might  have  been  perfectly
    sufficient.

11.  Secondly, the  Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference from the fact that the  children  had  not  provided  written
    evidence in support of their stepfather's claim.  The Immigration Judge
    gave a careful decision in which he reviewed  all  the  evidence.   The
    fact that the appellant was not listed as an emergency contact  by  the
    school was a factor that the judge was entitled to  take  into  account
    when considering whether he had  established  a  parental  relationship
    with his children.

12.  Before the Upper Tribunal  I  heard  argument  by  both  parties.  They
    agreed that the case of Ortega [2018] UKUT 298 (IAC) is relevant. Where
    children had a father caring role and a stepfather also  in  place,  in
    relation to children whose welfare is being considered:

         "... if a non-biological parent ("third party") caring for a child
         claims to be a step-parent, the existence of such a relationship
         will depend upon all the circumstances including whether or not
         there are others (usually the biologically parents) who have such a
         relationship with the child also. It is unlikely that a person will
         be able to establish they have taken on the role of a parent when
         the biological parents continue to be involved in the child's life
         as the child's parents."

13.  Mr Collins submitted that the Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  make
    proper  findings  in  relation  to  the  presence  or  nature  of   the
    relationship between the appellant and his stepchildren.  He  was  more
    important to them than the biological father, he said.  This had to  be
    properly investigated, preferably by remitting the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. He submitted that the  Immigration
    Judge had been wrong to decide that the appellant had a  limited  role.
    Whilst the biological father might have been the  "primary  carer"  for
    the appellant's step children, it was the case that the  appellant  had
    an almost equal role in the child's upbringing.

14.  Mr Bates on  the  other  hand  relied  on  Ortega  and  said  that  the
    Immigration Judge set out very clearly in his decision why he  did  not
    find the appellant to be in a parental role to his  step-children.   He
    referred me to several passages in the decision and he  submitted  that
    the  appellant  had  infrequent  contact  with  those   children.   The
    biological father was the primary parental figure in their  lives.  The
    Immigration Judge's decision was therefore well within his  discretion.



Conclusions

15.  I agree with Mr Bates' submissions.  I have  concluded  that  the  main
    parent  in  [Ur]  and  [Ut]'s  lives  was  their  natural  father.  The
    Immigration Judge set out in detail the arguments presented before  him
    by both sides. He  reached  an  adverse  view  as  to  the  appellant's
    credibility.  He was  entitled  to  take  account  of  the  appellant's
    failure to produce a letter from the children to confirm they  had  any
    significant relationship with the father, that was something that could
    have  been  dealt   with   reasonably   easily   by   the   appellant's
    representatives without the need for oral evidence.

Decision

16.  Given the adverse inferences and the clear fact-findings,  this  was  a
    decision the Immigration Judge was entitled to come to on the  evidence
    and I can find no basis for interfering with that decision.

17.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant is dismissed and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 7 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
