
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11318/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                        Ms MAXINE LORENE FARQUHARSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE))
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy promulgated on  27  October  2017  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision which the appellant had appealed against would not  cause  the
    United Kingdom to be in breach of the law or its obligations under  the
    ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a national of  Jamaica.   She  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of  her  relationship  with  her  partner
    Sharmaine Marie Taylor.  The  respondent  noted  that  passport  office
    records showed that Sharmaine Marie Taylor  had  fraudulently  obtained
    her British passport and that as a result  it  had  been  revoked,  and
    found that the appellant failed to meet the eligibility requirements of
    E-LTRP.1.2.

3.   The respondent further found that the appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE because she had not lived in the United  Kingdom
    for twenty years or more  and  was  not  under  the  age  of  18.   The
    respondent noted that the appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  in
    August 2002 having spent the first 35 years of her life in Jamaica  and
    that she would be able to integrate back into life in Jamaica.

4.   At the hearing before me there was no appearance by the  appellant  nor
    was there any appearance on her  behalf.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    notice of today's hearing was sent to the appellant at her  last  known
    address at [ ] London [ ].   That  was  the  address  provided  by  the
    appellant when she lodged the application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  There was no explanation from  the  appellant  for
    her absence.  In the circumstances I proceeded with the hearing.

5.   At the hearing before the judge the appellant  put  in  an  appearance.
    She gave oral evidence and said she was no  longer  in  a  relationship
    with Sharmaine Marie Taylor.  She described herself as gay but had  not
    made an asylum claim and wished to do so.  She claimed that  she  could
    not return to Jamaica due to her sexuality which she  had  always  kept
    secret but since coming to the United Kingdom did not wish to  hide  it
    anymore and that there are serious consequences in Jamaica if  you  are
    lesbian or gay.  She said she was gay before she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She had previously been granted discretionary  leave  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of a relationship with a male partner whose
    son was a British citizen.

6.   The judge said she asked the appellant why  she  had  not  applied  for
    asylum after the refusal of her application and she said it was because
    she had another application which  was  being  processed  and  had  not
    sought asylum.

7.   The judge accepted the respondent's decision that the  appellant  could
    not satisfy the eligibility requirements under  the  Immigration  Rules
    for limited leave to remain as a partner of a British citizen.

8.   The judge found that the appellant had  spent  her  formative  life  in
    Jamaica where she was educated and lived until the  age  of  35  before
    coming to the UK  as  a  visitor.   She  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has lost cultural, family and social ties  to  Jamaica.   She
    did not find that the appellant has disclosed evidence of the existence
    of  any  unjustifiably,  exceptional  circumstances  or  insurmountable
    obstacles nor has she disclosed any arguable good grounds  of  granting
    leave to remain outside the Rules.  As at the date of the  hearing  the
    appellant had made no claim for asylum in respect of her  claimed  fear
    as a lesbian returning to Jamaica.

9.   The judge found that the appellant was granted leave to remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules in June 2011 to June 2014 but since June 2014 has
    had no lawful leave and could have had no reasonable  expectation  that
    she could remain to develop her private life when at the time she  knew
    she had no lawful leave.  The judge said the appellant was not claiming
    to have any family life in the United Kingdom.

10.  Having considered all the factors as part of her consideration  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claims, the judge found that  the  appellant  has
    not disclosed sufficiently compelling and  compassionate  circumstances
    which would have justified the respondent in the grant of discretionary
    leave as the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  the   respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate.

11.  The appellant was  granted  permission  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Landes.  At paragraph 3 Judge Landes said as follows:

         "3.  It is arguable that despite the fact that  the  appellant  has
             not claimed asylum, the judge should have  considered  whether
             the appellant's return to Jamaica would breach Article 3 ECHR.
              Further it is arguable that the judge should have  considered
             Article 8 on the basis that if the appellant is gay and if the
             appellant would live openly as a gay woman  were  it  not  for
             fear of persecution then it is arguable that  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  reintegration
             into Jamaica.   The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's
             private life could be continued in  Jamaica  [16]  but  it  is
             arguable this finding is inadequately reasoned in the  absence
             of findings about the appellant's sexuality and how she  would
             wish to conduct herself in Jamaica".

12.  Mr Wilding argued that in light of the changes in the 2014  Immigration
    Act to Section 85(5) and (6), the appellant's claim to be at risk as  a
    result of her sexuality on return to Jamaica was  a  new  matter  which
    required the consent of the Secretary of State  for  the  appellant  to
    raise it.

13.  He submitted that the distinction in this case is  that  the  Secretary
    of State has always known about the  appellant's  sexuality.   However,
    the appellant until the hearing had not raised any fear on this  ground
    if she were to return to Jamaica.

14.  He said that in the respondent's  refusal  letter,  the  appellant  was
    told that if she has a fear of return to Jamaica, she should  make  the
    appropriate application in the manner described in the previous letter.
     A copy was included for her convenience.  For further information  she
    was asked to contact the Asylum Customer Contact  Centre.   Mr  Wilding
    said that the appellant failed to do this.

15.  The appellant was further told at Annex B -  Information  Notice,  that
    if she has reasons to stay in the United Kingdom that were not part  of
    her recent application, she must state them.  The requirement was being
    given under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  Again, the appellant failed to notify  the  Secretary  of  State
    about her fear of return to Jamaica on account of her sexuality.

Findings

16.  In the light of the submissions made by Mr. Wilding, I  find  that  the
    appellant's claim about her fear of return to Jamaica on account of her
    sexuality was a new matter.  Whilst the respondent  was  aware  of  the
    appellant's sexuality, the first time the appellant claimed a  fear  of
    return because of her sexuality was at the hearing  before  the  judge.
    She needed the consent of the respondent to raise this matter.    There
    was no evidence that the HOPO below gave the required consent on behalf
    of the Secretary of State.  The appellant was given  two  opportunities
    to raise this matter to enable the Secretary of State to  consider  it.
    She failed to do so.  Consequently, I find that the judge did  not  err
    in law in her failure to consider the matter.

17.  It is now up to the appellant to make the appropriate  application  for
    consideration by the Secretary of State.

18.  I find that on the evidence that was before  the  judge,  her  decision
    disclosed no error of law.

19.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 21 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




