






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/11926/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                 Decision and Reasons    |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On 15 June 2017                   |                 On 28 June 2017         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mr Dilraj Gurung
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Nepal,  born  on  1  October  1988.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Herlihy, promulgated on 13 September 2016, dismissing his appeal
      against the decision of the respondent to refuse to  grant  him  entry
      clearance as an adult dependant  relative  of  a  person  present  and
      settled in the UK. His sponsor was his father, Mr Sitaram Gurung.


   2. Notice of the hearing was sent to the appellant and his representative
      on record. However, no person attended the hearing. I consider that it
      is in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.


   3. Judge Herlihy found that at the date of decision the appellant was  26
      years old and was unmarried. The respondent refused his application on
      the basis that he was not financially and emotionally dependent on the
      sponsor [4.2]. The only evidence before her was the  letter  from  the
      village development committee - VDC - stating that  the  appellant  is
      totally dependent on his parents and the  land  ownership  certificate
      confirming ownership of land  by  the  sponsor  in  Nepal.  There  was
      however no 'objective  evidence'  of  any  financial  support  by  the
      sponsor to the appellant.


   4. Nor was it disputed that he had lived apart from his  sponsor,  having
      previously travelled to and been issued with a visa to work in  Qatar.
      He had accordingly lived independently of the sponsor - [4.2].


   5. She also found that there was no evidence that  he  was  incapable  of
      obtaining work, having worked in the past. He has  adult  siblings  in
      Nepal and is not living alone without a family there.


   6. In the circumstances she was not satisfied  that  he  has  established
      family life with his sponsor. He has spent his formative life in Nepal
      where many of his family members continue to live. He is 26 years  old
      and has lived independently for some years  apart  from  his  parents,
      before returning to Nepal to submit his application.


   7. On 18 April 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker stated  that  having
      regard to the grounds of appeal, the appellant claimed to have met all
      the terms of the applicable policy which had not been addressed. There
      was accordingly an arguable error of law in the Judge's assessment. It
      could not be said that the outcome would have been the  same  had  the
      policy and the claims made by the appellant in his original grounds of
      appeal been considered in the light of the amendment  of  the  policy,
      including in respect of those who are up to 30 years old at  the  date
      of their application, which the appellant claimed he was.


   8. Despite the fact that notice of hearing was given to the appellant and
      his representative, neither his  sponsor  nor  any  other  person  has
      attended the hearing.


   9. The appellant's application to settle in the UK was considered by  the
      respondent in accordance with the Home Secretary's policy as  outlined
      in Annex K(IDI Chapter 15 section 2A 13.2) as  amended  on  5  January
      2015.


  10. In his grounds, which are in the form of  a  narrative  statement  and
      which are signed by the appellant, he contends that the Judge "has not
      considered my appeal positively." He referred to  the  fact  that  the
      Judge decided two similar cases - his and another - at the same  time.
      The Judge did not pay positive and judicial attention to the  existing
      rules.


  11. He stated that he was 26 years old at the time of the application.  He
      was outside the UK when the application was made. He had not formed an
      independent family unit. He was financially and emotionally  dependent
      on his parents. He has not been apart from  them  for  more  than  two
      years. He visited Qatar in 2013  because  of  financial  problems.  He
      tried to be independent by going abroad  under  the  guidance  of  his
      parents and their support.


  12. In his grounds he stated that  he  has  enclosed  proof  of  financial
      support from his UK parents for his daily living as well as  fees  for
      his high school education.


  13. He asserted that he met the criteria in  annex  K  relating  to  adult
      children of former Gurkhas. He submitted that if he does not meet  the
      conditions under the Rules his claim is to be considered under Article
      8.


  14. Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  properly  considered  the
      appellant's appeal. The appellant  had  elected  to  have  the  appeal
      decided on the papers. Accordingly, no  person  attended  the  hearing
      then and there is no person who has attended  his  appeal  before  the
      Upper Tribunal either.


      Assessment


  15. In her decision, Judge Herlihy has set out the appellant's case.  This
      included his employment in Qatar in 2012.


  16. She had regard to Annex K, paragraph 9 (5) of the  IDIs,  Chapter  15,
      section 2A 13.2. In order for settlement to be granted  to  the  adult
      child of a former Gurkha under the policy, various conditions must  be
      met. The appellant must show that he is  financially  and  emotionally
      dependent on the former Gurkha. In addition, he must show that he  has
      not been living apart from the former Gurkha for more than  two  years
      at the date of application and has never lived apart from the  sponsor
      for more than two years at  a  time  unless  this  was  by  reason  of
      education  or  something  similar  (such  that  the  family  unit  was
      maintained, albeit the applicant lived away). Nor must he have  formed
      an independent family unit.


  17. At paragraph 2 the Judge had regard to the appellant's  grounds.  That
      included his claim  that  he  was  living  at  his  parents'  home  as
      confirmed by the village development committee. There are very limited
      jobs available in Nepal.


  18. The Judge noted that she has given careful consideration  to  all  the
      documents before her together with Annex K and the IDIs,  chapter  15.
      She did not have a respondent's bundle. Nor were there any  statements
      or other evidence from the appellant setting out his history. The only
      evidence in support was that submitted with the notice of appeal.


  19. The appellant contends in his grounds that  he  met  the  requirements
      under Annex K.


  20. The Judge has considered the assertions and evidence. At [4.2] of  the
      decision she noted that he was 26 years old  and  was  unmarried.  The
      only evidence before her was a letter from the VDC contending that  he
      is totally dependent on his parents and the land ownership certificate
      confirming ownership of land by the sponsor in Nepal.


  21. There was no objective  evidence  of  any  financial  support  by  the
      sponsor to the appellant. Nor was it disputed that he has lived  apart
      from the sponsor, having travelled to and been issued with a  visa  to
      work in Qatar. Accordingly he had lived independently of his sponsor.


  22. She also noted that there is no evidence that he  is  not  capable  of
      obtaining work. He has worked in the past. He has  adult  siblings  in
      Nepal and is not living alone without family there.


  23. Nor did the appellant establish that he enjoys family  life  with  his
      sponsor [4.3]. He spent all of his formative life in Nepal  with  many
      of his family members who continue to live there.


  24. She found that he has been living  apart  from  the  sponsor  and  his
      family for some time. It is clear that the family have  been  able  to
      maintain their relationship with him without any  difficulty,  despite
      their being separated by a considerable distance. He  has  support  as
      well as family members upon whom he can rely in Nepal.


  25. The appellant in his grounds before the Upper Tribunal  has  contended
      that he did meet the relevant  requirements  under  Annex  K.  He  has
      sought to enclose proof of financial support from his UK  parents  for
      his daily living and fees for his high school education.


  26. However, that evidence was not attached. In any  event  that  evidence
      had not been made available to the First-tier Judge.


  27. In summary the Judge found that the appellant is a 26  year  old  male
      who has previously travelled to Qatar  for  employment.  He  has  been
      separated from his parents and was living independently for some years
      before returning to Nepal to submit his application - [4.3]. The Judge
      properly found that there was no objective evidence of  any  financial
      support from the sponsor. Nor was it disputed that he had lived  apart
      from his sponsor, having travelled to Qatar in order to work as he has
      lived there independently of the sponsor.


  28. In the circumstances, the  finding  that  there  was  no  family  life
      between the appellant and his parents who came to the UK in March 2010
      was sustainable on the evidence produced.


  29. I find that the Judge has given proper reasons  for  her  conclusions.
      They are neither irrational nor perverse.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date:  27 June 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

