
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11453/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 January 2017                        |On 06 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                NURUL ASHRAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Graham, Eden Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  Despite having  remained  in
    the UK as an overstayer since early 2006, the  respondent  granted  him
    leave to remain on family life grounds from 3 November 2012 until 3 May
    2015.  This was granted on the basis of  his  marriage  in  2012  to  a
    person present and settled in the UK.   He  and  his  wife  have  three
    children, all British citizens, aged 2, 4 and 5.  On 6  April  2015  he
    applied for further leave to remain.  This was refused on  10  November
    2015.  The appellant appealed.  On 4 August  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) Judge Parker  dismissed  his  appeal.   Judge  Parker  did  find,
    however,  that  the  respondent  had  been  wrong  to  refuse  him   on
    suitability grounds.

2.   The appellant's grounds of  appeal  were  in  essence  that  the  judge
    failed to apply the requirements of the Immigration Rules correctly and
    failed to make a proper proportionality assessment.   In  her  Rule  24
    notice the respondent did not challenge any of the judge's findings  of
    fact and expressed agreement with the grounds of appeal.   In  granting
    permission to appeal, Judge Keane noted that the judge erred in failing
    to consider whether  the  appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  of
    EX.1(b) of the Rules.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their concise submissions.

4.   I find that the FtT judge materially erred in law.  Having  (for  valid
    reasons) concluded that the respondent  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    appellant failed to meet  the  suitability  requirements,  the  judge's
    subsequent decision, that the appellant could not meet the requirements
    of the Rules because he failed to meet the financial requirements,  was
    erroneous,  since  the  appellant  was  entitled   to   be   considered
    independently under EX.1(b).  This failure on the part of the judge had
    a material effect on the outcome of the appeal.

5.   With the consent of both parties I proceeded to hear their  submissions
    on the decision I should  re-make.   Both  agreed  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the judge's principal findings  of  fact  and  Mr  McVeety
    confirmed that the respondent accepted that the FtT Judge  was  correct
    to find that the suitability requirements of the Rules  were  met.   Mr
    McVeety also accepted that in light of the judge's findings there could
    be no dispute that the appellant and his wife were both  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and that both continued to permanently live
    with one another as husband and wife.  Mr McVeety  also  accepted  that
    the three children were British citizens and,  indeed,  Mr  Graham  was
    able to produce  their  British  passports  to  me.   Mr  McVeety  also
    accepted that it was not realistic for the respondent to seek to  argue
    in this case that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's wife
    and three British citizen children to accompany the appellant to resume
    family life in  Bangladesh.   In  my  judgment,  that  was  a  sensible
    approach and one that I adopt.

6.   I am entirely satisfied that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules on the basis of EX.1(b) and  that  he  also
    meets the suitability requirements.  It is clear in my  view  that  the
    only reason the respondent did not  extend  the  appellant's  leave  to
    remain was because of her view that he did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements.  Whilst it is understandable that the  officer  concerned
    wished to be vigilant to ensure that persons with a history of domestic
    violence were able to qualify under the Rules, it is clear that at  the
    date of decision the domestic violence protection order issued  against
    the appellant on 6 August 2015 (preventing him from  contact  with  his
    spouse or entering her home) was limited to the period  from  6  August
    2015 to September 2016 (28 days) and had  not  been  renewed;  and  the
    respondent's refusal decision itself noted on the last  page  that  the
    appellant was back living with his partner and engaging in  a  parental
    relationship with the children.  The unchallenged  evidence  before  me
    confirms that the couple remain living together as  husband  and  wife,
    the appellant continues to have a strong parental relationship with his
    three children and there are no continuing concerns as to the  couple's
    relationship on the part of the Social Services.

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's  appeal  because  he
    meets the relevant requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   This  also
    means in the circumstances of this case that the inevitable  result  of
    my proportionality assessment outside the Rules would be to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date
           [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

