
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11281/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2017                               |On 21 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                        mr Tajudeen Ajibola Olaniyan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shiraz Bhanji of Counsel instructed by
Quintessence Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national  born  on  8  October  1970.   The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally using a  false  passport
    on 14 December 2000.  He has made a number of applications to remain in
    the United Kingdom based on  applications  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   These
    applications were refused on 23 August 2011, 1 February 2012, and again
    on 25 April 2013.  A further application on the same basis, i.e.  as  a
    family member of an EEA national, namely a spouse of a French  citizen,
    Wuuri Ndiaye, was made on 11 January 2014.   That  further  application
    was withdrawn by the appellant who stated that he would  be  making  an
    application on the basis of involvement with a British  child.   On  21
    July 2015 the appellant made an application for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of family life with Tyrone Olaniyah  Smith-
    Olaniyan.  On 28 August 2015 the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    application.  The respondent  decided  that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM under the parent route as the  appellant  had
    not provided sufficient evidence that he was the biological  father  of
    Tyrone and also considered that the appellant could not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE as it was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria.  The  respondent
    also considered that there were no exceptional circumstances warranting
    a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated  on  3  May  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zahed dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge found
    that the appellant was not the biological father  of  Tyrone.   On  the
    basis that the judge was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  the
    biological father of a British child, and taking into  account  Section
    117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  judge
    considered that any interference in the appellant's  private  life  was
    proportionate to the maintenance of immigration control.

 3. The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision.  On 9 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4. The grounds of appeal set out three distinct grounds.  It  is  asserted
    that the judge erred by failing to consider  Section  55  of  the  2009
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The judge  should  have
    been cognisant of the position of Tyrone as the appeal  was  argued  on
    the basis of family life.  It is asserted (without conceding  that  the
    appellant is not the biological father of the child)  that  whether  or
    not the appellant is the biological father, the best interests  of  the
    child should have been considered.  There was overwhelming evidence  of
    a father/son relationship between the appellant  and  the  child.   The
    judge placed unduly a high premium on the DNA test.  The  existence  of
    the father/son relationship was not in doubt and should have  therefore
    warranted consideration of Section 55 by the judge.  The child attended
    the hearing in support of the appellant's appeal, the child's  mother's
    and grandmother's evidence and those  of  other  persons  unequivocally
    established  that  there  is  a  father/son  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his child.  The judge did not consider the  psychological
    impact of not allowing the appellant to stay in the United Kingdom on a
    child who has always known him as his father.

 5. Ground 2 asserts that the judge erred by failing to make a  finding  on
    the residence order  presented  in  evidence  before  him.   The  judge
    ignored the order of a superior court in its entirety.  It is  asserted
    that by flagrantly  ignoring  the  fact  that  if  the  court  was  not
    satisfied by credible evidence of identity of the appellant  the  court
    would not have made the order in the first place.  The  judge's  action
    in not taking cognisance of the residence order issued by  a  court  of
    competent jurisdiction was tantamount to judicial malfeasance.

 6. Ground 3 asserts that the judge unduly and unreasonably placed emphasis
    on the mode of entry into the United Kingdom as  if  entry  to  the  UK
    illegally is a bar to being granted leave to remain.  The judge  failed
    to direct his mind to the fact that the  Home  Office  policy  draws  a
    distinction between illegal entrant and overstayer and the policy never
    provides that an illegal immigrant will not be eligible to  be  granted
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge placed undue emphasis
    on the omission of the appellant's name at the initial registration  of
    the child's birth. By failing to make a decision on the residence order
    the judge has invariably discredited the residence order  which  formed
    the basis of the appellant's  details  being  entered  into  the  birth
    register.

 7. In oral submissions Mr  Bhanji  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider evidence of the witnesses and failed to give any reasons as to
    why he rejected that evidence.  With regard to Section 55 he  submitted
    that the judge was required to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  He referred to the evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal including evidence of photographs over a prolonged  period  of
    time, the description of each photograph, the evidence of the witnesses
    of  the  relationship,  letters  from  the  child's  school,  etc.   He
    submitted that even if the appellant is not the biological father there
    is  a  relationship  between  him  and  Tyrone  that  is   a   parental
    relationship as the evidence demonstrated.  He referred to the evidence
    of Tyrone's stepbrother and the other witnesses who all  gave  evidence
    that there was a subsisting genuine parental relationship.  He referred
    to the residence order that was in the bundle and submitted  that  this
    is evidence that the appellant is the biological parent of Tyrone.   He
    submitted that the judge  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  the  other
    evidence, such as the  birth  certificate  which  clearly  records  the
    appellant as the child's father.  He asserted that the  respondent  has
    never questioned the validity of the documents.  He argued  that  there
    is no obligation for the appellant to give DNA evidence and that  there
    might be many reasons why he would be unable to provide it.

 8. Mr Armstrong relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had considered all the evidence and that the  grounds  of  appeal
    are simply a disagreement with the findings of  the  judge.   The  Home
    Office had asked the appellant to produce DNA evidence.  The  appellant
    appears to have gone to great lengths to change documents to attempt to
    prove that he is the biological father. However, the appellant  entered
    the UK on a false passport which demonstrates  that  the  appellant  is
    prepared to  falsify  documents  and  therefore  the  judge  was  quite
    entitled in light of the appellant's background to find  the  documents
    did not carry sufficient weight.  He  submitted  that  it  is  for  the
    appellant to demonstrate and discharge the burden of proof that  he  is
    the biological father of Tyrone.  The appellant has been in the  United
    Kingdom illegally  for  seventeen  years.   He  has  not  produced  any
    evidence of how he has been financially supporting himself  or  Tyrone.
    That must be illegally if it is from working  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He submitted that  the  reluctance  of  the  appellant  to  submit  DNA
    evidence suggests that he is not the biological father of the appellant
    and the judge was perfectly entitled to make that finding.  In response
    to a question that I raised Mr Armstrong accepted that  the  judge  had
    not considered the relationship between the  appellant  and  the  child
    beyond whether or not the appellant was the biological father of Tyrone
    and has not considered,  notwithstanding  that  he  might  not  be  the
    biological parent, whether or not a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship might exist between them, but he submitted that  there  is
    little in  the  way  of  documentary  evidence  as  to  proof  of  that
    relationship.

 9. Mr Bhanji in reply argued that the judge clearly considered  Article  8
    outside of the Rules but he failed to consider  Section  117B(6).   The
    judge clearly has not considered whether or not there is a genuine  and
    subsisting parental  relationship.   He  submitted  that  there  was  a
    considerable volume of evidence of the relationship.

Discussion

10. It is clear that the background  to  the  appellant's  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his  relationship
    with  Tyrone  does  have  a  surprising  and  illogical  history.   The
    appellant made four applications between August 2011 and  January  2014
    on the basis of being the spouse of a non-EEA family member of a French
    national.  These applications were made when Tyrone  was  aged  between
    around 8 to 12 years.  No application was made  on  the  basis  of  his
    family life with Tyrone until 2015.  Amendments were made  to  Tyrone's
    birth certificate and a residence order appears to have been sought.  I
    agree with Mr Armstrong's submission that it would appear  that  whilst
    the appellant had a simple route available to establish that he was the
    biological father of Tyrone (i.e. a DNA test)  he  has  gone  to  great
    lengths to have documents changed possibly in an attempt to prove  that
    he is the biological father. Much emphasis in the grounds of appeal and
    in oral evidence was placed on the residence order that was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  However, as I noted during  the  course  of
    the hearing that residence order is not evidence that the appellant  is
    Tyrone's biological father. It does not record who  the  applicant  and
    the respondent to those proceedings are.



11. The judge set out the evidence from paragraphs 7 to 12.  He recorded at
    paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 the oral evidence of the appellant, Ms Lisa-Gaye
    Smith (Tyrone's mother) and Mrs Maudlyn Blake.  He dealt with the
    documentary evidence in respect of the birth certificate at paragraphs
    11 and 12 of the decision.

12. The judge set out at paragraphs 14 - 17:

         "14. The appellant was given an opportunity to give DNA evidence in
             order to prove  that  he  indeed  is  the  biological  father.
             However the appellant chose  not  to  avail  himself  of  that
             opportunity.  Further no explanation had been given as to  why
             it took 13 years to obtain  amend  the  birth  certificate  to
             include the appellant as the father.

         15.  I find that these amendments have been made in order  for  the
             appellant to make an application to remain in the  UK  as  the
             biological father of a British child.   I  find  that  on  the
             evidence before me that on a balance of probabilities that the
             appellant is not the biological father of  the  British  child
             and thus he cannot succeed under human rights on this ground.

         16.  I have given consideration  to  Section  117  of  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in particular  S.117B  and
             S.117D which states:

                  ...

         17.  I take into account that the appellant has been in the UK  for
             14 years unlawfully having come to the UK illegally on a false
             passport.  I do not  find  that  he  has  partner  or  is  the
             biological father of a British child.  The appellant  has  not
             been paying taxes and is a burden on the state.  I  find  that
             any  interference  to  the   appellant's   private   life   is
             proportionate to the maintenance of immigration control."



13. Despite setting out at paragraph 6 that all the documents in the bundle
    had been taken into account in reaching his decision the judge has  not
    referred to the other documents that were presented and has  not  given
    any explanation as to why those documents were rejected  as  supporting
    the appellant's claim. The birth certificates were the  only  documents
    specifically referred to. The judge focussed solely on whether  or  not
    the appellant was the biological father  of  Tyrone.  When  considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules the judge  failed  to  consider
    whether or not the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with Tyrone. There was evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in
    support of the appellant's claim that there was a parental relationship
    between the appellant and Tyrone.  Whilst the  judge  would  have  been
    entitled  to  conclude  that  there  was   not   a   genuine   parental
    relationship, he has not considered that issue at all.  As accepted  by
    the Secretary of State  the  judge  was  required  to  consider,  under
    Section 117B(6), whether or not there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship when assessing proportionality of removal of  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom.


14. There is no definition of parental relationship in s117.  In R (on  the
    application of RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC)  the
    meaning of parental relationship in s117B(6) was considered. A  helpful
    explanation of the factors  that  should  be  considered  in  assessing
    whether a person  is  in  a  parental  relationship  is  set  out  from
    paragraphs 42 - 44:



         42.     Whether a person is in a "parental relationship" with a
         child must, necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances.
         Those circumstances will include what role they actually play in
         caring for and making decisions in relation to the child. That is
         likely to be a most significant factor. However, it will also
         include whether that relationship arises because of their legal
         obligations as a parent or in lieu of a parent under a court order
         or other legal obligation. I accept that it is not necessary for an
         individual to have "parental responsibility" in law for there to
         exist a "parental relationship," although whether or not that is
         the case will be a relevant factor. What is important is that the
         individual can establish that they have taken on the role that a
         "parent" usually plays in the life of their child.

         43.     I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that, in effect, an
         individual must "step into the shoes of a parent" in order to
         establish a "parental relationship". If the role they play, whether
         as a relative or friend of the family, is as a caring relative or
         friend but not so as to take on the role of a parent then it cannot
         be said that they have a "parental relationship" with the child. It
         is perhaps obvious to state that "carers" are not per se"parents."
         A child may have carers who do not step into the shoes of their
         parents but look after the child for specific periods of time (for
         example whilst the parents are at work) or even longer term (for
         example where the parents are travelling abroad for a holiday or
         family visit). Those carers may be professionally employed; they
         may be relatives; or they may be friends. In all those cases, it
         may properly be said that there is an element of dependency between
         the child and his or her carers. However, that alone would not, in
         my judgment, give rise to a "parental relationship."

         44.     If a non-biological parent ("third party") caring for a
         child claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon
         all the circumstances including whether or not there are others
         (usually the biologically parents) who have such a relationship
         with the child also. It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person
         will be able to establish they have taken on the role of a parent
         when the biological parents continue to be involved in the child's
         life as the child's parents as in a case such as the present where
         the children and parents continue to live and function together as
         a family. It will be difficult, if not impossible, to say that a
         third party has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.


15. It is clear that parental  relationship  extends  beyond  a  biological
    parent. It was therefore incumbent upon the judge to make a finding  as
    to whether or not  Article  8  was  engaged  in  respect  of  what  was
    purported  to  be  a  parental  relationship  between  Tyrone  and  the
    appellant. The failure to do so amounts to a material error of law.

16. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

17. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Hatton Cross before any judge   other  than
    Judge Zahed pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of  the  TCEA.  A
    hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

19. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
The appeal of the appellant is allowed. The case is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a de-novo  hearing  before  any  judge  other  than  Judge
Zahed.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 21 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw









