
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/11230/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype at Field House        |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 July 2020                       |On 30 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                LANSFORD [D]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant, a national of Jamaica, appeals, with permission, against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Burnett) dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the  respondent  on  21  September  2017
    refusing to revoke a deportation order against  him.   The  grounds  of
    appeal are human rights grounds, based  on  his  relationships  in  the
    United Kingdom.


 2. The offences which  led  to  the  appellant's  deportation  were  drugs
    offences between March 2001 and May 2002.   He  was  sentenced  to  six
    years imprisonment on 15 May 2002 for possession  of  a  Class  A  drug
    within  intent  to  supply.   Following  an  unsuccessful  appeal   the
    appellant was deported to  Jamaica  shortly  after  the  birth  of  his
    youngest daughter.  He returned to the United Kingdom unlawfully  about
    six weeks later, and has been in the United Kingdom ever since.


 3. I can deal with this matter very  shortly.   At  paragraph  10  of  the
    judge's decision, after setting out the  appellant's  criminal  record,
    the judge added this:


         "I should note however that the appellant admitted before me at the
         hearing that he uses cannabis on a regular basis."


 4. It was asserted in the grounds that the appellant said no such thing at
    the hearing and that, indeed, he has been  drug-free  for  many  years.
    Before me, Ms Cunha confirmed  that  there  is  no  note  of  any  such
    admission in the Presenting Officer's note at the hearing.  She told me
    also that she had been in touch with the Presenting Officer, who had no
    recollection of the appellant having said this.  There is, in addition,
    no mention of the matter in  the  judge's  note  of  the  hearing.   It
    appears to have been a simple error.


 5. The parties agreed position before me, however, was that a  mistake  as
    to whether the appellant is currently involved with drugs  in  any  way
    goes to the heart of the judge's assessment of his case.  I also agree.
     It goes to his ability to reform, his  current  criminality,  and  the
    influence he may have  on  his  daughters.   There  appears  to  be  no
    evidential support for the statement  made  by  the  judge  and,  as  a
    result, his decision cannot stand.  The appeal will need  to  be  heard
    afresh by a different judge.


 6. For the foregoing reasons, I set aside  Judge  Burnett's  decision  for
    error of law.  I remit the appellant's appeal for hearing by the First-
    tier Tribunal.



                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 20 July 2020
