
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11338/2017
                                                HU/11326/2017, HU/11329/2017
                                                HU/11334/2017, HU/11335/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 06 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                            TZ (First Appellant)
                            MZ (second appellant)
                            AK (third appellant)
                            MS (fourth appellant)
                            MBS (fifth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Chaudrhry, instructed by Marks and Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  second  and  third
    appellants are husband and wife and  the  other  appellants  are  their
    children.  The second and third appellants were  born  in  Pakistan  in
    1980 and 1985 respectively.  The fourth and fifth appellants were  born
    in the United Kingdom in 2009 and 2013.  The  remaining  appellant  was
    born in 2015.  Because of the significance in this appeal  of  the  age
    and length of residence of the fifth appellant, I shall refer to him by
    the initials TZ.  Both parties accept that, by the date of the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal TZ had been resident in the  United  Kingdom
    for more than seven years.

 2. The appellants have applied to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human
    rights grounds.  By decisions dated 15 September 2017, the Secretary of
    State had refused the applications.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cope) which, in a decision promulgated on  8
    June 2018 dismissed the  appeals.   The  appellants  now  appeal,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. I find that there is an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge cited  the  authority
    of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  it  is  not  clear  that  he  has
    followed it.  The length of residence of TZ, in particular, required  a
    detailed consideration but the judge's analysis [48-50] is silent as to
    the best interest of TZ and as to any  private  life  ties  within  the
    United Kingdom which he may have formed.  Regarding MA (Pakistan),  the
    judge does not appear to have followed the principles set out at [49]:

         "Although this was not in fact a seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

 4. Miss Chaudrhry who,  appeared  for  the  appellants  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, submitted that the problems with the appellants'  immigration
    history which the judge discusses at [72-75] was not enough  to  amount
    to strong or powerful reasons justifying removal of TZ given that he is
    "qualifying child" for the purposes of Section 117 of the 2002 Act  (as
    amended).  Indeed, the judge's analysis ignores MA (Pakistan)  and  the
    length of residence of TZ other than recording it as a fact; he did not
    accord it any particular significance.  I  agree  with  Miss  Chaudrhry
    that that constitutes an error which leads me to set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision.

 5. I proceeded to remake the decision.  I agree with Miss  Chaudrhry  that
    there are no particularly strong  reasons  in  this  case  which  would
    justify  removal  of  TZ.   I  recognise  that,  given  the  length  of
    residence, TZ has formed private life  connections  within  the  United
    Kingdom.   Accordingly,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  his
    removal.  Both parties agree that the parents of TZ have a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with him.  Consequently,  there  is  no  public
    interest in their removal (see Section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act).   As
    their minor dependants, the remaining appellants could only have  their
    best interests met if they remain in the  care  and  control  of  their
    parents.  In consequence, I allow the appeals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  8  June  2018
is set aside.  I remade the decision.  The appeals  of  the  appellants  are
allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


