
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11550/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 03 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 RASEL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Ashaz, Solicitor, Blackrock Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 10 July 2000.  On  24
    January 2018 he applied for entry clearance as  a  child  to  join  his
    father, who is a British  citizen,  in  the  UK.  His  application  was
    refused on the basis that it had not been demonstrated that his  father
    has had sole responsibility for him within  the  meaning  of  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and  that  there  were
    not serious  or  compelling  circumstances  under  paragraph  297(i)(f)
    thereof. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  his
    appeal was heard  by  Judge  Wilding  ("the  judge").   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 April  2019  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. At paragraphs [6] to [12] of the  decision  the  judge  summarised  the
    evidence given by the appellant's father.  Amongst  other  things,  the
    appellant's  father  claimed   that   his   mother   (the   appellant's
    grandmother) was currently looking after his son but she was "very old"
    and it was difficult for  her  to  continue  to  look  after  him.  The
    appellant's father further stated that  he  financially  supported  the
    appellant and remitted monies to Bangladesh  and  ensured  through  his
    mother that the funds were spent appropriately.

 3. The judge accepted the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    father was as claimed, and that,  the  appellant  would  be  adequately
    maintained in the UK. However, at [19] the judge gave  several  reasons
    for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  sole
    responsibility. While the judge acknowledged that there was evidence of
    financial remittances to the appellant by his father, the  judge  noted
    that the appellant's father was unable to demonstrate any knowledge  of
    how the remitted monies was being spent, what the monies was  spent  on
    and what direction he was giving to his son and his mother. Fundamental
    to the judge's decision was his conclusion that there was  no  evidence
    of regular contact, or  of  the  important  decisions  the  appellant's
    father had made or evidence of involvement with his school or doctor or
    anyone else in Bangladesh.

 4. Accordingly, the judge  found  at  [21]  that  responsibility  for  the
    appellant was shared between his father and grandmother.

5.    The judge also observed  that  no  evidence  was  forthcoming  of  any
    compelling reasons as to why the appellant's exclusion was  undesirable
    at [22].  In light of  these  conclusions  the  judge  found  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance was proportionate.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

6.    The grounds of appeal are discursive.  It  is  difficult  to  identify
    from this pleading the specific nature of the alleged error(s),  but  I
    shall nevertheless attempt to summarise them as follows. First,  it  is
    argued that there was sufficient evidence of sole responsibility before
    the judge and of the grandmother's inability to carry out the  father's
    instructions. This it is said was set out  in  the  affidavits  of  the
    grandmother. Second, it is argued that in  view  of  the  grandmother's
    inability to look after the  appellant  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family  and  other  considerations  making  the  appellant's
    exclusion undesirable. It is argued that it was in the  best  interests
    of the appellant, whose mother had remarried and moved  away,  to  live
    with his father.

7.    Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that there was arguably  insufficient  analysis  in  relation  to
    factors relating to the issue of serious and  compelling  circumstances
    in the light of the evidence of the grandmother which in turn  infected
    his conclusion on the issue of proportionality.

8.    The respondent opposed the appeal in a Rule 24 response dated 17  July
    2019.

9.    At the error of law hearing Mr Ashaz relied on his skeleton  argument.
    He accepted that the appellant's father was unable to provide  evidence
    on the issues identified by the judge at [19] but  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to take into account the evidence of  the  grandmother
    which was further evidence of serious and compelling circumstances.  Mr
    Ashaz  further  submitted  that  the  judge  mis-directed  himself   in
    concluding that day-to day care equated to shared responsibility.

10.   Mr Kotas submitted that the judge did not misdirect  himself  in  law.
    He pointed out that there was no challenge to the judge's  findings  at
    [19]. He further pointed out by reference to the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument before  the  judge  that  it  was  unclear  whether  paragraph
    297(f)(i)  of  the  Rules  was  pursued  before  him.  The  judge   had
    nevertheless dealt with this issue. Mr Kotas referred  to  the  written
    evidence of the appellant's father and grandmother and  submitted  that
    the circumstances did not meet the threshold for entry under  paragraph
    297(i)(f) by reference to the Tribunal's decision in Mundeba (s 55  and
    para 297 (i)(f) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC). Mr Kotas submitted that  there
    was no evidence of abuse or neglect in this case or that the  appellant
    was living in substandard conditions.

11.   In reply Mr Ashaz submitted that the judge had failed to consider  the
    appellant's circumstances  and  his  best  interests.  The  appellant's
    circumstances were similar to that of the appellant in Mundeba in  that
    there were no other family members to care for him in Bangladesh.

Analysis

12.   The grounds of appeal mostly set out a narrative seeking  to  re-argue
      the appellant's case. Whilst it is said therein, understandably,  that
      the appellant and his father are "very upset" by the judge's  decision
      and feel that is it "unfair", in order for this Tribunal to find  that
      the judge's decision should be set aside, the appellant must establish
      that the judge erred in law. I am not satisfied that he  did  err  for
      the following reasons.

13.   The judge referred at [17] to the leading authority of  TD  (Paragraph
      297(i)(e) e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.  He
      cited the headnote therein and at  [18]  to  the  guidance  given  and
      noted, in particular, that the guidance made it "plain that the  test,
      is not whether anyone else has day to day responsibility, but  whether
      the parent  has  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the  child's
      upbringing making all the important decisions in the child's life.  If
      not, responsibility is shared and so not sole."

14.   The judge proceeded to apply that test against the factual  background
      from [19] onwards.

15.   There is plainly no misdirection in law, and I  agree  with  Mr  Kotas
      that the challenge on this ground is without merit.

16.   Next, it is argued that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
      evidence of the grandmother. Mr Ashaz in his skeleton argument invites
      the Tribunal to take judicial notice of the fact that it would fall on
      the grandmother to care for  the  appellant  in  the  absence  of  his
      mother. As I observed at the hearing, that is not a  matter  that  has
      been authoritatively attested and does  not  assist  the  Tribunal  in
      establishing whether the judge erred in law.

17.   The evidence of  the  appellant's  grandmother  is  contained  in  two
      affidavits dated 25 January 2018 and 20 March 2019  respectively.  The
      latter contains slightly more detail than the first,  but  neither  is
      particularly detailed. Essentially, she states that she has cared  for
      the appellant since his parents divorced and believed that this  would
      be a temporary arrangement. She said that she had high blood  pressure
      and constant backaches and was unable to care for the  appellant.  She
      further refers to the fact that her home has no running tap water  and
      is not in a  good  condition.  At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Ashaz
      confirmed that there was  no  medical  evidence  supportive  of  these
      claims.

18.   While the judge did not make specific reference  to  the  evidence  of
      the grandmother he was clearly aware of the  father's  evidence  about
      the inability of his mother to continue to look after the appellant at
      [9]. While perhaps for the  sake  of  completeness  reference  to  the
      affidavits would have been helpful, I am not satisfied in light of the
      father's evidence that  the  judge  reached  his  conclusions  without
      having regard to the stated position.

19.   Even if it could be said that the judge did not  have  regard  to  the
      position of the grandmother, which I do not  accept,  the  fundamental
      difficulty with the appellant's case is that there is no challenge  to
      the judge's findings at [19]. Therein the judge gave  several  reasons
      for rejecting the claim that the appellant's father did not have  sole
      responsibility for the appellant. In particular, the judge noted "that
      there was no evidence of regular contact, no evidence of any decisions
      he has made, no evidence of involvement with his school or  doctor  in
      fact anyone in Bangladesh." (sic) It was as a  direct  consequence  of
      these failings that the judge concluded at  [21]  that  responsibility
      for the appellant was shared between his father and grandmother.  That
      is a finding that was entirely open to him on  the  evidence.  In  the
      circumstances, the evidence of the appellant's grandmother in light of
      the lacuna in the appellant's father's own  evidence  would  not  have
      made a material difference to the outcome.

20.   Given the judge's unassailable finding that responsibility was  shared
      between the father and grandmother I agree  with  Mr  Kotas  that  the
      threshold for establishing  a  claim  under  paragraph  297(i)(f)  was
      plainly not met. There is further force in the submission of Mr  Kotas
      that a case under this limb of the Rules was not pursued at all before
      the judge. The skeleton argument before the judge is in general terms.
      Most of it refers to Article 8 and case law relevant to the  issue  of
      sole responsibility. It makes no reference to paragraph  297(i)(f)  of
      the Rules. The judge cannot be criticised for failing to deal with  an
      issue that was  not  raised  before  him.  In  any  event,  the  judge
      considered the issue and noted in particular that no evidence had been
      provided to establish a  case  under  this  limb  of  the  Rules.  The
      evidence of the appellant's grandmother, unsupported by  corroborative
      evidence, taken together with the judge's findings was not capable  of
      demonstrating that the threshold in paragraph 297(i)(f) was  met.  Any
      failure by the judge to make specific reference to  the  grandmother's
      position would again in my judgement have made no material  difference
      to the outcome.

21.   In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge, for  the  reasons
      he gave, was entitled to find that the appellant  had  not  discharged
      the burden of showing that on the balance of probabilities that he met
      the requirements of the Rules. Accordingly, the judge was entitled  to
      find that the refusal of entry clearance was proportionate. The appeal
      is therefore dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral   |Dated: 20 August 2019                |


