
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/11047/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2019                         | On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mISs JAYANTI LIMBU
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Sweet in which he allowed the appeal of  the  Respondent  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  her  application  for
    leave to enter in the United Kingdom on human rights  grounds.  I  will
    refer to the Respondent as the 'Claimant' and to the Appellant  as  the
    'Secretary of State'

 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  28  March  2018.   The
    Claimant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal came before Judge Sweet on 16 April 2019 and  was  allowed.  The
    Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  His application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes on 27 June 2019 in the following terms:

       The judge found the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  IDI
       Annexe K but found that  there  was  a  family  life  and  emotional
       dependency and that exclusion was disproportionate.


       The grounds argue that the judge erred as the appellant  lives  with
       her sister who had returned to Nepal in 2018, the family are  not  a
       unit and the circumstances did not justify a grant of leave.


       In addition to the factual error on which the decision appears to be
       based compelling circumstances would be needed to succeed  when  the
       rules are not met, and it is arguable that the judge  did  not  give
       sufficient reasons for the findings made.



Background


 3. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Claimant is a citizen
    of Nepal born on 11 December 1982. She applied for leave to  enter  the
    UK as the adult dependent relative of her father an ex-Gurkha  soldier.
    The Secretary of State refused her application because she was over the
    age of  30  and  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  financial  and
    emotional dependency and she had lived apart from her father  for  more
    than two years of the time of the application.


 4. At the appeal hearing the  Claimant's  father  and  brother  both  gave
    evidence and submitted written  witness  statements.  The  Judge  found
    their evidence to be credible and that family  life  existed.  He  said
    that all members of the family have been granted  settlement  save  for
    the Claimant herself and in his  view  it  was  clear  that  there  was
    emotional dependency.


 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge erred in law  by  making  a
    material misdirection. The  Judge  said  that  the  Claimant  had  been
    separated from the family unit  whereas  her  sister  ,  Sharmila,  had
    returned to live with her in Nepal.




Submissions


 6. At the hearing before me Mr Walker appearing for the Secretary of State
    said that the grounds latch on to  the  fact  that  one  family  member
    returned to Nepal. However,  the  evidence  showed  that,  having  been
    granted entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom,  she  returned
    to be with her sister, the Claimant, who was on her on  her  own.  This
    was not taken into account in the grounds and looking clearly  at  what
    was before Judge Sweet he was justified in allowing the appeal.


 7. I did not ask Ms Jaja to address me  and  made  an  extempore  decision
    dismissing the Secretary of States appeal.

Decision

 8. This case involves a Gurkha family who have sought  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with the Secretary of State's  policy  and
    guidance. The Claimant's father (the sponsor) is an  ex-Gurkha  soldier
    and he was granted permission to settle in  the  United  Kingdom  along
    with his wife and minor son  on  1  March  2012.  Having  been  granted
    permission the sponsor and his son came to United Kingdom  on  6  April
    2012 leaving the sponsor's wife behind in Nepal to look after their two
    adult daughters. After seeking  legal  advice,  the  younger  daughter,
    Sharmila, who was under 30 applied for settlement in United Kingdom and
    her application was granted and she entered  the  UK  on  13  September
    2016. The evidence before Judge Sweet showed that the Claimant's mother
    remained with her  in  Nepal.  When  the  Claimant  applied  for  entry
    clearance it was on the basis that all of the family, apart  from  her,
    now had permission to reside in  United  Kingdom.  In  fact,  Sharmila,
    having been granted permission to stay in United  Kingdom  returned  to
    Nepal to be with her sister.

 9. Judge Sweet found that the Claimant shared a family life with her other
    family members and that the ties were more than mere emotional ones. He
    found that it was wholly disproportionate for her not  to  be  able  to
    join her family said that the family should remain a family  unit.  The
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, as conceded by Mr  Walker,  are
    misconceived. Whereas the Claimant's  sister  had  indeed  returned  to
    Nepal to be with her in Nepal this was not evidence that  the  Claimant
    would not be alone in Nepal and therefore had a  separate  family  life
    with her sister rather it was an example of the tight mutual dependency
    and intertwined family life which existed between the  family  members.
    In the first place the Claimant's mother, despite having  been  granted
    entry clearance, remained with her daughters to support them  in  Nepal
    and then when the one daughter was granted entry  clearance  to  enable
    her to settle with the family in United Kingdom she remained  with  the
    Claimant waiting for her entry clearance to  be  granted.  Judge  Sweet
    took all these matters into account in his decision and no error law is
    disclosed.



Summary of decision

10. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2019


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
