
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/11872/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2018                  |On 17 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 EBARRA [S]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, of Counsel, instructed by Ashfield
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Filipino national born on 21 September 1979. His
         appeal comes before me following his successful  challenge  to  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg, promulgated  on  23
         July 2018, dismissing his appeal on human rights grounds. Following
         a hearing on 11 October 2018, that decision  was  set  aside.  Full
         reasons are contained in my determination of 12 October 2018.

      2. The appellant entered with entry clearance to join his spouse,  the
         sponsor, in 2013 and obtained further leave until 10  August  2018.
         This was, however, curtailed to 14 August  2016  after  his  spouse
         informed the respondent  that  the  relationship  had  broken  down
         because of the appellant's gambling and drug addiction. Thereafter,
         they reconciled and a  further  application  for  leave  was  made,
         albeit out of time.

         The Hearing

      3. The appellant and the sponsor attended the hearing before me on  10
         December 2018. Both gave evidence in English.

      4. The appellant confirmed the contents of his witness  statement  and
         adopted it as his evidence in chief. He confirmed  that  since  the
         preparation of that statement, he had had a son, born in July 2018.
         He stated he enjoyed a very close relationship with  the  baby.  He
         cared for him whilst the appellant went to work. He bathed him, fed
         him and took him for his regular medical checks. He said  his  wife
         worked five days a week for 12 hours a day and had  done  so  since
         the completion of three months of maternity leave in November 2018.
         He explained that apart from a short separation  in  2016,  he  had
         lived with his wife since his arrival in the UK. He explained  that
         they had had some problems, but she had forgiven him  and  accepted
         him back. He said he had promised her that he would do all he could
         to be a good husband. They had previously tried IVF, but  had  been
         unsuccessful, and then following  their  reconciliation,  his  wife
         fell pregnant, naturally.

      5. The appellant confirmed  that  he  was  receiving  support  from  a
         charity in respect of his addictions.  This  included  mindfulness,
         yoga, meditation and healing techniques.

      6. The  appellant  explained  that  he  had  approached  his  previous
         solicitors to make a further application for him  in  August  2016,
         but they had not done so and this was discovered in November  2016.
         He had then changed solicitors, but this is why his application had
         been delayed. His barrister had advised him he could make a  formal
         complaint, but he had already felt stressed about this  appeal  and
         so had not wanted to do so.

      7. The appellant stated that he would find it too emotional to make an
         entry clearance application. He was too close to his  son  and  his
         wife. His absence would impact upon his child as he was the one who
         cared for him. They had no other family in the UK.  That  completed
         examination in chief.

      8. In cross examination, the appellant said that he  had  sought  help
         for his addiction. He said that for the last two years he  had  not
         gambled or taken drugs.

      9. The appellant said that his wife worked in a care home for Care  UK
         in Fulham, near the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital. He  confirmed
         his home address and said that he had been  living  with  his  wife
         since they were reconciled in June 2016.

     10. That completed cross examination. There was no re-examination.

     11. I  then  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife,  [JS].  She
         confirmed her address and adopted her witness statement  which  she
         confirmed to be true and correct. She confirmed that she had  since
         had a son. Her husband looked after the baby and they had  a  close
         relationship. He bathed the baby as she had a fear of doing so.  He
         also fed him, took him for medical appointments, walked  him,  took
         him for baby massage and to the library and put  him  to  bed.  She
         confirmed that she worked five days a week, twelve hours a day  for
         Care UK.

     12. The witness confirmed that she and the  appellant  had  experienced
         problems in May-June 2016 and he had gone to stay with friends  for
         a few weeks. However, they reconciled in June 2016  and  had  lived
         together since. She had seen a  big  difference  in  her  husband's
         behaviour. He was even more helpful than he had been.  He  got  the
         dinner ready for her, cleaned the house and took  her  out  on  her
         days off. She said that it would be very stressful  if  he  had  to
         leave. There would be no one to look after the baby  who  would  be
         parted from his father. She could not return  to  the  Philippines.
         Her parents were deceased. Her siblings had their own families. She
         had no home.  She would have difficulty finding work  and  starting
         over at her age. She had been here since 2002, having entered on  a
         work permit and had worked ever since.

     13. In reply to Mr Melvyn's questions,  the  witness  stated  that  her
         husband  had  received  professional  help  for  his  gambling  and
         addiction to drugs. This was  not  just  for  the  benefit  of  the
         appeal. It was to help him and to  ensure  that  he  had  no  vices
         because he was responsible for their son. She maintained that's  he
         could see the difference in him since they had reconciled.

     14. The witness confirmed that she regretted reporting the appellant to
         the Home Office. She explained she had done  so  in  anger  at  the
         time. She said that he had however turned out to be a good  husband
         and father. She confirmed that if the  appellant  were  allowed  to
         remain, he would find work and she would  be  able  to  reduce  her
         hours. They would then be able to share the child care.  She  would
         love to be able to spend more time with her child.

     15. There was no re-examination. That completed the oral evidence.

     16. I heard brief submissions  from  Mr  Melvyn  who  relied  upon  his
         written submissions and accepted the oral evidence  that  had  been
         given. He also confirmed that the respondent had no issues over the
         paternity of the child or the nature of  the  relationship  between
         the appellant and  his  son.  He  accepted  that  the  relationship
         between the appellant and his wife was subsisting  and  he  invited
         the court to make a determination. In the circumstances, I  saw  no
         need to trouble Mr Malik for submissions and  I  indicated  that  I
         would be allowing the appeal. I now give my reasons.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     17. Having considered the submissions made and the evidence before  me,
         I am satisfied that the appellant has made  out  his  case  on  the
         balance of probabilities. I am grateful to Mr Melvyn for  his  very
         fair submissions.

     18. Both the appellant and  the  sponsor  impressed  me  as  completely
         credible and honest witnesses. It is plain that they have  a  long-
         lasting marriage which has remained strong despite the difficulties
         they experienced on account of the appellant's conduct in  2016.  I
         am satisfied that the appellant has made a sincere  effort  to  win
         back his wife and that he is serious about keeping his  promise  to
         be a good husband. I also accept that their son  has  cemented  the
         marriage further, that the appellant has done all he can  to  be  a
         good father and to alleviate the pressure on  his  wife  who  works
         long hours in a care home and that  he  has  received  professional
         help and support to address his problems which appears to have been
         very successful.

     19. I accept fully, as did Mr Melvyn, that the appellant is the primary
         carer for the child and that there are no other relatives in the UK
         to  whom  they  can  turn.  I  have  seen  the  photographs,  birth
         certificate,  DNA  evidence,  various  certificates  and   evidence
         regarding the sponsor's care and maternity leave.  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant can speak English and I  note  that  he  entered
         with entry clearance to join the sponsor as her spouse. Other  than
         a brief blip in their relationship in mid-2016,  they  have  always
         lived together as a married couple since his arrival. I accept  the
         appellant would not be in this situation now had  the  sponsor  not
         reported him to the Home Office in anger in 2016 and I  accept  the
         evidence that the delayed application for further leave was due  to
         problems with the appellant's previous representatives. even though
         the financial requirements do not  apply  to  the  appellant  under
         Appendix FM, I am satisfied that the  sponsor's  salary  meets  the
         income threshold.

     20. I find that given the fact that the appellant entered the UK  as  a
         spouse, that he has lived with his wife ever  since  apart  from  a
         brief separation, that they have a  child  together  and  that  the
         appellant is the  primary  carer  of  the  child,  there  would  be
         insurmountable obstacles to the enjoyment of  family  life  in  the
         Philippines. Were the appellant to return  to  the  Philippines  to
         make an entry clearance application, I cannot see any  reason  that
         it would be refused and applying the  Chikwamba  principles,  there
         appears to be no public interest in his removal  when  there  is  a
         young child's care and welfare at stake.

         Decision

     21. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

         Anonymity

     22. I have not been asked to make an anonymity order and see no  reason
         to do so.


Signed


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 10 December 2018
