
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11586/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2018                  |On 03rd December 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     B H
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas of Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Dineen (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 28th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born 22nd June  1986.   On  2nd
    October 2017 the Appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   His
    application was refused on the same date that it was made.

 3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had entered the UK  on  27th
    October 2007 as a student with leave  to  remain  until  31st  December
    2009.  On 23rd December 2009 the Appellant submitted an application for
    further leave to remain as a student which was granted until  5th  July
    2011.  On 7th June 2011 the Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student which was granted until 30th April 2013.

 4. On 31st August 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  relying
    upon Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention.  This  application  was
    refused on 23rd October 2013.  The Appellant lodged an  appeal  against
    that decision on 20th January 2014.

 5. The Respondent did not accept the  Appellant  had  accrued  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.  The Respondent accepted that the  refusal
    letter of 23rd October 2013 was not received by the  Appellant  because
    it was returned to the Home Office by Royal Mail on 4th November  2013.
    It was then re-sent to the Appellant on that date.  The  Appellant  did
    not  lodge  an  appeal  until  20th  January  2014  and  therefore  the
    Respondent considered that he did not have valid leave to remain in the
    UK after 4th November 2013.

 6. The Respondent considered Article 8.  It was noted that  the  Appellant
    had a partner, but she was not British, and was not settled in  the  UK
    or in the UK with refugee or humanitarian protection leave.  Therefore,
    the Article 8 claim was considered under the private life route only.

 7. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant satisfied any  of  the
    provisions contained in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.

 8.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal,  as
    the application he  had  made  was  a  human  rights  application,  and
    therefore he had a right of appeal on human rights grounds.

10. The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by  the  FtT  on  29th
    June 2018.  The judge found that there was no gap  in  the  Appellant's
    continuous lawful residence between the refusal of the application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds on 23rd October  2013  and  the
    lodging of the appeal on 20th January 2014 because a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal had on 17th March 2014 extended time for the  lodging  of
    the appeal.  The judge therefore found at paragraph 10  "there  was  no
    effective gap in residence to justify the refusal".

11. The judge described this  as  common  ground,  meaning  that  this  was
    accepted by the parties at the appeal hearing.

12. The judge went on to note that on 18th  July  2014  the  Appellant  had
    submitted an application for a residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national which had been granted until 24th July 2020.  The  judge  then
    referred to paragraph 5  of  the  Immigration  Rules  setting  out  the
    following extract;

         "Save where expressly indicated, these rules do not apply to  those
         persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of the provisions of the 2006 EEA regulations".

13. The judge then found at paragraphs 15 and 16 of his decision;

         "15. The effect of paragraph 5 is that a person  may  rely  on  one
             regime or the other, that is the Immigration Rules or the  EEA
             regulations, but not both.

         16.  That being the case, the Appellant's present appeal, which  is
             based on the Immigration Rules, must fail".

14. Following dismissal of the appeal, the Appellant applied,  through  his
    representatives, for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   It
    was contended that the judge had erred in law by  failing  to  consider
    the Appellant's Article 8 human rights claim.  It was pointed out  that
    at the hearing the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  judge  were
    satisfied that there had been no  gap  in  the  Appellant's  continuous
    lawful residence, and the judge had described this as common ground.

15. It was pointed out that no issue had been taken by  the  Respondent  in
    the refusal decision to the Appellant  not  being  able  to  rely  upon
    residence as the spouse of an EEA national.  Reference was made to  the
    Respondent's own guidance on long residence which was published on  3rd
    April 2017, which states that  a  Home  Office  caseworker  must  apply
    discretion and count time spent in the UK as lawful residence for an EU
    or EEA national or their family members exercising their treaty  rights
    to reside in the UK.  The guidance goes on to state that when  granting
    a long residence application in which a person has relied on the period
    of leave in the UK exercising treaty rights as an EEA national of their
    family member, any grant of leave must be made outside the  Immigration
    Rules.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrew  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dineen) who,  in  a
             determination promulgated on 28th August  2018  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             to grant leave to remain.

         2.   I am satisfied it is arguable that in  view  of  human  rights
             being  the  only  ground  of  appeal  the  judge  should  have
             considered Article 8".

17. Following the grant of permission to appeal the Respondent submitted  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, not opposing the application for permission to appeal,  and
    inviting the Tribunal;

         "... to determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)
         hearing to consider whether the Appellant satisfies the Immigration
         Rules for long residence (to establish public interest in removal);
         and if not, whether there  is  disproportionate  interference  with
         Article 8 rights".

18. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

19. At the commencement  of  the  hearing  Miss  Kiss  confirmed  that  the
    Respondent accepted that the judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider Article 8, which had been raised  as  a  Ground  of
    Appeal by the Appellant.

20. In my view the concession  was  rightly  made,  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT.

21. Both representatives submitted that it was appropriate for  me  to  re-
    make the decision without a further hearing.  Mr Abbas  submitted  that
    the finding made by the judge that there was no gap in  the  continuous
    lawful residence of the  Appellant  should  be  preserved.   Miss  Kiss
    agreed, conceding that  there  had  been  no  gap  in  the  Appellant's
    continuous lawful residence.

22. Miss Kiss conceded that the appeal should be allowed.  It was  accepted
    that the Appellant had accrued  in  excess  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence since his arrival in the  UK  on  27th  October  2007.
    There was no public interest in refusing his  application.   Miss  Kiss
    submitted a copy of the Home Office guidance on long  residence  issued
    on 3rd April 2017, pointing out that because the Appellant  had  relied
    on a period of leave in the UK exercising treaty rights as  the  family
    member of an EEA national, any grant of leave must be made outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Abbas did not disagree.

23. As it was conceded that the appeal should be  allowed,  I  re-made  the
    decision by allowing the appeal and indicated  that  I  would  issue  a
    written decision confirming this.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. I firstly set out my reasons for finding a material error of law.

25. It is common ground that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal  against
    the  Respondent's  decision  dated  2nd  October  2017.   His  previous
    solicitors  submitted  Grounds   of   Appeal,   contending   that   the
    Respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the   law   and
    Immigration Rules, and that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  exercise
    discretion properly.  Those are  not  valid  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Appellant's right of appeal to the Tribunal is set out in section 82 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The application that
    he made for indefinite leave was treated as a human rights application,
    and therefore his right of appeal arises from section 82(b) because the
    Secretary of State refused a human rights claim.  The Ground of  Appeal
    is set out in section 84(1)(c) being that removal of the Appellant from
    the United Kingdom would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary to  Human  Rights
    Convention).

26. Section 84(2) confirms that an appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal
    of human rights claim) must be brought on the ground that the  decision
    is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

27. The Grounds of Appeal  entered  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  did  at
    paragraph 6 specifically rely upon  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention, and therefore it is clear that human rights were raised  as
    a Ground of Appeal.

28. The FtT should have considered Article 8 and did not do so, which is  a
    material error of law.  For that reason the decision was set aside.

29. I re-made the decision at the request of the representatives without  a
    further hearing which I  found  to  be  appropriate.   I  accepted  the
    concession made on behalf of the Respondent.  Miss Kiss did not seek to
    go behind the concession that had been made  before  the  FtT,  to  the
    effect that there was no gap in the lawful continuous residence of  the
    Appellant.  It was specifically  conceded  and  accepted  that  he  had
    accrued in excess of ten years' continuous lawful residence.

30. It was not suggested that there were any factors  in  relation  to  the
    public interest, that would justify refusing the application.

31. Article 8 is engaged on the basis of the Appellant's family  life  with
    his spouse and his private life.  In considering the public interest  I
    must have regard to the considerations listed in section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.

32. Subsection (1) confirms that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest and I attach very significant weight
    to this.

33. Subsection (2) confirms that it is in the public interest that a person
    seeking to remain in the UK can speak English.  The Appellant can speak
    English.  This is therefore a neutral factor in the balancing exercise.



34. Subsection (3) confirms that it is in the public interest that a person
    seeking to remain in the UK is financially independent.  The  Appellant
    is financially independent, and again this is a neutral factor  in  the
    balancing exercise.

35. Subsection (4) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established  by
    a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   The
    Appellant has not established a private life or a relationship while in
    the UK unlawfully.

36. Subsection (5) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  I find this  is  relevant,  as  the  Appellant's
    immigration status has been precarious in that he  has  only  ever  had
    limited leave to remain.

37. Subsection (6) is not applicable to this appeal.

38. This is not a case where it can be said that the Appellant has  a  poor
    immigration history.  It is not a case where it is alleged that he  has
    any criminal convictions.  The Appellant has resided in the UK lawfully
    since October 2007.  The Respondent concedes that the appeal should  be
    allowed, and I find no public interest factors to  indicate  otherwise.
    The issue of the type of leave to  be  granted  is  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent as accepted by Mr Abbas, as the Appellant does rely  upon  a
    period of leave as the spouse of an EEA national.  In fact  he  already
    has a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national  which  is  valid
    until 24th July 2020.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

I re-make the decision.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds  with
reference to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date         17th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to  make  a  fee
award.  I make no fee  award.   The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of
submissions and evidence presented to the Tribunal that was not  before  the
initial decision maker.


Signed                              Date         17th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

