
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11706/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                             SHAUKAT HAYAT KHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal
       against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox,  sitting
       in Birmingham, dismissing his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       respondent, dated 15 May 2018, refusing his application for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private and family life. The appellant came
       to the UK in 2011 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  but  was
       subsequently granted leave to remain as a  spouse.  His  application
       for further leave was refused for the following reasons:


        . He had submitted as  part  of  a  previous  application  a  TOEIC
          certificate issued by ETS which he had obtained  fraudulently  by
          use of  a  proxy  test-taker  (paragraphs  R-LTRP.1.1.(c)(i),  R-
          LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) and S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
          Rules).
        . Whilst he met the Eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
          respect  of  Relationship,  Immigration  Status,  Financial   and
          English    Language     (paragraphs     R-LTRP.1.1(c)(ii),     R-
          LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii), E-LTRP.1.1. to  1.12,  E-LTRP.2.1  to  2.2,  E-
          LTRP.3.1 to 3.4 and E-LTRP.4.1. to 4.2),  he  did  not  meet  the
          requirements  of  paragraph   EX.1   because   there   were   not
          insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Pakistan
          (paragraphs EX.1(b) and EX.2).


    2. It might be observed at  this  point  that  there  is  a  degree  of
       obscurity and confusion in  the  refusal  letter.  I  say  obscurity
       because the respondent has not explained which  of  the  Suitability
       requirements the appellant has not met. Was  it,  for  example,  the
       mandatory paragraph S-LTR.1.6. or  the  discretionary  paragraph  S-
       LTR.2.2.? I also say confusion because, if the appellant met all the
       Eligibility requirements so as to meet paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(c)(ii),
       as appears to be conceded, then he does not also  have  to  show  he
       meets the requirements of paragraph EX.1. In  other  words,  if  the
       appellant meets the Suitability requirements, he  has  met  all  the
       requirements of the rules.


    3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In his grounds of
       appeal he pointed out that, in order to obtain his previous grant of
       leave as a spouse, he had complied with a  request  to  sit  another
       English test. His application for further  leave  under  the  5-year
       route had been refused and then reconsidered following a  threat  of
       judicial review. He denied using deception and reiterated  that  his
       leave had been granted on the basis of a second test and he had  not
       relied on the first test. Furthermore, he had  been  interviewed  at
       port after returning from a holiday and the immigration officer  had
       been satisfied so as to readmit him as a spouse. The  appellant  has
       excellent English skills.

    4. The appeal bundle contained, among other things, Home Office records
       obtained through a SAR showing that the appellant  was  admitted  to
       the UK on 2 May 2015 after interview because it was established that
       his leave had been granted on the basis of a  new  English  language
       test sat at Trinity College, not on the test in  question,  and  the
       Home Office was aware when granting leave of the submission  of  the
       earlier TOEIC test. Additionally, a record  dated  5  February  2016
       stated that deception had not been confirmed and  an  interview  was
       required to test the appellant's credibility. That had not happened.



    5. There was other evidence of the appellant's English language skills,
       such as his first degree and his  MBA,  which  had  been  taught  in
       English. The appellant had obtained a CEFR level B2  certificate  on
       20 April 2011 and ABE qualifications in 2013. He scored 99%  in  his
       DVLA multiple choice test in April 2014. There was evidence  of  the
       appellant ordering TOEIC study materials  from  Foyles  in  February
       2013.


    6. Judge Fox noted the respondent had conceded the  appellant  met  all
       the  requirements  of  the  rules,  with  the  sole   exception   of
       Suitability, in paragraph 3 of his decision and again  in  paragraph
       12. He then tackled  the  ETS  point,  finding  the  respondent  had
       satisfied the burden on him to show dishonesty on the  part  of  the
       appellant such that the burden shifted to him to provide an innocent
       explanation. After considering his evidence, the judge  decided  the
       appellant had not provided an innocent explanation. He concluded  in
       paragraph  46  that  the  respondent  had  been  entitled  to  apply
       paragraph 322(5) of the rules. He next considered article 8  outside
       the rules and concluded there would be no breach. Although  she  had
       not been called to give evidence, he found  the  appellant's  wife's
       entitlement to DLA inconsistent with her employment.  There  was  no
       reliable  evidence  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family   life
       continuing in Pakistan. The appeal was dismissed.

    7. Extremely lengthy grounds were submitted by the appellant,  appended
       to which was a statement prepared by counsel  who  had  attended  on
       behalf of the appellant at the hearing.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  all
       rounds.

    9. A short rule 24 response has been  filed  by  the  respondent  which
       opposes the appeal on the basis the judge directed himself correctly
       in law.

   10. Parts of the grounds allege procedural impropriety on  the  part  of
       the judge through his abrupt behaviour and giving the impression, at
       least to the appellant, that he "worked for the Home Office".  These
       are serious allegations and, as I pointed out, I was in no  position
       to consider them without first giving Judge Fox  an  opportunity  to
       respond. Ms Smith did not urge me to take that step but preferred to
       proceed on the remaining issues. As they are not  pursued,  I  shall
       say nothing further about those particular allegations.

   11. Ms Smith made her submissions  after  which  Mr  Tarlow  said,  with
       characteristic  frankness,   that   he   could   not   defend   "the
       indefensible". He confirmed, in particular, that there was no answer
       to the first ground, which was that Judge Fox had  erred  by  simply
       assuming that the respondent had relied on paragraph 322(5)  of  the
       rules.

   12. I agree with the representatives that this error  is  sufficient  to
       require the decision to be set aside. I have already  mentioned  the
       absence  of  any  indication  from  the  respondent  which  of   the
       Suitability grounds was relied on. What can be said  with  certainty
       is that the respondent did not rely on  paragraph  322(5).  That  is
       because there is a general reference  to  Section  S-LTR.  Paragraph
       322(5) is not found in that section.

   13. It is apparent that the judge did  not  require  the  respondent  to
       clarify his case and, without knowing what  the  allegation  against
       him was, it was unfair to expect the appellant to deal with it.  The
       refusal letter stated that the TOEIC test taken by the appellant  on
       21 August 2013 at the Universal Training Centre had  been  cancelled
       by ETS and, on the basis of the information  provided  by  ETS,  the
       respondent was satisfied the certificate was  fraudulently  obtained
       and the appellant used deception in his  application  of  7  January
       2014.

   14. The judge then erred, in my  judgement,  in  his  analysis  of  that
       evidence. Whilst it is correct that the generic evidence  relied  on
       in such cases and which the judge appears to have had before him  is
       usually sufficient to cause the burden to  shift  to  the  appellant
       (see SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229
       (IAC)), the judge appears  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  fact  the
       allegation was that the appellant had relied on the  TOEIC  test  in
       his application. As seen, that was denied by the appellant and there
       was a great deal of evidence  before  the  judge  to  establish  the
       point. In particular, the respondent's own records disclosed that he
       was granted leave on the basis of the Trinity College test, not  the
       TOEIC test. The documents show that  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
       appellant on 10 February 2014 stating that his  application  was  on
       hold because of the "discrepancies" in the TOEIC  certificate.   The
       letter invited him to take another test from an alternative  source,
       provided it was not ETS. That is precisely what he did.

   15. Judge Fox makes no mention of this evidence. In paragraphs 35 to  37
       of his decision, he only refers to the evidence of the  TOEIC  test.
       If the respondent had been relying on character  grounds  under  the
       Suitability  heading,  then  counsel  addressed  him   as   to   the
       respondent's own guidance which stated that this ground  could  only
       be relied on if the information had not been known before. The judge
       did not consider this at all. Judge Fox was  aware  of  the  Trinity
       College certificate because he mentioned it in paragraph 41.

   16. There is another reason the decision is erroneous in law  such  that
       it has to be set aside. As mentioned,  the  judge  accepted  at  the
       beginning of the hearing that the only  issue  was  Suitability.  It
       appears that, on that basis, he advised counsel that the appellant's
       wife did not need to give evidence. Notwithstanding that indication,
       he went on to make adverse findings on the issue  of  insurmountable
       obstacles and to make an adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
       appellant's wife on the basis she was working and in receipt of DLA.
       The point had simply not been put to her to give her an  opportunity
       to answer  it  and  it  is  certainly  not  outside  the  realms  of
       possibility that Tescos would retain a longstanding employee who had
       developed a disability. It is not a condition of receipt of DLA that
       a  person  is  unemployed.  That  is  a  straightforward  error   of
       procedural fairness.

   17. In the penultimate paragraph of his decision, Judge Fox said that it
       was reasonable to conclude that the appellant  (not  his  wife)  had
       made misrepresentations to the DWP, which  damaged  his  credibility
       further. There was no legal basis for making that inference.

   18. Having indicated I would set aside the decision of Judge Fox,  there
       was discussion of how to proceed. Having had that discussion it  was
       agreed that the appropriate course would be for me  to  re-make  the
       decision rather than remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

   19. I shall not repeat the frailties in the reasons for  refusal  letter
       set out above. In my view, they place the respondent in difficulties
       in resisting the appellant's appeal which, as I have also explained,
       turns solely on the issue of Suitability.

   20. It is clear enough that the respondent relies on deception and there
       are available requirements in the rules which concern  an  applicant
       who has previously made false representations,  such  as  S-LTR.4.2.
       However, without knowing which rule is relied on, I do not  consider
       there is any case to answer on the part of the appellant. The burden
       cannot shift to him without him being told what allegation he has to
       deal with.

   21. However, even if I were wrong about that and it is  enough  for  the
       respondent to say that the appellant engaged in deceptive conduct by
       submitting the TOEIC certificate, that allegation has not been  made
       out unless the appellant is shown to have relied on  the  deception.
       As seen, the appellant was offered the opportunity to submit a fresh
       test certificate, which he duly did. The respondent was satisfied by
       that and proceeded to grant  leave  on  the  basis  of  the  Trinity
       College certificate. If there were any force in  the  allegation  of
       deception, it is difficult to understand why leave would  have  been
       granted. Of course, it is clear from the respondent's  records  that
       deception had not  been  confirmed  and  that  was  the  reason  the
       appellant was admitted after being held up by  immigration  officers
       at Heathrow Airport. I repeat that no interview was ever arranged to
       test the appellant's credibility, as referred to in the respondent's
       notes.

   22. Under such circumstances, it could not seriously be argued that  the
       appellant's presence was not conducive to the public good.

   23. Even supposing the burden did shift to the appellant to  provide  an
       innocent explanation, I note that in Secretary of State for the Home
       Department v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615 the Court of  Appeal
       noted what the Upper Tribunal had said on the matter at paragraph 69
       of SM and Qadir:


         "We turn thus to address the legal burden. We  accept  Mr  Dunlop's
         submission that in considering an allegation of dishonesty in  this
         context the relevant factors to be weighed include (inexhaustively,
         we would add) what the  person  accused  has  to  gain  from  being
         dishonest; what he has to lose from being dishonest; what is  known
         about his character; and the culture or  environment  in  which  he
         operated.  Mr Dunlop  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  three
         further considerations, namely how the Appellants  performed  under
         cross examination,  whether  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  their
         English language  proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC
         scores and whether their academic achievements are such that it was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."


   24. It is not necessary to hear oral evidence from the appellant to find
       that he more than exceeded the slight burden of showing with minimal
       plausibility that he  had  no  reason  at  all  to  submit  a  false
       certificate due to his existing  language  skills.  He  was  already
       highly educated and had studied  in  English.  There  are  no  other
       adverse matters raised regarding his character and he had nothing to
       gain by obtaining the TOEIC certificate at the time he obtained  it.
       It is clear beyond any doubt that the  respondent  cannot  discharge
       the legal burden of proving deception in this case.


   25. This is a human rights  appeal.  However,  having  disposed  of  the
       Suitability issue, there is no other matter in terms of  the  public
       interest  to  weigh  against  the  appellant  who  meets   all   the
       requirements of the rules for a grant of leave.


   26. The appeal is therefore allowed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The following decision
    is substituted:

              The appellant's appeal is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (article 8).

     No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 7 March 2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


