
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11561/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2020                 |On 14 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                          MOHAMMED KARIM CHOWDHURY

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr L Youssefian of Counsel instructed by St Martin
Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

         Background

      1. This joint appeal comes before me following the grant of permission
         to appeal to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on  9
         April 2020 against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ross, promulgated on 5 February 2020 following a hearing at  Taylor
         House on 22 January 2020. For  convenience,  I  shall  continue  to
         refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 10  November  1991.
         He entered the UK on 30 May 2007 aged 15. No details are  given  as
         to his method of entry but  as  he  has  claimed  he  never  had  a
         passport one can assume he  arrived  unlawfully.  He  then  claimed
         asylum on 15 June 2007. Although this was refused, he  was  granted
         discretionary leave from 16  August  2007  until  16  August  2008,
         presumably because he was a minor. On 4 September  2008  a  further
         application for asylum was made but this was  refused  on  18  June
         2011. The basis of the claim was that the  appellant's  father  was
         involved with the Jatia Party and he received threats from the  BNP
         and the Awami League party supporters. The appellant maintains that
         on one occasion he was approached by strangers outside  his  school
         but he refused to go with them. He feared he would be kidnapped  if
         he were returned to Bangladesh. An appeal against the decision  was
         heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg on 1  August  2011  and  was
         dismissed. He failed  to  embark  and  took  no  further  steps  to
         regularise his stay until 22 September 2017 when he sought leave on
         the basis that he was stateless. That application was refused on 18
         December 2018 with no right of appeal. The decision was  maintained
         on administrative review on 6 February 2019. On  19  February  2019
         the appellant made his present  application  for  leave  to  remain
         outside the rules.  That was refused on 21 June 2019.

      3. The respondent noted that of the eleven years and eight months  the
         appellant had been in the UK, only one year was with lawful  leave.
         It was considered that the length of time he had  been  here  since
         then was not beyond his control and  he  could  not  have  had  any
         expectations that he would be able to remain on a permanent  basis.
         The respondent considered that the fact that he claimed to have  an
         uncle here was not sufficient to warrant a grant of  leave  outside
         the rules. It was noted that the uncle was supporting  him  and  it
         was considered that he was free to continue supporting him  on  his
         return and that friends and family could  visit  him  there  should
         they wished to do so. The  respondent  noted  the  claim  that  the
         appellant  had  made  friends  and  integrated  into  society   but
         considered  that  there  was  nothing  particularly  compelling  or
         exceptional about the ties he had made. His relationships with  his
         uncle and friends were not considered to be in any  way  remarkable
         such  that  they  would  justify  a  grant  of  settlement  on   an
         exceptional basis.  The  claim  that  the  appellant  was  of  good
         character with no criminal convictions and had not relied on public
         funds was noted but the respondent maintained that  this  was  what
         was expected of any person living here. The respondent acknowledged
         that it would be difficult for the appellant to return but did  not
         accept that he had lost all  social  and  family  connections  with
         Bangladesh or that he would be unable to adjust to life back  there
         because he had spent 15 years  there  and  was  familiar  with  the
         language, environment and culture. The respondent also  noted  that
         the appellant had demonstrated his ability  to  adapt  to  life  in
         another country and a completely new environment of which he had no
         knowledge or experience. On that basis, it was considered  that  he
         would be able to reintegrate into a culture and way of  life  which
         he was familiar with.

      4. The respondent noted  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  left
         Bangladesh due to his parents'  political  activities  and  threats
         made on his life. The respondent invited the appellant to  make  an
         asylum application if he had a fear of return.

      5. It was noted that the appellant was an educated  man  in  his  late
         20s, that he had lived the majority of his life in Bangladesh, that
         he had family residing there and that  he  would,  therefore,  have
         some form  of  support  network  upon  his  return.  Based  on  the
         information he had provided, the respondent found that  there  were
         no exceptional circumstances which would warrant a grant  of  leave
         outside the rules.

      6. The respondent accepted that he arrived in the UK aged 15  1/2  and
         accepted that he had adapted to life here but did not  consider  it
         unreasonable to expect him to return to his country  of  origin;  a
         country where he was fluent in the language and familiar  with  the
         culture and where he would be able to re-establish his life. It was
         considered that he would have a base to return to and support  from
         his  relatives.  It  was  considered   that   there   was   nothing
         particularly compelling or exceptional about the ties he  had  made
         here  and  that  friendships  and  other  relationships  could   be
         maintained using modern means of communication.

      7. Judge Ross heard oral evidence from the appellant and two witnesses
         described as  a  "cousin  brother"  and  "an  uncle/friend  of  the
         appellant's  father".   Despite  objections  from  the   Presenting
         Officer, he found that the appellant's protection claim was  not  a
         new matter but he also noted that the appeal was not concerned with
         a refusal of asylum and that the  previous  determination  did  not
         assist with the determination of the matter presently  before  him.
         He found that the appellant had a family life with those with  whom
         he lived, that he had been unable to establish himself in education
         or a career because he only had a year of discretionary  leave  and
         that his life was confined to living with his uncle. He found  that
         there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  and
         accordingly he allowed the appeal.

      8. The  respondent  successfully  sought  permission  to  appeal.  She
         argued: (i) that the judge had been  contradictory  in  determining
         that the claim based on political issues was not a new  matter  yet
         finding that the appellant had not claimed asylum so that  previous
         credibility  issues  could  not  be  considered;   (ii)   that   he
         misdirected himself in law in not taking the previous determination
         into account and failed to give  reasons  for  departing  from  it;
         (iii) that he failed to consider whether the claim was  genuine  or
         not  and  simply  accepted  the  oral  evidence  without   adequate
         reasoning; (iv) that his reasoning on why he found there were  very
         significant  obstacles  to  re-integration   lacked   clarity   and
         adequacy,  that  speculative  findings  were  made  and   that   no
         unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  of  removal   were   identified
         (Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932); and  (v)  that  the  judge  made  no
         findings on public interest issues and failed to balance  the  need
         for  effective  immigration   control   against   the   appellant's
         private/family life claim.

      9. Permission was granted on 9 April 2020.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters and extension of time

     10. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread, this did not happen and instead directions were sent to
         the parties on 24  June  2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

     11. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  the  respondent
         dated 1 and 20 July 2020 and from the appellant on  17  July  2020.
         The appellant also claimed to  have  made  an  application  for  an
         extension of time to comply on 10 July 2020.  I  now  consider  the
         application for an extension and also whether it is appropriate  to
         determine the matter on the papers.

     12. Dealing first with the application for an extension of time, I note
         that although an email from the appellant's  representatives  dated
         10 July 2020 is on file, the attached application for an  extension
         of time is missing. I do not hold the  solicitors  responsible  for
         that; it is likely to be a housekeeping issue on the  part  of  the
         Tribunal. In any event, the submissions have  since  been  received
         and the respondent  has  replied  without  raising  any  complaints
         regarding timeliness.  She  acknowledges  that  she  has  not  been
         prejudiced. I, therefore, extend time and admit the submissions.

     13. I now consider whether it is appropriate to determine  this  matter
         without an oral hearing. In doing so I have regard to the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the  judgment
         of Osborn v The Parole  Board  [2013]  UKSC  61,  the  Presidential
         Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19  pandemic
         (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD).  I
         have regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule  2
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
         enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To
         this end I have considered that dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and
         justly includes: dealing with it in ways that are proportionate  to
         the importance of the case, the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
         avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
         proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties  are
         able to participate fully in the  proceedings;  using  any  special
         expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so
         far as compatible with proper consideration  of  the  issues  (Rule
         2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

     14. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the  view
         that a full account of the facts are set out in those papers,  that
         the arguments for and against the appellant have been  clearly  set
         out and that the issues to be decided are uncomplicated. There  are
         no  matters  arising  from   the   papers   which   would   require
         clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed  for  that
         purpose. I have regard to the  importance  of  the  matter  to  the
         appellant and consider that a speedy determination of  this  matter
         is in their best interests.

     15. I have had regard to the appellant's request for an  oral  hearing.
         The arguments are largely generic. I do not agree that  the  matter
         is "legally and  factually  involved"  nor  that  the  respondent's
         grounds are "nuanced". Whilst there may be several points, they are
         largely repetitive  and  could  have  been  made  more  succinctly.
         Essentially the complaint is that the  previous  determination  was
         not taken into account in the consideration of credibility and that
         the assessment of the article 8 claim was flawed. Those are  issues
         which can be addressed on the basis of the evidence on the Tribunal
         file including the submissions from both sides. I am satisfied that
         I am able to fairly and justly deal with  this  matter  without  an
         oral hearing and now proceed to do so.

         Submissions

     16. On 1 July 2020, Mr Whitwell on behalf of the respondent, replied to
         the  directions  and  confirmed  reliance  on   the   grounds   for
         permission. He submitted that there had not been a restricted grant
         of appeal and all  the  grounds  are  therefore  addressed  in  his
         submissions. With reference to whether the claim based on political
         opinions was a new matter, it is  submitted  that  the  appellant's
         oral evidence that his life would be at risk on return  because  of
         political activities amounted to  a  ground  of  appeal  listed  in
         section 84(1)(2) of the Nationality,  Asylum  and  Immigration  Act
         2002 and reliance is  placed  on  Mahmud  (s.85  NIAA  2002  -  new
         matters) [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC). It is accepted, however that  the
         judge ruled solely on the human rights  claim  and  did  not  bring
         protection issues into his consideration.

     17. It is submitted that the previous determination of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal remained the starting  point  as  per  Devaseelan  (second
         appeals-ECHR-extra-territorial  effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]   UKIAT
         00702. It is  argued  that  that  determination  and  the  findings
         therein with respect to the false account of circumstances provided
         should, therefore, have been taken into account.

     18. It is submitted that the judge made multiple material misdirections
         of law when finding that the appellant's  circumstances  were  such
         that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his   re-
         integration. It is submitted that the two reasons  offered  by  the
         judge - the appellant's lack of education and employment in the  UK
         and not being able to start his own family  here  -  were  far  too
         narrow to underpin a finding of very significant obstacles  to  re-
         integration. It is submitted that the reasons given  were  backward
         looking at the appellant's ties in the UK rather than  his  ability
         to re-integrate into Bangladeshi life and  reliance  is  placed  on
         Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 which outlines the nature of  the  broad
         forward facing test being one of whether  the  appellant  would  be
         enough of an 'insider' to be able to  participate  in  his  private
         life on return. It is maintained that the judge  does  not  explain
         why not having an education or employment whilst remaining  in  the
         UK unlawfully hinders the appellant's ability to re-integrate  into
         life in Bangladesh. It is pointed out that the appellant spent  the
         first 15  1/2 years of his life there, that it  was  not  suggested
         that he had not received any education there, that he has a sister,
         aunt and paternal uncle in Bangladesh, that he  was  a  28-year-old
         healthy male of working age  with  no  dependants  who  spoke  both
         Bengali and English, had  experience  of  working  in  the  service
         sector and that there was no suggestion that the financial  support
         currently offered by his uncle's family here  would  cease  on  his
         return to Bangladesh. Given these factors it  is  argued  that  the
         judge's  conclusion  of  very   significant   obstacle   approached
         perversion. It is submitted that  any  material  error  of  law  in
         finding that there were very significant obstacles  to  integration
         would infect the claim under article 8.

     19. The appellant's representatives responded  by  way  of  submissions
         dated 17 July 2020. It is argued that the first ground was  without
         merit and that any error was  immaterial  because  the  judge  only
         ruled on the human rights claim and not on protection  matters.  It
         is submitted that the appellant's failure  to  advance  a  separate
         asylum claim was immaterial because he had specifically raised  the
         issues of political opinion in his current application and the fact
         that the respondent chose not to meaningfully engage with  them  in
         her decision on article 8 was  "neither  here  nor  there".  It  is
         submitted that the matter was brought to the respondent's attention
         and that it was, therefore, no longer a new matter and the Tribunal
         could, and indeed had to, consider it in determining the appeal. It
         is submitted that if the respondent felt prejudiced because she had
         not anticipated that the protection element of the case would  form
         part of the article 8 claim, the proper course of action would have
         been to seek an adjournment but no such application was made.

     20. On the point of the credibility assessment, it  is  submitted  that
         this ground was also without  merit.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
         reject the submission that the appellant's failure to claim  asylum
         undermined his credibility. The judge found,  in  any  event,  that
         there was no evidence  that  he  would  be  politically  active  in
         Bangladesh or that he would be of interest to the  authorities  due
         to  any  political  activities.  It  is  submitted  that  this  was
         consistent with the previous determination and, therefore, no issue
         could be raised in relation to Devaseelan because the judge did not
         depart from the previous findings. It is  submitted  that,  in  any
         event, there was no evidence that the judge took into  account  the
         difficulties the appellant would face  in  Bangladesh  due  to  his
         political  affiliation  when  considering  the  question  of   very
         significant obstacles.

     21. It is submitted that the respondent sought to re-argue the case and
         did not identify any clear material errors of law  in  the  judge's
         assessment on the issue of  whether  there  were  very  significant
         obstacles to re-integration.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge's
         findings were not based on speculation but rather on  evidence.  It
         is submitted that the judge  cogently  explained  his  reasons  for
         finding that there was family life. It is submitted  that  contrary
         to the  respondent's  submissions,  the  judge  plainly  took  into
         account the binding  authorities  of  Kamara  and  Parveen.  It  is
         pointed out that these two authorities were expressly referenced in
         the appellant's skeleton argument. It is submitted that  the  judge
         considered the cumulative effect of the appellant's young age  when
         he arrived here, the length of his  absence  from  Bangladesh,  his
         diminished ties, the length of  his  residence  here,  his  limited
         education and employment, and the ties he had developed with family
         here and properly concluded that combined  they  posed  significant
         obstacles to his re-integration on return. It is submitted that  it
         was elementary that a lack of education and  employment  experience
         would adversely impinge on an individual's ability to  successfully
         integrate  into  another  country.  It  is   submitted   that   the
         respondent's grounds were a straightforward attack on  findings  of
         fact which led to a conclusion that the respondent  did  not  agree
         with. The Tribunal is reminded that it should be slow to  interfere
         with findings of fact made by another tribunal unless the  findings
         were perverse. The Tribunal is invited to  find  that  the  judge's
         determination did not reveal any material  errors  of  law.  It  is
         submitted that the appeal was allowed pursuant to paragraph  276ADE
         of the rules rather than article 8 outwith the  rules  and  that  a
         proportionality assessment was unnecessary. It is submitted that if
         the Tribunal found there was a material error of  law,  the  appeal
         should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
         in light of the factual findings that would need to be made.

     22. Mr Whitwell's response is dated 20  July  2020.   he  submits  that
         there is nothing  in  the  judge's  determination  to  support  the
         contention that he had taken into account the  binding  authorities
         of Kamara and Parveen and that the issue of whether  the  appellant
         would be  enough  of  an  insider  to  re-integrate  has  not  been
         considered.

         Discussion and conclusions

     23. I have considered all the evidence, the determination, the  grounds
         for permission and the submissions made by both parties.

     24. The first and most glaring error made by the judge is  his  failure
         to take the determination of  Judge  Beg  as  his  starting  point.
         Whilst that was mainly the determination of an asylum  application,
         the appellant had also relied on  article  8  and  the  judge  made
         lengthy findings on the  appellant's  claimed  family/private  life
         which  included  a  credibility  assessment.  She  found  that  the
         appellant had no family in the UK, that he had  admitted  that  the
         "uncle" he lived with was not  a  relative  but  a  friend  of  his
         father, that he had sought to mislead the court as to family he had
         in Bangladesh, that he had parents and other relatives still living
         in Bangladesh, that he had worked and studied here and  would  have
         an advantage therefore on his return  to  Bangladesh  when  seeking
         employment, that the delay in the consideration of  the  claim  had
         not caused consequences which warranted a grant of leave,  that  he
         could maintains his relationships and friendships after he returned
         to Bangladesh and that he could return to live with his family. She
         also found that he had fabricated his asylum claim  and  identified
         numerous inconsistencies  and  difficulties  with  the  conflicting
         accounts given.

     25. Having noted that the appellant's representative had accepted  that
         the previous decision could be taken into account (and, of  course,
         he did not require the representative's consent  for  that),  Judge
         Ross was wrong to find that it was not relevant to the claim before
         him and the issue he had to determine (at 22). The previous judge's
         findings on the private/family life claim were very relevant to the
         present matter and the conclusion that the appellant had fabricated
         his asylum claim also had  a  bearing  on  the  assessment  of  the
         credibility of his current account. The judge did  not  follow  the
         proper procedure and take Judge Beg's determination as his starting
         point. His reasoning for not doing so  was  erroneous  in  that  he
         failed entirely to appreciate that the determination did  not  only
         deal with a protection claim but also addressed the same article  8
         claim now relied on.  Even  without  such  a  claim,  the  previous
         judge's credibility  findings  would  have  had  relevance  to  the
         subsequent credibility assessment undertaken by Judge Ross. On that
         basis, alone, the entire determination is flawed and  the  findings
         cannot stand.

     26. For completeness, however I consider the other  matters  raised  in
         the respondent's  grounds.  First  is  the  issue  of  whether  the
         appellant's  representations  concerning  his  fear  on  return  to
         Bangladesh amounted to a new matter. I find that they  did  because
         the appellant was advised that he should lodge a  protection  claim
         if he wanted  to  rely  on  that  claim  and  the  matter  was  not
         considered any further in the decision letter. He did not do so and
         the respondent was entitled to object to the claim being raised  at
         the hearing. However, as  both  parties  accept,  the  argument  is
         academic because the judge only ruled on the article  8  claim  and
         did not consider protection matters.

     27. The complaint about the judge's credibility assessment is made out.
         The judge failed to have regard to the  earlier  findings  made  by
         Judge Beg which should have factored into  his  assessment  on  the
         current article 8 claim. It  is  correct  as  pointed  out  by  the
         respondent that the judge simply accepted all  the  oral  evidence.
         Had  he  considered  the  claim  in  the  context  of  the  earlier
         determination, he may have reached a different conclusion.

     28. The judge based his findings on family life on the premise that the
         appellant lived with relatives. The evidence is, however, that  the
         "uncle" is not a relative at all but a family  friend  and  so  the
         references to cousins and niece and nephew are erroneous (at 23 and
         24). The judge did not carry out  his  assessment  on  the  correct
         factual basis; that is, that the appellant has been living  with  a
         friend of his father and not with family members. His  findings  on
         the appellant being confined to the home  with  no  opportunity  to
         follow an education or a career were made  against  the  weight  of
         evidence before him which included a number of  documents  to  show
         that  the  appellant  attended   college   and   obtained   various
         qualifications including certificates  in  employment  skills.  The
         evidence further suggests that all the appellant's  activities  and
         friendships have been within the Bangladeshi community and in  that
         context the finding that he would have problems  in  re-integrating
         have not been adequate reasoned. The  reference  to  financial  and
         "other" support is not explained (at 24). Further, and contrary  to
         what  the  appellant  maintains  in  submissions,  there   was   no
         consideration whatsoever  by  the  judge  of  any  of  the  binding
         authorities referred to by the parties. Mr Youssefian  argues  that
         there "plainly"  was  but  does  not  point  to  any  part  of  the
         determination  to  support  that  contention.  He  may  well   have
         mentioned this in his skeleton argument  but  the  judge  does  not
         refer to that or indeed to having considered any of the documentary
         evidence before him.  The judge has not considered whether the fact
         of  having  all  his  family  in  Bangladesh  and  having  retained
         familiarity with the culture and the language would  be  enough  to
         make him an "insider" for the purposes of  re-integration.  Nor  is
         there any consideration of the public interest  factors  which  are
         relevant where almost all the time the  appellant  has  spent  here
         (and largely as an adult) has been without  leave.  For  all  these
         reasons, the judge's decision is unsustainable and it is set aside.






         Decision

     29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and
         it is set aside. A fresh decision shall be made by another judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.  Directions shall
         be forwarded by that Tribunal in due course.

         Anonymity

     30. There as been no request for an anonymity order and I see no reason
         to make one.




         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 10 September 2020
