
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
hu/11077/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 January 2018                        |  On 20 February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 AICHA HOUTI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton of Counsel instructed by Visa Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  29  March  1984.   She
    arrived in this country as a visitor on 5 October 2015 with leave until
    5 February 2016.  She applied on 4 February 2016 for leave to remain as
    a spouse.  This was refused on 19 April 2016.  The  appellant  appealed
    and her appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 18 September 2017.

2.   The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.  The judge heard from the appellant and  her  husband  whom  the
    appellant had married in Algeria on 23 April 2013.  The couple  have  a
    daughter born on 21 January 2014 who is a British citizen.

3.   It was the appellant's case that she had first visited the UK  in  2013
    and that during her second visit she became pregnant  and  returned  to
    Algeria to give birth to her daughter.

4.   The judge also heard from the appellant's  husband  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  He married the appellant after obtaining a divorce  from  the
    High Court on 24 January 2013.  He has a 19 year old  daughter  by  his
    previous marriage.

5.   The First-tier Judge made unfavourable credibility findings  and  found
    that the appellant used deception to enter the UK as  a  visitor.   She
    noted that the appellant could not meet the requirements to stay on the
    basis of family life because she  did  not  comply  with  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.2.1 because at the time of her application  she  had  leave  as  a
    visitor only and hence was  not  eligible.   While  the  couple  had  a
    qualifying relationship within paragraph EX.1 the Judge concluded  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  with
    her husband outside the UK.  There was nothing to prevent the appellant
    returning to Algeria and it was a matter for  the  couple  whether  the
    daughter was left with her husband or returned  with  her  to  Algeria.
    There  would  be  no   significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration into Algeria and no exceptional circumstances outside the
    Rules under Article 8.  The Secretary of State had fully considered the
    best interests of the British child.  The appellant  had  lied  in  her
    evidence and these lies were an attempt to remain in the UK and not  to
    return to Algeria in order to make a proper  spouse  application.   The
    judge referred to Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 but it is argued in this case that  she  erred  in  not
    referring to Section 117B(6):

         "6.  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

    117D(1) In this part-

         "(2) 'Qualifying Child' means a person who is under the age  of  18
         and who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or


             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                  of seven years or more."

6.   The judge dismissed the appeal under the  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

7.   There was an application for permission to appeal on 16  October  2017.
    Permission to appeal was granted on 6 November 2017 on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that  the  judge  had  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  EX.1  when  there
    was a concession in the refusal notice that EX.1 applied.  It was  also
    arguable that the judge had erred  in  failing  to  consider  paragraph
    117B(6).

8.   A response was filed on 14 December 2017  arguing  that  EX.1  did  not
    apply as the appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements of the
    Rules and the judge had been correct.  In respect of Section  117B  the
    judge had taken into account that the appellant had obtained  entry  to
    the UK by  deception  and  she  had  further  taken  into  account  the
    situation that the British child would face if removed.

9.   A skeleton argument was filed shortly before the hearing on 29  January
    2018.  Reference was made to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 but  it  was  noted
    that in that case neither appellant had any children and  the  decision
    predated the implementation of Section 117B.  It  was  clear  that  the
    appellant met Section 117B(6).  The  only  issue  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  Reference was made  to
    the respondent's policy which had been considered by the Tribunal in SF
    (Albania) [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  In paragraph 7 the Tribunal  refers
    to guidance on the issue of whether it would be unreasonable to  expect
    a British citizen child to leave the UK and  in  the  headnote  it  was
    stated that the Tribunal ought to take such guidance into account if it
    clearly pointed to a particular outcome.

10.  Ms Ahmad accepted that the  issue  had  been  clearly  set  out  in  SF
    (Albania) and the policy was still applicable.   The  First-tier  Judge
    had not taken into account the  question  of  reasonableness.   It  was
    agreed there was a material error of law.  Ms Ahmad further agreed that
    the appeal should be allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Judge
    reversed in the light of the Home Office policy guidance under Rule  8.



11.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.   In  this
    case it is agreed that the First-tier Judge materially  erred  in  law.
    The judge failed to take into account the question  of  reasonableness.
    No reference is made to Section 117B(6).  Although in the refusal issue
    was taken with the appellant attempting to circumvent Immigration Rules
    it was not argued by Ms Ahmad that the appellant was disqualified under
    the policy by  reason  of  criminality  or  "a  very  poor  immigration
    history, such as where  the  person  has  repeatedly  and  deliberately
    breached the Immigration Rules."

12.  For the reasons I have  given,  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Judge was materially flawed in law.

13.  I remake the decision.  It is accepted that in the light  of  the  Home
    Office guidance as referred to in the case of  SF  (Albania)  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.  Accordingly I allow the appeal under Article
    8.  The period of leave is to be determined by the Secretary of State.

ANONYMITY Order

The First-tier judge made no anonymity order and I make none.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal  any  fee  paid  by  the  appellant  is  to  be
returned to her.






Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal






