
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11430/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD UIST
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                 farook mola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Shuttari Paul &
                    Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth ("the judge"), promulgated on 12 September  2019,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim  in  the  context  of  a  deportation
    order.

 2. The Appellant, who claims to be a dual national of Portugal  and  India
    (the former claimed nationality having been disputed by the  Respondent
    throughout), allegedly arrived in the United Kingdom in 2000.   Between
    2006 and 2017 he was convicted of  a  number  of  offences  concerning,
    amongst other matters, theft, possession of Class A drugs, and  driving
    a vehicle with excess alcohol.  As a result of convictions  accrued  in
    the midst of this period, on 2 October 2014 the Appellant was made  the
    subject of a deportation order.  Representations  based  on  Article  8
    ECHR had been submitted to the Respondent prior to the making  of  that
    order.  These representations were  then  treated  as  a  human  rights
    claim, and that claim was refused on 9 May 2018.  It is  this  decision
    which led to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In essence, the Appellant's case has always  been  as  follows.   As  a
    result  of  the  claimed  dual   Portuguese/Indian   nationality,   the
    Respondent should have considered any deportation  proceedings  in  the
    context of EU  law  (in  particular  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016). Thus, the decision made in  May  2018
    was unlawful.  Although the Appellant has no children, he has been in a
    relationship with an Irish citizen, Mary Mongal  (erroneously  referred
    to as Ms "Mongan" by the judge), for some time.   He  has  relied  upon
    this relationship  in  resisting  deportation.   In  addition,  he  has
    asserted that he provides significant care for a woman described as his
    adopted grandmother, Mrs Devi.  His removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would have a significant impact upon her.  These factors, together with
    other ties said to have been established in this country, permitted him
    to satisfy the exceptions to deportation contained in section  117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  amended  ("NIAA
    2002"), and paragraphs 399-399A of the Immigration Rules.

 4. In refusing the human rights claim, the Respondent did not accept  that
    the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms Mongal,
    that the Appellant held Portuguese nationality, that  he  was  socially
    and culturally integrated into the life of  the  United  Kingdom,  that
    there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
    Indian society, or that there were any  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those set out in the exceptions.

The judge's decision

 5. The Appellant's claimed dual nationality was raised  as  a  preliminary
    issue and dealt with at length by the  judge  at  paras  11-27  of  his
    decision.  In light of inconsistencies and omissions in  the  evidence,
    the  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  hold  Portuguese
    nationality.  For reasons set out at paras  38-40  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with Ms Mongal and therefore he was unable to rely on the  family  life
    exception.  At para 43 the judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom by reason of
    his criminality.  On the basis of additional matters stated within  the
    same paragraph and those contained at para  45,  the  judge  in  effect
    concluded  that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Indian society. As result, he could  not
    rely on the private life exception.

 6.  In  considering  whether  or  not  there  were  any  "very  compelling
    circumstances over and above" those described in  the  two  exceptions,
    the judge went on at  para  50  to  consider  the  Appellant's  claimed
    assistance to Mrs Devi.  On the basis of the evidence  before  him  the
    judge  concluded   that   there   was   no   relevant   dependency   or
    "exceptional/compelling/compassionate circumstances".  The  appeal  was
    duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. Five grounds of appeal were put forward by the Appellant.  Grounds  1-4
    all state in terms that the challenges were based on "perversity".  The
    grounds may be summarised as follows.  Firstly, that it was not open to
    the judge  to  conclude  that  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and Ms Mongal simply  because  there
    was an absence of evidence from Mrs Devi on the issue of  cohabitation.
    It is said that  Mrs  Devi's  silence  on  the  issue  simply  did  not
    constitute a contradiction at all.  Secondly, that in the absence of an
    allegation by the Respondent that the Appellant had entered the  United
    Kingdom illegally it was not open to the judge to conclude that he  was
    not a Portuguese national.  Thirdly, that on the  evidence  as  to  the
    claimed dependent relationship with Mrs Devi, it was irrational for the
    judge to have concluded that no such relationship in fact  existed  and
    for him  to  have  concluded  that  this  did  not  constitute  a  very
    compelling circumstance.  Fourthly, that in  relying  solely  upon  the
    Appellant's criminality  it  was  irrational  for  the  judge  to  have
    concluded that he was not socially and culturally integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom.  The fifth ground of appeal asserts that the judge  had
    failed  to  conduct  what  is  described  as  "a  fair   and   balanced
    consideration of the evidence as a whole".

 8. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    made reference to ground 1, regarding it is arguable that there was  "a
    considerable difference between one witness not having stated something
    in evidence and not having been asked  questions  about  a  matter  and
    another witness stating that something is true".  Judge Osborne went on
    to state that having identified this arguable error, all other  grounds
    were also properly arguable.

The hearing

 9. Mr Waheed relied upon the grounds of appeal and his skeleton  argument.
    He made additional succinct  oral  submissions  based  upon  those  two
    documents and referred us to specific aspects of the evidence that  had
    been before the judge, in particular a witness statement from Mrs Ayub,
    photographs, and other additional materials.

10. Mr Kotas asked us to bear in mind that where perversity is  alleged,  a
    high threshold must be met.  Addressing each of the grounds  of  appeal
    in turn, he submitted  that  there  were  no  material  errors  in  the
    decision.  In certain respects, he went further and submitted that even
    taking the Appellant's case as its highest there was no rational  basis
    upon which the appeal could have succeeded.

Error of law decision

11. In our judgment, when it  is  considered  as  a  whole,  there  are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.

Ground 1

12. The first ground is misconceived on two bases.  First, at para  39  the
    judge was rationally entitled to take account of the fact that  one  of
    the Appellant's  witnesses,  Mrs  Devi,  was  entirely  silent  in  her
    evidence about a material aspect of his case, namely whether or not  he
    had cohabited with Ms Mongal.  It may well be the case  that  Mrs  Devi
    was not cross-examined on this omission, but of course it was  for  the
    Appellant to make good his case and if no relevant evidence was led  on
    his behalf, that is  not  a  matter  which  materially  undermines  the
    judge's assessment.  Whether or not the absence of  evidence  from  Mrs
    Devi should have been described as a "contradiction", it was clearly  a
    relevant omission.  This discrete point has of course to be  read  with
    the rest of the judge's findings on the relationship issue.

13. The second reason for rejecting ground 1 is that it entirely  fails  to
    acknowledge the additional reasons set out by the judge at paras 38-40,
    in respect of which there has been no challenge. [38] contains  reasons
    relating to clear inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    relationship.  The first part of para  39  itself  contains  a  further
    reason relating to an inconsistency as to the place of residence.  Para
    40 makes reference to yet more inconsistencies in  addresses  contained
    within the evidence.

14. At para 41 the judge makes it very clear that he  had  considered  "all
    the evidence" when reaching the composite conclusion that the Appellant
    was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms  Mongal.   We
    have no hesitation in finding that that conclusion and the  reasons  in
    support thereof were not irrational in any way.

Ground 2

15. The judge dealt with the issue of the  claimed  Portuguese  nationality
    with care,  dedicating  numerous  paragraphs  to  an  analysis  of  the
    evidence before him.  The reasons set out at paras 14-25 in  particular
    were manifestly rational.  The judge quite rightly approached the issue
    on the basis that it  was  for  the  Appellant  to  prove  the  claimed
    Portuguese nationality.  In light of the  numerous  inconsistencies  in
    the evidence, and  the  absence  of  any  positive  evidence  from  the
    Appellant as to the claimed nationality, we cannot see  any  perversity
    on the judge's part.  The sole basis of the challenge under ground 2 is
    that the Respondent had apparently not asserted that the Appellant  was
    an illegal entrant.  The argument offered is that  in  the  absence  of
    such an allegation, the Appellant must have  arrived  in  this  country
    lawfully, and that this in  turn  indicated  that  he  was  probably  a
    Portuguese national.

16. We reject this contention.  It is clear from the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter that the Respondent deemed the Appellant to have resided in this
    country unlawfully.  There is no evidence at all that he had ever  been
    acknowledged  as  an  EEA  national.   The  judge  had  considered  the
    nationality issue on a holistic basis, including the  complete  absence
    of any evidence from  the  Appellant  as  to  that  claimed  Portuguese
    nationality.  It simply cannot be  the  case  that  a  failure  of  the
    Respondent to provide evidence of one sort or  another  to  the  effect
    that the Appellant was an illegal entrant had such  a  bearing  on  the
    judge's consideration as a whole that his conclusion on  the  issue  is
    rendered irrational.

Ground 3

17. There is no merit in the argument that it was perverse to conclude that
    there was no relationship of dependency and/or that this constituted an
    important factor in the appeal.

18. The judge accepted that the Appellant accompanied Mrs Devi to  hospital
    appointments in a taxi and that he helped with  household  chores.   It
    was also accepted that he provided "support and comfort" to  her.   The
    judge (quite correctly) noted that there was no corroborative  evidence
    to suggest that there had been any enquiries made  of  social  services
    (or for that matter any other relevant body) to establish what type  of
    care could be provided  to  Mrs  Devi  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    deported.  The  judge  went  on  to  note  the  absence  of  any  blood
    relationship and, as had been described elsewhere in the evidence,  the
    absence of any residence together for a number of years.

19. The ground of appeal makes the point  that  the  absence  of  a  shared
    residential address cannot preclude the existence of a relationship  of
    dependency.  In principle, that must  be  right:  all  depends  on  the
    particular circumstances of any given case.   However,  as  with  other
    aspects of the Appellant's  challenge,  the  totality  of  the  judge's
    reasoning  has  been  ignored.   The  conclusion  that  there  was   no
    relationship of dependency was not  based  simply  on  the  absence  of
    shared residence.  This was only  one  among  a  number  of  (otherwise
    unchallenged) factors taken into account.

20. On the evidence before him and in light of the reasons stated, even  if
    the very narrow issue of a lack of shared  residence  should  not  have
    been accounted for at all, the judge was plainly entitled  to  conclude
    that there was no relevant relationship, bearing in mind  the  relevant
    legal framework in adult dependency cases (as set out in, for  example,
    Kugathas [2003] INLR 170 and Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320) and the  elevated
    threshold applicable to perversity challenges.

21. Further, even if the judge was bound to have concluded that  there  was
    such a relationship of dependency, this does not come close to reaching
    the very high threshold of a "very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above" the two exceptions.  Any error would be entirely immaterial.

Ground 4

22. With reference to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  CI  (Nigeria)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 2027, the judge does appear to have erred in apparently
    basing  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  not  socially   and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom solely on  the  basis  of
    his criminality.  A wider assessment is  required,  having  regard  not
    simply to criminal conduct, but ties established in this  country  over
    the course of time.  However, any  error  on  this  issue  is  entirely
    immaterial.  In order for it to have had any favourable bearing on  the
    Appellant's ability to meet the private life  exception  under  section
    117C(4) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 399A of the Rules, the Appellant  would
    have had to meet the other  two  limbs,  namely  that  he  had  resided
    lawfully in the United Kingdom for "most of his life"  and  that  there
    would be "very significant obstacles" to his reintegration into  Indian
    society (see Tirabi (Deportation: "lawfully resident":  s.5(1))  [2018]
    UKUT 199 (IAC)).  On the basis of the judge's sustainable  findings  on
    the Appellant's claimed Portuguese nationality and the absence  of  any
    lawful status in this country, together with the unchallenged  findings
    on his good health, linguistic abilities, and time spent  in  India  in
    the past, the Appellant was clearly unable to meet either the first  or
    third the first of these limbs.

Ground 5

23. We see no merit in the  final  ground  of  challenge.   The  judge  had
    clearly considered the evidence of Mrs Ayub, making specific  reference
    to  it  when  considering  the  issue  of   the   Appellant's   claimed
    relationship with Ms Mongal in [39].

24. As regards her evidence on the issue of  the  claimed  relationship  of
    dependency with Mrs Devi, the witness statement of Mrs Ayub  (at  pages
    88-89 of the Appellant's bundle) contains  only  the  barest  assertion
    that the Appellant was an  important  part  of  Mrs  Devi's  life.   At
    paragraph 3 of that statement we find the following:

         "His grandmother Champa [Mrs Devi] also depends  on  him.   She  is
         able to live and enjoy her home life because Farook [the Appellant]
         is there looking after her and making sure she takes  part  in  all
         the social activities."

25. A failure by the judge to specifically mention that  rather  threadbare
    evidence at para 50 of his decision in no way materially undermines the
    sustainability of the findings and ultimate conclusion reached.

26. Finally, the judge's failure specifically to refer to photographic  and
    other evidence concerning the claimed relationship with Ms Mongal  does
    not assist the Appellant when the decision is viewed  sensibly  and  in
    the round.  It is well-settled that a judge need not refer to each  and
    every item of evidence adduced when  setting  out  their  analysis  and
    reasons for a decision.  In  light  of  the  totality  of  the  judge's
    reasoning the absence of express reference to this other evidence could
    not rationally have made a difference to the outcome.

27. In view of the above, the  judge's  decision  is  sustainable  and  the
    Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

28. We add a comment on the grant of permission in this case.  In light  of
    the judge's decision and the way in which the grounds  of  appeal  were
    put - squarely on a perversity basis in almost all  respects  -  it  is
    somewhat difficult to see why permission was granted on ground  1.   It
    is all the more difficult to see why, even if that ground was deemed to
    be properly arguable, it followed that the remaining grounds were  also
    arguable.  This, it seems to us, was a non-sequitur.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 20 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



