
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11736/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE NICOL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aitken, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Welsh sent on 25 July 2019,  dismissing  his
         appeal on human rights grounds.



Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1971.  He entered
         the United Kingdom ('UK') in 1986 (when he was 14) with his family,
         and was granted indefinite leave to remain in 1989.  The  appellant
         has a British Citizen wife ('A') and two children aged 13 ('B') and
         20 ('C').

      3. Although the  history  relevant  to  the  respondent's  deportation
         proceedings against the appellant is lengthy, it suffices to  state
         that  on  13  April  2018  the  respondent  notified  him  that   a
         deportation decision had been made.   This  followed  sentences  of
         imprisonment over the course of 2013 and 2014 totalling  13  months
         for drug dealing offences: 6 months  activated  suspended  sentence
         for dealing cannabis; 6 months consecutive for another  offence  of
         dealing cannabis; one month consecutive for possession of  cocaine;
         one month concurrent for possession  of  cannabis.  In  a  decision
         dated 18 May 2018, the respondent  refused  the  appellant's  human
         rights claim to remain, based upon his family and private  life  in
         the UK.

Appeal proceedings

      4. When the matter came before the FTT, it was conceded on  behalf  of
         the appellant that he was a 'foreign criminal' (in  any  event  the
         judge found that his offences had caused serious harm), and it  was
         for the FTT to  decide  whether  the  appellant  met  the  relevant
         thresholds to be found in ss.117C(5) and (6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002  Act').   The  FTT
         concluded that they were not, and dismissed the  appellant's  claim
         on Article 8, ECHR grounds.  The grounds  of  appeal  against  this
         decision have been prepared by Mr  Aitken,  and  are  twofold:  (1)
         there was no assessment of B's best interests,  and  (2)  excessive
         weight  was  given  to  the  public  interest  and  the  issue   of
         deterrence.

      5. Upper Tribunal (UT) Judge McWilliam granted permission  to  appeal,
         observing that it is arguable that the FTT  did  not  consider  B's
         best  interests  when  assessing  whether   the   consequences   of
         deportation would be unduly harsh.

Hearing

      6. At the hearing before us, Mr Aitken relied upon a skeleton argument
         dated 7 November 2019.  This sought to reargue the appeal, and  did
         not address the  important  issue  for  us,  whether  there  was  a
         material error of law in the FTT's decision.  When this was pointed
         out, Mr Aitken clarified that he only  relied  upon  ground  1,  as
         summarised above.  He withdrew ground 2.

      7. Ms Jones relied upon a succinct but helpful skeleton  argument,  in
         which  she  submitted  that  the  FTT  took  all  relevant  matters
         connected to B's best interests, and ground  1  was  therefore  not
         made out.

      8. After hearing from both representatives, we reserved our  decision,
         which we now provide with reasons.

Legal Framework

      9. Paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  reflected
         within s. 117C of the 2002 Act.  This is a case in  which  the  FTT
         found that exception 2 could not be met.  Exception 2 is set out in
         this way:

             "Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh".

     10. The correct approach to the unduly harsh test has  been  considered
         by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  It was
         made clear by Lord Carnwath that the unduly  harsh  test  is  self-
         contained, that is to say it does not require a  balancing  of  the
         relative levels of severity of the parent's offence other  than  is
         inherent in the distinction drawn by s.117C itself.  Lord  Carnwath
         also made it clear that the unduly harsh test requires an  elevated
         threshold to be met.  Paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) says this:

             "On the other hand the expression unduly harsh  seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             reasonableness under Section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word unduly implies an element of comparison.   It
             assumes that there is a due level  of  harshness,  that  is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context.  Unduly implies something going  beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence".

     11. The approach in KO has been considered and applied  in  RA  (s.117C
         "unduly harsh": offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC).
           The President said this:

             22.  It is important to keep in mind that the test in  section
             117C(6) is extremely demanding. The fact that, at this  point,
             a  tribunal  is  required  to   engage   in   a   wide-ranging
             proportionality   exercise,   balancing   the   weight    that
             appropriately falls to be given to  factors  on  the  proposed
             deportee's side of the  balance  against  the  weight  of  the
             public interest, does not in any sense permit the tribunal  to
             engage in the sort of exercise that would  be  appropriate  in
             the case of someone who is not within  the  ambit  of  section
             117C. Not only must regard be had to the factors  set  out  in
             section 117B, such as giving little weight to  a  relationship
             formed with a qualifying partner that is established when  the
             proposed deportee was in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  the
             public interest in the deportation of a  foreign  criminal  is
             high; and even higher for a person sentenced  to  imprisonment
             of at least four years.

         And then immediately supported this by referring to  the  reasoning
         of Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) & Another v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         662:

             "23. Jackson LJ put it as follows:-

                  "33. Although there is no 'exceptionality' requirement, it
                  inexorably follows from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the
                  cases in which circumstances are  sufficiently  compelling
                  to outweigh the high public interest in  deportation  will
                  be rare. The commonplace incidents of family life, such as
                  ageing parents in poor health or the natural love  between
                  parents and children, will not be sufficient.

                  34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great
                  weight,  as  identified  by  Lord  Kerr  in  HH  v  Deputy
                  Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25;  [2013]
                  1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it is  a  consequence  of
                  criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be  separated  from
                  their children  for  many  years,  contrary  to  the  best
                  interests of those children. The desirability of  children
                  being with both parents is a commonplace of  family  life.
                  That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance
                  to outweigh the high public interest in deporting  foreign
                  criminals. As Rafferty LJ observed in Secretary  of  State
                  for the Home Department v CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488
                  at [38]:

                      "Neither the British nationality of the  respondent's
                      children  nor  their  likely  separation  from  their
                      father for a long time are exceptional  circumstances
                      which   outweigh   the   public   interest   in   his
                      deportation.""

Error of Law Discussion

     12. Apart from erroneously referring to Pakistan instead of  Bangladesh
         at [39] the FTT's decision is carefully drafted and  contains  very
         detailed reasoning over the course of 92 paragraphs.  The FTT noted
         that it was accepted that the appellant is a foreign  criminal  for
         the purposes of s. 117C of the 2002 Act (see  s.  117D(2))  and  as
         such the issues in dispute could be narrowed to three:

          i) whether the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
             unduly harsh  on A and B (Exception 2 in s. 117C(5));

         ii)  whether  the  appellant's  length  of  residence,  particular
             circumstances and  mental  health  met  the  requirements  for
             Exception 2 in s.117C(5) to be satisfied;

        iii) assuming that exceptions 1 and 2 cannot be met  whether  there
             are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those
             Exceptions in order to meet the requirements in s. 117C(6).

     13. There was no appeal against  the  FTT's  findings  regarding  issue
         (ii).   Ground  1  only  challenges  the  unduly  harsh  assessment
         regarding B in issue (i).  Ground 2 only challenges the approach to
         the public interest, a relevant ingredient to be considered for the
         purposes of issue (iii), but this has been withdrawn by Mr  Aitken.
         It follows that we need only deal with ground 1 and the  submission
         that the FTT failed to address B's best interests.

     14. The FTT correctly directed itself to KO  (Nigeria)  and  was  fully
         aware of the relevant best  interests  principle,  having  directed
         itself to ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 11  at  [21].   Although
         the FTT did not expressly refer to B's best interests  after  this,
         when the decision is read as a whole we are satisfied that the  FTT
         had B's best interests fully in  mind  when  making  its  carefully
         considered findings regarding B's circumstances in Bangladesh  with
         her father and in the UK without her father.  The FTT addressed all
         relevant factors including, in relation to life in Bangladesh  with
         both parents: linguistic skills, knowledge of Bangladeshi  customs,
         age, adaptability,  support  available  in  Bangladesh  and  mental
         health considerations; and in relation to remaining in the UK  with
         her mother: her wish to have both parents living with her  but  her
         mother is her primary carer and they will have the support  of  the
         extended family in the UK, without the stress  that  the  appellant
         has caused the family.

     15. Mr Aitken did not take us to any factors or  evidence  said  to  be
         left out of the FTT's assessment of  B's  circumstances  in  either
         Bangladesh with both parents or in the UK without her  mother.   At
         [36] the FTT expressly accepted that the effect  of  relocation  to
         Bangladesh would be harsh upon B.  We accept that  it  is  implicit
         from this that the FTT considered that relocation would not  be  in
         B's best interests i.e. it would be harsh, but was entitled to find
         for the reasons provided, that notwithstanding B's best  interests,
         the effect of deportation upon her would not be unduly harsh.

     16. Even if the FTT expressly found that B's best  interests  supported
         the appellant not being deported, the ultimate decision would  have
         been the same for the detailed reasoning provided by  the  FTT,  as
         summarised above.  As Jackson LJ put it in  NA  (Pakistan),  whilst
         the best interests of children certainly carry great weight, it  is
         nevertheless, a consequence of criminal conduct that offenders  may
         be separated from their children for many years,  contrary  to  the
         best interests of those  children.  The  desirability  of  children
         being with both parents is a commonplace of family  life.  That  is
         not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh  the
         high public interest in deporting foreign criminals.  Similarly, in
         this case, an express consideration of  B's  best  interests  would
         have made no material difference to the outcome,  given  the  FTT's
         careful and comprehensive assessment of the relevant  circumstances
         appertaining to B.

Notice of decision

     17. The FtT's decision does not contain a material error of law and  we
         do not set it aside.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 20 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
