
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11643/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2019                   |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Gurpal [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H. Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Butler, promulgated on 13th  November  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 25th October 2018.  In the decision, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 9th  April
    1971.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  15th
    May 2018, refusing his application on human rights grounds,  to  remain
    in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that, although he came  to  the
    UK on a visit visa in 2014 which was valid until 2015,  and  thereafter
    overstayed, the purpose of his visit was to see his partner, [BK], whom
    he subsequently married in a religious ceremony on 18th November  2015.
    He did not leave the UK in accordance with the terms of his visa.   The
    reason for this was the medical condition of his  partner  who  suffers
    from a number of medical  conditions.   The  Appellant  has  wished  to
    support her in this country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge set out the Appellant's evidence.  He  observed  how  it  was
    that the Appellant's wife had "some significant  medical  issues  which
    affect her digestive process and give her back pain".  She had repeated
    absences from work and has not returned to work  since  December  2016.
    She suffers from achalasia, which prevents  food  passing  through  her
    oesophagus smoothly.  She has fibromyalgia.  This gives her severe back
    pain.   She  has  had  a   number   of   surgical   interventions   and
    investigations.  These are evidenced in 80 pages of correspondence  and
    appointment letters which start on page 77 of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    (see paragraph 31 of the decision).

 5. The judge accepted that:_

         "It is perhaps unsurprising that she claims  to  have  symptoms  of
         depression as a result of her many physical ailments.  The  doctors
         at pages 152 and 157  show  her  receiving  treatment  in  hospital
         dermatology and dietetics clinics in 2018 ..." (paragraph 32).

 6. The Appellant's claim, however, was that he gave his wife 24 hour care.
     The judge observed that "there was no detail as to what care had to be
    given, if at all, during the night.  More significantly,  there  is  no
    medical opinion that such care is necessary" (see paragraph 33).

 7. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in law in the
    following material respects.  First,  he  had  concluded  that  he  was
    "unconvinced of" (paragraph 43) the need of the Appellant's partner  to
    receive 24/7 care.  However, the focus of the judge  of  the  need  for
    24/7 care from the Appellant has  led  him  to  fail  to  consider  the
    emotional bond between the Appellant and his  partner,  because  it  is
    this which goes to the question of "insurmountable obstacles" which has
    to be determined under the Immigration Rules.

 9. Second, the judge had made a material misdirection in law (at paragraph
    40) in concluding that "I  do  not  find  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances warranting consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules"
    because in associating the judge imposed an unlawful gateway  threshold
    upon the consideration of Article 8.  This was a human  rights  appeal.
    The reference to "exceptional circumstances"  meant  that  the  judge's
    "Razgar" assessment was flawed (at paragraphs 42 to 43).

10. Third,  the  judge  made  an  irrational  finding  in  considering  the
    Appellant's wife's fitness to travel to India, when concluding that the
    Appellant's GP was not a person  who  had  evidenced  his  professional
    background by way of documentary evidence, and it was  not  clear  what
    qualifications he had to make the kind of assessment that he had  made,
    when suggesting that the Appellant was not fit to travel to India.

11. Fourth, the judge had  failed  to  consider  the  argument  based  upon
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, which had been expressly  put  to  the  judge
    (see paragraph 14 of  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  before  the  judge
    below).

12. Finally, the judge did  not  consider  the  impact,  in  terms  of  the
    consideration  of  "insurmountable  obstacles",  upon  the  Appellant's
    partner, of the Appellant being  removed,  because  this  went  to  the
    proportionality assessment directly, outside of the Immigration Rules.

13. On 28th January 2019 permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal.



Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 1st August 2019, Mr. Pipe relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.  He submitted that the judge had accepted  that
    the relationship between the Appellant and his wife was a "genuine  and
    subsisting" relationship.  Therefore, the key question here was whether
    there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    relocating to India.  The fact, which has not been  questioned  by  the
    judge, was that the Appellant suffered  from  numerous,  multiple,  and
    complicated medical conditions.  These had been set out, and  expressly
    referred to by the judge,  from  page  77  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    onwards.

15. In particular, there was a letter from the  Appellant's  GP,  Dr.  Alex
    Kupfer, dated 24th September  2018,  which  sets  out  under  a  single
    column, both the medical condition of the  Appellant's  wife,  and  the
    medications that she was taking.  It then referred to the fact that the
    Appellant's wife, [BK], was a person who "suffers from chronic pain  in
    shoulders, hips and  back.   She  has  a  tight  chest,  breathing  and
    swallowing symptoms/problems.  She  struggles  to  find  adequate  pain
    relief.  She gets severe symptoms every day".  It refers  to  how  [BK]
    has had to leave her job due to her medical conditions  and  that  "her
    physical health problems exacerbate her mental health and  she  suffers
    from depression every day".

16. Indeed, it says that "[BK] struggles to  stand  for  more  than  twenty
    minutes and walking  is  difficult  for  her  at  all  times.   She  is
    currently not able to travel to India".  Mr. Pipe submitted that rather
    focus upon the legal test of "insurmountable obstacles", the judge  had
    focused upon the need for 24 hour care for the  Appellant's  wife.   It
    was unnecessary, however, to go this  far.   If  the  Appellant's  wife
    suffered from the conditions that had been  set  out  in  the  numerous
    medical reports, then  the  "insurmountable  obstacle"  test  had  been
    satisfied, quite simply, because the Appellant was to  be  required  to
    return to India, together with his wife,  and  if  she  was  unable  to
    travel,  as  the   medical   reports   indicated,   then   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to this particular relocation taking place.

17. Finally, Mr. Pipe referred to the fact that there had been today a Rule
    15(2A) application before this Tribunal.  There was new evidence  which
    had not been available previously, that was overwhelmingly important to
    the remaking of the decision, should this Tribunal get to  that  stage.
    This included a letter of 10th July 2019 from Dr.  Kupfer,  who  states
    that, "I can say with certainty, that the stress of Gurpal's  leave  to
    stay hearing is already having a negative effect on [BK]'s  health  and
    that should he be  required  to  leave  it  would  have  a  significant
    negative effect on [BK]'s health".

18. Mr. Pipe submitted that even if the Appellant were required  to  return
    to India alone, it was plain from this that the impact  upon  his  wife
    would be very considerable.  This  is  because,  as  Dr.  Kupfer  makes
    clear, "her partner, Gurpal [S], is her carer and a great  support  for
    [BK]".

19. Second,  there  was  another  letter  dated  14th  March  2019  from  a
    specialist dietician, from the Nottingham NHS Treatment  Centre,  which
    makes it clear that:-

         "even  liquids  can  be  a  problem  for  her  [referring  to   the
         Appellant's wife].  There is a discomfort on her righthand side and
         she  describes  her  abdomen  as  feeling  hard  there.   She   has
         identified many things which do not suit her IBS and has  cut  them
         out of her diet for the most part".

    This evidence, submitted Mr. Pipe, was not inconsistent,  but  entirely
    in conformity, with the evidence previously before  this  Tribunal,  in
    the decision made by Judge Butler on 13th November 2018.

20. For her part, Miss Aboni submitted that the judge did not engage in any
    error of law.  He directed  himself  appropriately.   All  the  medical
    evidence  was  properly  taken  into  account.   This  was  clear  from
    paragraph 31 onwards, where the conditions that  the  Appellant's  wife
    suffers from are set out.  Thereafter, adequate consideration is  given
    to the test of "insurmountable obstacles".  If it  was  said  that  the
    Appellant could not fly, this evidence only came from Dr.  Kupfer,  the
    Appellant's GP.  It was not clear why other specialists had  not  given
    that evidence.  Moreover, the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's  wife
    needed 24 hour care was one which had not been made out in the  medical
    evidence.  There was accordingly no error.

21. In reply, Mr. Pipe submitted that  Dr.  Kupfer  was  an  NHS  certified
    general practitioner for the Appellant.  It was not necessary  for  him
    to demonstrate any  further  expertise.   Some  matters,  such  as  the
    ability to be able to fly, or to relocate,  are  matters  that  do  not
    require a specialist to report upon.  After all,  the  Appellant  could
    only go to so many different medical  practitioners  to  get  evidence.
    The evidence was what it was and it was  not  such  that  it  had  been
    impugned in any way.

22.  There  had  been  multiple  letters  speaking  to   multiple   medical
    complications that the Appellant's wife suffered from.  None  of  these
    had been contested.  If the  general  practitioner's  letter  had  been
    divorced from these other letters from medical practitioners  that  may
    have been an entirely different matter.  As it was, it  was  in  tandem
    with the prognosis from the other practitioners.  He asked me to make a
    finding of  an  error  of  law  and  to  remake  the  decision  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I set aside the decision.  My reasons are as  follows.



24. First, the judge's rejection of the evidence from the  Appellant's  GP,
    Dr. Kupfer, in the letter dated 24th September 2018 (at page 77 of  the
    bundle), stating she is currently not able to travel  to  India"  could
    not have been rejected on the basis that "There is no indication as  to
    Dr. Kupfer's qualifications to make such a statement, on  whether  [BK]
    may be able to travel at a later date or whether such a  journey  could
    be made in stages" (paragraph 35).  There are  two  reasons  for  this.
    First, Dr. Kupfer was a medical practitioner under the  NHS  who  could
    make such a prognosis.  In his report of 24th September 2018  (at  page
    77), he sets out the condition, and the medication, of the  Appellant's
    wife.  His conclusion that "[BK]  struggles  to  stand  for  more  than
    twenty minutes and walking is difficult for her at all times",  is  one
    that then leads to the statement that "she is not  able  to  travel  to
    India".  It is not clear why the second statement would not follow  the
    first statement if [BK] cannot stand for more than twenty  minutes  and
    has difficulty in walking.   In  addition,  the  judge  refers  to  the
    difficulties that [BK] has in breathing and swallowing symptoms and the
    fact that she has "severe symptoms every day".  Second,  the  reference
    to the ability to travel at  a  later  date  or  travel  in  stages  is
    speculative, as the finding has to be made, in a human  rights  appeal,
    on the day of the hearing.  It is conjectural to say that  someone  may
    or may not be able to travel at a later date.  What is not  conjectural
    is the GP's firm statement that the wife of the Appellant "is not  able
    to travel to India".

25. Second, the judge had to consider the question of  whether  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles".  Proper  consideration  was  given  to  the
    Supreme Court decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 by the judge.  It  was
    unnecessary, however, to consider  whether  the  Appellant  could  only
    satisfy this test on the basis of showing where  the  Appellant's  wife
    would need 24/7 care.  Ultimately, this is how the judge approached the
    matter when  looking  at  the  issue  of  proportionality.   The  judge
    observed that:-

         "I would remain unconvinced of the need for  him  to  provide  24/7
         care to his partner and bear in mind his apparent lack of financial
         means, other costs to the  taxpayer  in  terms  of  healthcare  and
         benefits and the fact that, on a balance of probabilities,  he  had
         no good reason to overstay at  the  end  of  his  visit  visa  ..."
         (paragraph 43).

Remaking the Decision

26. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

27. First, the condition of the Appellant's wife was fully and properly set
    out by the judge (at paragraph 31) where the judge observed  that  "The
    first issue, therefore, is whether there are  insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing outside the UK".  Here the  judge  looked  at
    [BK]'s "significant medical issues which affect her  digestive  process
    and give her  back  pain".   This  was  to  such  an  extent  that  the
    Appellant's wife had been "dismissed from her  employment  in  December
    2016 due to her repeated absence from work and has not  worked  since".
    The judge referred to the Appellant's wife's condition "which  prevents
    food passing through  her  oesophagus  smoothly".   Indeed,  the  judge
    recognised that the impact of the physical  ailments  suffered  by  the
    Appellant's wife were such that it had led to "symptoms of  depression"
    (paragraph 32).

28. Second, there is evidence from Dr. Kupfer that "[BK] struggles to stand
    for more than twenty minutes and walking is difficult for  her  at  all
    times.  She currently is not able to travel to India" (page 77).   This
    has been further strengthened by evidence, which I admit under the Rule
    15(2A) application today, in a letter dated 10th July 2019,  describing
    how the Appellant's wife is suffering  from  "severe  achalasia"  which
    affects her swallowing, such  that  she  "continues  to  need  hospital
    investigations and treatment", such that it is "affecting  her  ability
    to walk", means that "she lives  with  chronic,  daily  pain".   It  is
    specific in its statement that, "her partner, Gurpal [S], is her  carer
    and a great support for [BK]".  The letter further makes it clear  that
    the Appellant's "leave to stay hearing" is having a negative impact  on
    his wife's health and that "should he be required  to  leave  it  would
    have a significant negative affect on [BK]'s health".  If against  this
    background, the scriptures of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC
    11, are applied, it is plain that the Supreme Court made it clear  that
    "the Secretary of State has not imposed a test of exceptionality in the
    sense that the case should exhibit some highly  unusual  feature,  over
    and above the application of the test of proportionality".

29. The Supreme Court went on to say that:-

         "On the contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word  'exceptional',  as
         already explained, as meaning circumstances in which refusal  would
         result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  such
         that the refusal of the application  would  not  be  proportionate"
         (paragraph 60).

30. Applying this test, I conclude that it would be unjustifiably harsh  to
    expect the Appellant to return to India, given the fact that  he  is  a
    carer for his wife and that she suffers in the  manner  that  has  been
    described  in  the  medical  reports.   I  come  to   this   conclusion
    notwithstanding Section 117B which expresses  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control.   This  is  because  ultimately  the  question  is
    whether the refusal  is  proportionate  in  the  particular  case,  and
    balancing the strength of the public interest in the  removal  of  this
    Appellant, against the impact on his family life, I conclude  that  the
    decision would not be proportionate.

Notice of Decision

31. This appeal is allowed.

32. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019




