

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Numbers: HU/11171/2016


                                           HU/11173/2016


                                           HU/11174/2016


                                           HU/11176/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2018                 |       On 18 October 2018          |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                          MUHAMMED RIZWAN KHAN + 3
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                               Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr W M Rees, of Counsel, instructed by Farani  Taylor
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 9  May  1978.  His
      wife and their two children born in October 2008 and January 2013  are
      his dependants. He entered the UK as a student and thereafter  married
      his wife in Pakistan. She joined then joined him. Their last period of
      leave expired in July 2009 and an application  for  an  extension  was
      refused on the basis that the appellant had  relied  on  a  fraudulent
      diploma from the Cambridge College of Learning. That decision was  not
      challenged. Thereafter several applications for leave  were  made  but
      all refused. The most  recent  application  was  made  on  family  and
      private life grounds.


   2.       The appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bowler  at
      Hatton Cross on 15 September 2017  and  was  dismissed  by  way  of  a
      determination promulgated on 4 October 2017. Permission to appeal  was
      refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidge  on  4  April  2018  but
      granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 16 August  2018.
      Permission appears to be  limited  to  the  issue  of  whether  it  is
      reasonable to expect the older, qualifying, child to leave the UK  and
      whether MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 had been properly applied.

   3.       There has been a Rule 24 response from the  respondent  opposing
      the challenge.

The hearing

   4.       I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing  before  me
      on 15 October 2018.

   5.       Mr Rees submitted that the judge had fallen into  error  in  the
      determination by applying the  wrong  MA  test;  i.e.  taking  as  the
      starting point the fact that the qualifying child's status  should  be
      regularized unless there was "good reason" not to do so (at  paragraph
      101) instead of "powerful reasons". It was argued that the application
      of the wrong test had a material impact upon the judge's findings.  It
      was also argued that the seven-year requirement under paragraph 276ADE
      (1)(iv) had been met, that it was not reasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the UK and that the sins of the father should not be  visited
      on the son. Reliance was  placed  upon  the  decision  of  MT  and  ET
      (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT  00088
      (IAC) where it was confirmed that "powerful" reasons  were  needed  to
      remove a qualifying child from the UK (ET had been in the UK for  over
      ten years since the age of four). It was also submitted that the third
      appellant would soon be entitled to apply for British nationality.

   6.       A complaint was also made against the judge's refusal to allow a
      number of family members, who  had  travelled  from  Scotland  to  the
      hearing, to give oral evidence.

   7.       In response, Ms Fijiwala submitted that there  was  no  material
      error.  The requirements of 275ADE had not been met at the date of the
      application and so the case fell to be considered outside  the  rules.
      There was no indication that the judge had refused to  hear  from  the
      other witnesses. There had been no request for a record of proceedings
      and  nothing  to  show  that  their  evidence  would  have  made   any
      difference. With respect to the issue of the reasonableness test,  the
      judge had properly considered the best interests of the  child  first.
      The language issue had been considered at paragraphs 81-88, the  claim
      of a fear of terror incidents at 89-92 and the welfare of the children
      at 93. It was the grant of permission and not  the  grounds  that  had
      raised the matter of the wrong test having been applied yet the  court
      in MA had referred to "strong reasons" (at 46), "powerful reasons" (at
      49) and "good reasons" (at 103). Indeed, the judge in the present case
      had cited "strong reasons" at  paragraph  78.  There  was,  therefore,
      nothing in this point. The judge recognised  that  significant  weight
      should be given to the  period  of  residence  (at  111-113)  and  the
      children's circumstances alone were considered when the assessment was
      undertaken. This was consistent with MA.  The  judge's  reasonableness
      assessment commenced at paragraph 101. It was noted  that  there  were
      many family members in Pakistan.  Schooling  opportunities  were  also
      considered. Then the immigration history of the parents was taken into
      account along with the fact that they had never contributed to the  UK
      economy yet had accessed the NHS without paying for services obtained.
      The child was not close to registering for British nationality at  the
      date of the hearing. The IDIs were also considered.

   8.       Mr Rees replied.  He  stood  by  the  points  already  made  and
      submitted that the third appellant qualified under the  rules  at  the
      date of the hearing. The evidence of the other witnesses had not  been
      heard. That evidence  would  have  gone  to  the  integration  of  the
      appellants to British society. The older child's knowledge of Urdu was
      limited. The issue of terrorism impacted on the minds of the children.
      The judge had fallen into  legal  error  in  paragraph  101  when  she
      referred to "good reasons".

   9.       That completed submissions. I  then  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

  10.       I have carefully considered all the evidence before me  and  the
      submissions that have been made by both parties.

  11.       The basis on which permission was granted centred on  the  issue
      of whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  third  appellant,  as  a
      qualifying child, to leave the UK. Tied in with  this  was  the  issue
      raised by Judge Freeman on the First-tier Tribunal Judge's use of  the
      language of MA (Pakistan) and thus its application.

  12.       Judge Freeman was not taken with the complaint  that  the  judge
      failed to allow other  witnesses  to  give  oral  evidence.  There  is
      nothing in the determination to suggest that leave was sought for  the
      witnesses  to  do  so,  no  contemporaneous  notes  from  Counsel  who
      represented the appellants at that hearing and no statement  of  truth
      to confirm what it is maintained had transpired.  In fact, the  record
      of proceedings shows that when the judge observed that  there  were  a
      lot of children in the court room, Counsel indicated that they had not
      been told to come. He then stated that he did not plan on calling  the
      appellant's sister and family as witnesses as there was  nothing  they
      would add to their  witness  statements  and  the  Presenting  Officer
      confirmed that she would not be cross examining them in any event.  It
      was only then that the judge records that he indicated that  it  would
      be better for the appellant's sister and her children  to  go  outside
      for refreshments than  to  stay  in  the  waiting  area.  Their  brief
      statements were before the judge and these were  considered  with  all
      the  other  evidence  (at  21  and  67).  In  all  the  circumstances,
      therefore, I do not consider that this complaint has been made out.


  13.       There is also no merit in the submission that  the  requirements
      of paragraph 276ADE had been met in terms of the third appellant.  The
      judge addressed this point at paragraphs 58-63. The relevant  date  is
      that of the application. Even allowing for the further submissions  to
      count as a fresh application, the third appellant had been here  under
      seven years at the relevant time and the  fourth  appellant  was  only
      two.

  14.       Nor do I find any merit in the criticism that when assessing the
      best interests of the third appellant, the judge fell into legal error
      by referring to "good reasons" in paragraph 101 when it is  maintained
      that Elias LJ referred to "powerful reasons" in MA. As pointed out  by
      Ms Fijiwala, there are also references to "strong reasons"  and  "good
      reasons" in MA (at 46 and 103 and, indeed, additionally at  73)  which
      suggest that the phrases were used interchangeably.  That  is  exactly
      what Judge Bowler has done; there are references to  "strong  reasons"
      and "good reasons" in  her  determination  and  an  appropriate  self-
      direction in respect of MA (at paragraph 100). The  judge  also  shows
      that she is aware of the significance of the seven-year period and the
      considerable weight to be given to that (at 111  and  113).  There  is
      nothing in the assessment which would support the argument that the MA
      language was wrongly used and that the  test  was  thus  not  properly
      applied; indeed, experienced Counsel and  instructing  solicitors  did
      not even include this argument in the grounds. Had  it  been  of  such
      significance then I am in no doubt it would have been  included  as  a
      primary  criticism.  I  also  consider  it  to  be  somewhat   ironic,
      considering the emphasis now placed on that 'error' by the judge, that
      Counsel, himself, referred in his grounds to the  issue  in  precisely
      the same terms as the judge is now criticized for doing (at  paragraph
      11 of the grounds).

  15.       I now turn to the judge's assessment. Having properly found that
      the requirements of the rules had not been met, the judge embarked  of
      an assessment outside the rules. No issue is taken  with  any  of  her
      findings regarding the adult  appellants  and  so  I  proceed  to  her
      analysis of the position of the two  children.  The  judge  considered
      their best interests at 73-95. The assessment is detailed.  The  judge
      properly referred to relevant case law and acknowledged that the  best
      interests was a primary consideration (at 73-76).  The point she  made
      at paragraph 76 equates with that made in MT and  ET  that  a  younger
      child is less likely to have  a  private  life  outside  that  of  the
      family. She also notes that the length of residence in itself  is  not
      the sole determinant of best interests.

  16.       The judge noted that the third appellant who had been born  here
      would have been reliant on his parents and immediate family  for  much
      of his life given his young age. This was not a child  who  came  here
      when he was a  few  years  old  and  then  spent  seven  of  his  more
      influential years putting down roots and  making  a  separate  private
      life. The judge considered the key  issue  raised  by  the  parents  -
      education. Whilst it was argued for the child that  his  knowledge  of
      Urdu was limited because English was spoken at  home,  the  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to reject that contention  in  circumstances  where
      the child's mother could not understand basic questions in English and
      where other evidence suggested that Urdu was the language used at home
      (GP's evidence). The judge was also entitled to be sceptical about the
      claim that a child could only be taught  in  Urdu.  I  am  aware  from
      country guidance cases that there are English speaking schools in  the
      cities and as the appellants have a large family in  Karachi,  finding
      an appropriate school in such a large city should not  be  a  problem.
      The judge also noted that the appellants had made no efforts  to  make
      the relevant enquiries into the options available.  Of course, as  the
      children are so young and have a spoken knowledge of Urdu, it would be
      possible for them to learn to read and  write  it  just  as  the  many
      children who come to the UK learn to read and write English at  school
      here. The judge noted that the third appellant was a  bright  boy  and
      found that with the support of his parents he would be able to improve
      his knowledge. At  worst  as  the  judge  notes,  it  would  take  the
      appellants some time to catch up with their peers if they attended  an
      Urdu speaking school.


  17.       The judge also took account of the claim that there were  terror
      incidents  in  Karachi.  The  judge  noted  that  the   evidence   was
      insufficient to show that the situation would impact upon the  welfare
      of the children and she also  noted  that  the  appellants'  relatives
      lived there and there were no claims that they  had  suffered  in  any
      way. The reference to mobile phones being stolen  was,  she  correctly
      observed, a crime that also occurred in the UK. Similarly, the claimed
      problems of gas and water shortages,  power  cuts  and  infrastructure
      difficulties were found to be insufficient to threaten the welfare  of
      the children. As for the climate, there  was  no  evidence  that  this
      would adversely impact on their health.

  18.       The judge gave weight to the  importance  for  the  children  to
      establish relationships with their  grandparents  (both  maternal  and
      paternal sets remain there) and with a  large  number  of  uncles  and
      aunts and their families. She  noted  that  the  first  appellant  had
      obtained an education here and had some  experience  of  working  both
      here and previously in Pakistan. She considered that that would assist
      in finding employment. The judge  then  properly  concluded  that  the
      evidence did not show that the best interests of the children required
      them to stay in the UK.

  19.       The judge then went on to consider s.117B(6)  in  terms  of  the
      third appellant as a qualifying child. She properly  directed  himself
      as to MA in respect to the issue of reasonableness. She made  it  very
      plain that the child was not to be blamed  for  the  poor  immigration
      history of his parents and that the starting point was that his status
      should be legitimized unless there were good reasons not to do  so.  I
      have already addressed the issue of "good reasons" above. I would add,
      however, that my conclusions are reinforced  by  the  fact  that  this
      direction comes immediately after the judge had cited MA  and  so  the
      correct test and approach would have been  fresh  in  her  mind.   She
      noted that the child was still young, at primary school and only  just
      beginning  to  venture  beyond  the  protection  and  support  of  his
      immediate family. His years here would not have had the same impact in
      terms of his social and cultural roots than they would have done at  a
      later age. He would be able to continue with clubs and  activities  in
      Pakistan. In all the circumstances the judge found that  it  would  be
      reasonable for the child to leave the UK.


  20.       In the judgment of MA, the particular case of MA and his  family
      (combined and heard with other cases) was  unsuccessful.  Indeed,  his
      circumstances are very similar to  those  of  our  appellant.  MA  had
      entered as a student, his wife had joined him thereafter and they  had
      two sons born in the UK, one of whom had been here  over  seven  years
      (eight at the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
      ten years when the appeal came to the  Court  of  Appeal).  The  court
      found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings that  the  child's
      social life was dominated by his parents and younger brother, that  he
      was in primary education,  that  his  parents  offered  him  a  loving
      environment, that there were no health issues, that  there  were  many
      extended family members  in  Pakistan  and  that  it  was  reasonable,
      therefore, for him to leave the UK showed no errors  of  law.  It  was
      accepted that the judge had shown he was aware of the significance  of
      the seven-year period, that he had given  sufficient  weight  to  that
      matter and that whilst  other  judges  may  have  struck  the  balance
      differently, this decision was not legally wrong. The court held  that
      "It may be reasonable to require the child to leave  where  there  are
      good cogent reasons..." (at 73).


  21.       In the same way, Judge Bowler undertook a  full  assessment  and
      concluded that the best interests of  the  child  appellants  did  not
      require them to remain in the UK and that it was  reasonable  for  the
      third appellant to leave  the  UK.  She  followed  the  correct  legal
      approach in assessing the evidence and the issues. She gave weight  to
      the length of residence and she reached fully reasoned conclusions.

  22.       It is worth noting here that at the  date  of  the  hearing  the
      third appellant was a long way off from an entitlement  to  apply  for
      British nationality.

  23.       It follows that I conclude that the  judge  properly  considered
      the evidence and the issues before her and that she made no errors  of
      law.



Decision

  24.       There are no errors of law in the determination  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Anonymity order

  25.       There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
      and I see no reason to make one.

      Signed:


      [pic]
      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      16 October 2018





