
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/11830/2015
                                                               hu/11832/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             (1) Anirudra gurung
                              (2) Ganesh gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M S N Nnamani (Counsel), Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robinson, promulgated on 25th April 2017, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 7th  April  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Respondent's
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are sibling brothers, who are both nationals  of  Nepal,
    and were born on 28th June 1980 and 19th April 1983 respectively.  They
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 16th October  2015,
    refusing their application for entry clearance in  order  to  join  and
    settle with their  father,  Hikmat  Gurung  under  the  policy  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Office in Annex K  of  ADI  chapter  15
    Section 2A 13.2 (as amended on 5th January 2015) and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellants'  claim  is  that  they  have  continuing
    family life between themselves  and  their  sponsoring  father,  Hikmat
    Gurung, following from the Sponsor's use of service to  the  Crown  and
    the Military  Covenant,  which  foresees  that  families,  as  well  as
    servicemen, will be rewarded for their  service  to  the  Crown.   They
    maintain that but for the historic injustice done to  veterans  of  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas in denying them the opportunity to  settle  earlier,
    they would have had the right to do so.  They seek  to  place  reliance
    upon Limbu [2008] EWHC 2261 (at paragraph 72).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis of the  facts,  namely,  that
    the Appellants were not living alone in Nepal, but were dependent  upon
    their sponsoring father, with whom they had regular contact,  and  that
    there was unchallenged  evidence  that  the  Sponsor  served  with  the
    Brigade of the Gurkhas for many  years,  and  on  discharge  wished  to
    settle in the UK, such that following the holistic  approach  advocated
    by the Tribunal in Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567, this appeal stood  to  be
    allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    the evidence did not establish that the  Appellants  had  the  relevant
    "family life" with the Sponsor, Hikmat Gurung.  Moreover, any "historic
    injustice" could  not  make  the  Respondent's  decision  under  appeal
    disproportionate, even if issues  of  proportionality  weighed  in  the
    Appellants' favour.

 6. On 1st November 2017 permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 17th January 2018, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  Respondent's
    Counsel.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on  28th  February  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Ms  Nnamani  of  Counsel,  and  the   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.   Mr
    Avery submitted that the judge failed to ascertain whether family  life
    existed in the first place, before moving on to considering whether the
    decision to refuse was disproportionate or not.  For example, under the
    heading "Decision"  the  judge  observed  that,  "the  application  was
    founded on the continuing family life between  Sponsor  and  Appellants
    ..." (paragraph 20).  However, there  was  no  discussion  there  about
    precisely what the "family life" was that the Appellants  enjoyed  with
    their sponsoring father.  In the same way, the closing  speech  of  the
    Appellants'  Counsel  was  very  much   focused   on   the   issue   of
    proportionality, the Military Covenant, and the partial satisfaction of
    the Rules (see paragraph 24) without any emphasis being laid on how the
    Appellants enjoyed their "family life" with  their  sponsoring  father.
    All of this was simply being assumed in  the  determination.   It  was,
    however, necessary first to consider whether  there  was  a  subsisting
    family life.  This was not considered.  No case law  was  brought  into
    play to demonstrate how, in circumstances where the Appellants were not
    living with their sponsoring father in  Nepal,  family  life  could  be
    shown.  It was well-established that  there  had  to  be  a  degree  of
    "emotional dependency" over and above the normal relationships  between
    adults and this had not been done.

 9. For her part, Ms  Nnamani  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that the judge did look at the nature of the family.  He  was
    cognisant of the evidence  of  the  father's  visits,  the  significant
    health concerns he had, and the support and financial assistance he was
    still giving the Appellants.  There was evidence of photographs of  the
    parents visiting the Appellants.  The  judge  had  looked  at  all  the
    evidence before coming to the decision that he did.  There was no error
    of law.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision, and remake the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

11. First, the judge did give  very  close  and  careful  consideration  to
    whether "family life" existed between the Appellants and the sponsoring
    father.  At least six separate matters are considered.  First, there is
    evidence of emotional support  provided  by  the  parents  in  the  UK.
    Second, the judge was referred to recent case law on how to  deal  with
    the various issues.  Third, the Appellants had been left  in  Nepal  in
    2010 and they were regularly being visited  by  the  parents.   Fourth,
    there were photographs submitted to show the Appellants in their  home.
    Fifth, there was evidence that the parents were finding it increasingly
    difficult to visit because of their  deteriorating  health,  which  was
    supported by a letter from the local hospital trust.  Sixth, the  judge
    was cognisant of the fact that, although the  parents  were  articulate
    and able to  manage  themselves,  they  were  not  in  good  health  as
    presented.  This was the evidence before the judge (at paragraph 19).

12. Second, the judge's own findings of fact, on the basis of this evidence
    was that first, the Appellants were not living alone in Nepal.  Second,
    that they were dependent on their parents,  who  paid  their  rent  and
    enabled them to meet their daily needs.  Third, that if so far  as  the
    physical contact between them is concerned, their  contact  with  their
    parents depends significantly on  their  parents'  ability  to  travel.
    Fourth, the first Appellant's attempt to find work abroad  had  "proved
    disastrous and it took him about  a  year  to  pay  back  the  manpower
    company which recruited him to work in Malaysia" (paragraph  25).   All
    of this showed the dependency of the  Appellants  on  their  sponsoring
    father.

13. Third, this tied in with the submissions made right at the very  outset
    by the Appellants' Counsel, who did specifically focus upon the  nature
    of this family, pointing out that the Appellants "were  unemployed  and
    dependent on the Sponsor for their necessities.  They were members of a
    close-knit family and photographs of visits to them by  family  members
    had been submitted to demonstrate this" (paragraph 15).  It was open to
    the judge to accept this  evidence  and  nothing  on  the  face  of  it
    suggested why the judge should not have.

14. The only other issue was that of "proportionality" and the  Appellants'
    Counsel at the outset had also submitted as a follow-up argument, that,
    "the other major issues to be taken into account in  the  present  case
    was the lengthy separation and the  compassionate  circumstances  which
    led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was
    disproportionate" (paragraph 15).

15. In this regard the "historic injustice" dimension of the  Gurkha  cases
    was highly significant, and the judge properly took this  into  account
    right at the beginning (at paragraph 7) when referring to the fact that
    the Sponsor had served with the British Army for  seven  years,  wanted
    his dependent sons to come to the UK for settlement, "but were told  by
    the Gurkha Settlement Office in Kathmandu that there were no settlement
    policies for adult dependent children".  It was in these  circumstances
    that he had to leave his two sons behind (paragraph 7).

16. Finally, it is significant that  at  the  hearing  the  Sponsor's  wife
    explained that he and his wife always intended for the Appellants' sons
    to accompany them to the UK (see paragraph 3 of his witness statement),
    and there was, as Ms Nnamani makes clear in her Rule  24  response  (at
    paragraph 8), an early application for their  son  Anirudra  which  was
    refused.  The evidence before the judge was that the Sponsor could  not
    afford to support the applications of both sons at the same time and he
    had stated that if he were permitted to live in the UK,  after  he  was
    discharged from the army, he would have done so (paragraph 19 and 20 of
    his witness statement).  It is against this background, that Ms Nnamani
    makes it clear (at paragraph 19 of her Rule  24  response)  that  Judge
    Robinson noted that the Sponsor and his  wife  would  not  be  able  to
    continue to travel frequently to Nepal due to their advancing ages  and
    deteriorating health, and that this was enough for the Appellants to be
    able to demonstrate that they did indeed enjoy family life  with  their
    parents (at paragraph 25 of  the  determination)  as  explained  by  Ms
    Nnamani in her Rule 24 response (at paragraph  9).

17.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  here  amounts  to  nothing  more   than   a
    disagreement with the findings of  the  judge.   The  determination  of
    Judge Robinson is carefully crafted, comprehensive and clearly set  out
    determination.  There is no error of law.





Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2018
