
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11365/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th November 2019                        |On 19th November 2019         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     EKO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coward; Phoenix Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT"), but as the appellant is treated as a vulnerable witness, it
      is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal
      or Court directs otherwise, EKO is granted anonymity. No report of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any
      member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others to all
      parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
      of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Ghana. On 28th July 2017, he made an
      application for leave to remain in the UK on private life grounds.
      The application was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out
      in a decision dated 4th May 2018.  The appellant's appeal against that
      decision was dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on 5th July 2019.


   3. The appellant's immigration history is set out in the respondent's
      decision of 4th May 2018. The date upon which the appellant arrived in
      the UK is unclear. The appellant was encountered by immigration
      officials in September 2014 and stated that he had entered the UK a
      year ago, by lorry.  The respondent made enquiries of the appellant's
      representatives seeking confirmation of the date upon which the
      appellant entered the UK. In a letter dated 8th January 2018 the
      appellant's representatives said that "... according to our client he
      entered the United Kingdom in 2014.".  The respondent did not accept
      that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
      integration into Ghana, a country where he was born and raised, and
      where he had spent the majority of his life including the formative
      years of his life. The respondent considered the mental health of the
      appellant and noted that the appellant has previously been sectioned
      by the NHS and released into the care of his brother who is a
      psychiatric nurse, and who has continuously looked after the appellant
      and made sure all his needs are taken care of. The respondent noted
      that the symptoms of the mental illness are paranoia, panic attacks
      and anxiety, and that the appellant relies upon his family for
      constant support.  The respondent considered the medical evidence
      relied upon by the  appellant and concluded that the appellant's
      removal from the UK would not be in breach of Article 3. The
      respondent noted the medical evidence that the appellant's mental
      state continues to improve due to his compliance with medication, and
      the medication described by the appellant's GP, is available in Ghana.
      The respondent was not satisfied that the removal of the appellant to
      Ghana would be in breach of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


The decision of FtT Judge Parker ("the judge")


   4. The judge considered the medical evidence and expert report of Dr
      Parsonage dated 18th May 2019 regarding mental health care in Ghana.
      The judge noted the evidence that the appellant has previously
      experienced a worsening of his psychotic illness on discontinuing
      treatment, and the prognosis that if he did not receive treatment,
      there would be a deterioration in his mental well-being.  At
      paragraphs [18] and [19], the judge stated:


         "18. The appellant tells a story being bullied at school and
         leaving Ghana at the age of 14 to travel various countries over the
         next 10 to 15 years. He ended up in Italy working menial jobs
         before coming to this country in 2014. He had a psychotic episode
         which resulted in a hospital visit and by chance he met his brother
         who was actually his cousin and his cousin is a psychiatric nurse.
         He has been involved in his care since.

         19.  His brother looked at the cost of medical treatment in Ghana
         and the cost of medication. Unfortunately we have no objective
         evidence regarding this. Dr Parsonage who has written a medical
         report is not a country expert. The Ghana country of origin report
         will mention some discrimination that is not sufficient to amount
         to a breach of his Article 8 rights on its own. The operational
         guidance note on Ghana at 5.2 and 5.3 says the threshold for
         article 3 is a high one it is not simply whether the treatment is
         not available or not easily accessible in the country of origin. It
         quotes the case of N the test is whether the applicant's illness
         has reached such a crucial stage i.e. is dying and in (sic) would
         be inhuman treatment to deprive him of the care which is (sic)
         currently receiving and sending him to an early death. This is
         pretty crucial in an appeal such as this. He lives with his brother
         but regularly comes to London on his own to attend appointments for
         medical and legal reasons. He says he can spend up to a month
         there."

   5. The Judge found, at [20], that the appellant is largely compliant with
      his medication. The Judge found that the appellant does not need
      continual supervision and, at [22], that there are no obstacles to
      prevent integration into Ghanaian life where he has lived the majority
      of his life. The judge concluded that the appellant is unable to meet
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.


   6. Insofar as the Article 8 claim is concerned, the judge refers, at
      [25], to the five-stage approach set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar.
      It is not entirely clear whether the judge found that the appellant
      has established a family and private life in the UK. It could however
      be assumed that the question was resolved in favour of the appellant.
      At [28], the Judge found that the decision appealed, has consequences
      of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.
      The judge noted that it is not in issue that the interference caused
      by the decision is in accordance with the law and the judge found that
      the interference is necessary in the interests of immigration control
      and the economic well-being of the country. The judge then turned to
      consider whether the decision to refuse leave to remain is
      proportionate.


   7. The judge considered the relevant public interest as set out in s117B
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  At paragraph
      [43] of the decision, the judge states:


         "At the time of the application the appellant could not meet the
         rules. At the time of the decision the appellant could not meet the
         rules and thereby under any consideration the rules have not been
         met at the relevant dates I have to decide whether there are
         compelling circumstances to deal with the matter outside the
         rules."

   8.  The Judge found that the appellant can work on return to Ghana.  The
      reasons given at [42] are that the appellant has no family in Ghana
      and a brother who says without supporting evidence, the cost of
      maintaining the appellant in Accra is too great.  It is not clear how
      those reasons support a finding that the appellant can work on return.
       The judge considered the medical evidence and noted that the
      appellant has a psychotic condition which will not be treated properly
      in Ghana. It was uncontroversial that the medication required is
      available in Ghana, but the issue was whether the appellant can access
      it, due to cost and availability. The judge referred to the relevant
      authorities and found that they do not assist the appellant as it has
      been established that his condition is not life-threatening and that
      he can travel.  The judge found that the appellant has demonstrated he
      can live in countries such as Italy, Libya and Nigeria independently,
      and could return to Ghana, the country of his birth. The judge noted
      the psychiatric evidence that with medication, the appellant will live
      a satisfactory life in Ghana and there is no risk of deterioration.
      The judge noted the appellant had been sectioned for five weeks in
      2016 but has not been sectioned since and appears stable on his
      medication. The judge concluded that there are no very significant
      obstacles to the appellant returning to Ghana.


   9. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant claims that the judge's
      conclusions are irrational.  It is said that the judge erred in
      failing to carry out a proper balancing exercise and failed to
      properly consider the impact that removal would have on the appellant.
      Furthermore, the judge erred, at paragraph [22], in proceeding upon
      the premise that the appellant has spent the majority of his life in
      Ghana, having noted at [18], the appellant's account that he left
      Ghana at the age of 14 and travelled through various countries over
      the next 10 to 15 years.


  10. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      by FtT judge Bristow on 9th September 219.  In granting permission to
      appeal, Judge Bristow observed that the remark that the appellant
      spent the majority of his life in Ghana, is factually incorrect and
      the assessment of the appellant's family and private life may have
      been infected by the mistake as to fact, to the appellant's detriment.
      Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.


  11. Mr Coward submits that the judge refers at paragraph [18], to the
      applicant's claim that he left Ghana at the age of 14.   However, in
      reaching his decision at paragraph [22] that there are no obstacles to
      prevent integration into Ghana, the judge refers to the applicant
      having spent the majority of his life in Ghana.  On the facts, the
      applicant has spent less than half his life in Ghana.  Mr Coward
      submits there is no reflection in the decision of the fact that the
      applicant has never lived in Ghana as an adult.  He submits the
      appellant left Ghana as a child, and a careful consideration of the
      test under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was required.  The Judge was
      required to consider whether there would be very significant obstacles
      to the appellant's integration into Ghana.  The judge not only
      proceeds upon a mistake as to fact, but also fails to have regard to
      the strong support network that the appellant has in the UK, that
      would not be available to him in Ghana.  Mr Coward submits the judge
      failed to have proper regard to the evidence that the appellant is on
      a stable pattern of secure treatment, that should not be disrupted. He
      submits the medical evidence and background material relied upon
      establishes that there would be very significant obstacles to the
      applicant's integration into Ghana, and the judge is likely to have
      reached a different decision if he had appreciated that the appellant
      left Ghana at the age of 14, and has never lived in Ghana previously
      as an adult, with significant mental health issues.


  12. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Cunha submits that at paragraph [18],
      the Judge refers to the appellant's case.  She accepts the judge had
      not made a finding as to the credibility of the applicant, and whether
      the judge had accepted the appellant's account that he left Ghana at
      the age of 14, but she submits, the judge was concerned with whether
      there are very significant obstacle to integration.  She submits the
      thrust of the appellant's claim is his poor mental health.  She
      submits that on any proper view of the evidence, the appellant cannot
      satisfy the high threshold relevant to an Article 3 claim on medical
      grounds, and that in the circumstances, absent any additional factual
      element, the claim could not succeed on Article 8 grounds.


  13. Although there is some force in the submissions made by Ms Cunha, she,
      rightly in my judgement, accepts that the judge appears to reach
      conclusions upon a mistake as to fact, in circumstances where the
      judge does not expressly reject the appellant's account that he left
      Ghana at the age of 14. She also, rightly in my judgement, accepts
      that the decision of the FtT judge appears to conflate a number of
      issues and lacks clarity so that I can be satisfied that the judge
      properly addressed all relevant issues.


  14.  At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties
      that in my judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge does contain a
      material error of law, and that I set aside that decision.


  15. Although the judge refers to the five stage approach for the
      consideration of an Article 8 claim, and appears to resolve the first
      four questions in favour of the appellant, at paragraph [43] of his
      decision, the judge states that the appellant cannot satisfy the
      requirements of the rules and he has to decide whether there are
      compelling circumstances to deal with the matter outside the rules.
      Having considered matters, the judge states at paragraph [61], that he
      finds ".. there are no very significant obstacles within the meaning
      of the law and the appellant can return to Ghana.".


  16. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998.  The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017]
      UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that the immigration rules cannot be
      met, does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-
      based assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate
      issue is whether a fair balance has been struck between the individual
      and public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.


  17.  The judge's conclusion at paragraph [61] of the decision that there
      are no very significant obstacles within the meaning of the law and
      the appellant can return to Ghana, fails to address the Article 3 and
      8 claims.  As to the human rights claim on Article 8 grounds, the
      Judge should have adopted the approach set out by Lord Bingham in
      Razgar [2014] UKHL 27.  The Tribunal should first determine whether
      Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If Article 8 is engaged, the
      Tribunal should have gone on to consider the remaining four stages
      identified in Razgar.


  18. The issue in this appeal, as is often the case, was whether the
      interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to
      be achieved.  The judge does not appear to properly address that
      issue, and to the extent that he does consider whether the decision to
      refuse leave to remain is proportionate or in breach of the Article 8
      rights of the appellant, the judge proceeds upon the premise that the
      appellant can return to Ghana where he has lived the majority of his
      life. The respondent had not conceded that the appellant had left
      Ghana at the age of 14.  The judge makes no finding as to the
      credibility of the appellant, and whether he accepts the account of
      the appellant that is referred to at paragraph [18] of the decision.
      The judge does refer, at [58], to the appellant having been able to
      live in strange countries such as Italy, Libya and Nigeria
      independently.  That however is inconsistent with the finding, at
      [22], that the appellant has lived the majority of his life in Ghana.




  19. In my judgement the judge has failed to properly address the human
      rights claim advanced by the appellant and I can have no confidence
      that the judge properly addressed his mind to the relevant facts and
      issues. In my judgement the decision of the FtT judge is infected by a
      material error of law and must be set aside.


  20. As to disposal of the appeal, I have decided that it is appropriate to
      remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,  having  considered
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  21. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker  promulgated  on  5th
      July 2019 is therefore set aside,  and  the  appeal  is  remitted  for
      rehearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  afresh,  with  no  findings
      preserved.  The parties will be notified of  a  hearing  date  in  due
      course.


Notice of Decision


  22. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Parker is allowed, and
      the decision of FtT Judge Parker is set aside.


  23. The appeal is remitted for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
      with no findings preserved.

Signed

    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


    13th November 2019




