
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11702/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th March 2019                             |On 18th March 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             Mr MD jakir hossain
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Fox)  (FtT)  promulgated  on
    8th January 2019 in which the appellant's appeal against a  refusal  of
    leave to remain was dismissed. It was alleged that  the  appellant  had
    used a proxy tester for his ETS language certificate.

Background
2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. The FtT found that  the  SSHD
    had discharged the initial burden of proof that there was  evidence  of
    dishonesty [25-28].  The FtT found that the appellant failed to provide
    an innocent explanation [33].

Grounds of appeal
3.   In grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to consider if the appellant's innocent explanation had reached
    the "minimum level of plausibility".  The FtT erred  in  rejecting  the
    evidence for lack of corroboration.  The appellant's level  of  English
    demonstrated that he had no reason to cheat.  The FtT  failed  to  take
    into account that the appellant contacted ETS to obtain evidence  about
    the test.  The FtT erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  human  rights
    Article 8 claim.

Permission to appeal
4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  FTJ  N
    Haria on 29.1.2019.  In granting permission the FTJ considered that  it
    was arguable that the FtT failed to apply the correct evidential burden
    to the raising an innocent explanation.  All grounds were arguable.

Submissions
5.   At the hearing before me Mr Collins representing the  appellant  relied
    on the grounds of appeal and argued that whilst the FtT had  identified
    the correct burdens of proof the FtT failed to  go  beyond  the  second
    stage. The appellant had given detailed evidence as to how and when the
    test was taken and his representative had  requested  information  from
    ETS.  This was a case where the SSHD  failed  to  produce  the  generic
    bundle of evidence.

6.   In response Mr Whitwell contended that the FtT had embarked on  a  fact
    sensitive approach having regard to the fact that the appellant did not
    given evidence and his case was submissions only.  The  respondent  had
    provided a supplementary bundle with the supporting evidence  including
    the look up tool and the invalid certificate. The FtT  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence amounted to an assertion that he took the test and
    this was viewed in the context that all the test taken  that  day  were
    invalidated.

Discussion and conclusion
7.   At the end of the hearing I found that there was no material  error  of
    law.  My reasons are as follows.  The FtT considered the correct burden
    and standard of proof set out at [6]-[7] and I find no basis  to  argue
    that the FtT applied  a  standard  that  was  too  high.   No  specific
    arguments were made having regard to the self  directions  at  [7]  and
    [37] indeed Mr Collins acknowledged that the FtT  correctly  identified
    the burden of proof. The FtT found that the  respondent  had  satisfied
    the  initial  burden  on  him  to  show  that  there  was  evidence  of
    dishonesty.  There is no challenge to that finding [26] notwithstanding
    that the generic bundle was  not  produced  but  there  was  sufficient
    evidence from the respondent.  It is argued  that  the  FtT  failed  to
    assess the  appellant's  innocent  explanation  having  regard  to  the
    minimum level of plausibility.  The FtT did not accept the  appellant's
    evidence that he had attended the test centre nor that he had no reason
    to cheat having regard to his language ability [29 -30]  as  evidenced.
    The FtT found that this claim as to his language qualification was  not
    reliably supported [35] and that there were other reasons  why  someone
    might cheat.  The FtT was entitled to come to the decision that it  did
    on the findings made having regard to the evidence before the Tribunal.
     The FtT in effect concluded that the appellant's assertion  failed  to
    meet the minimum  level  of  plausibility  and  failed  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation [37].  As to the argument that the FtT did not  go
    on to stage three, that is misconceived given that the FtT did not find
    there to be an innocent explanation and therefore the  burden  did  not
    return to the SOS to counter that.

Decision

8.   The appeal is dismissed.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed
    in the decision which shall stand.




                               Signed                     Date 14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 14.3. 2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


