
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
HU/11456/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 7 December 2018                     |On 20 December 2018                    |
|                                       |                                       |
|                                       |                                       |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HARDEEP SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Miss T Bird (counsel) instructed by Paul John & Co,
solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1, I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phull,  promulgated  on  05/09/2018
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 12/05/1978 and  is  a  national  of  India.  On
25/09/2017
the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Phull ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16/10/2018 Judge Parkes  gave
permission to appeal stating

      1. The respondent seeks permission to appeal against a decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phull  promulgated  on  5  September  2018
      whereby the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision was allowed. The application is in time and is admitted.


      2.  The  Judge  found  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's family life continuing in India  and  allowed  the  appeal
      under article 8 having regard  to  the  terms  of  paragraph  EX.1  of
      appendix FM.


      3. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in finding that the marriage
      was genuine and subsisting and not a sham. There was evidence that the
      appellant and sponsor did not live together  and  this  had  not  been
      addressed by the Judge. There was little evidence of the nature of the
      relationship and  it  was  not  clear  that  the  Judge  had  properly
      considered the stepson's care needs or why  he  could  not  living  in
      India. The Judge erred in  finding  that  the  appellant's  precarious
      status was neutral. The Judge had not addressed inconsistencies in the
      marriage interview.


      4. The points made by the Home  Office  are  arguable.  As  there  was
      evidence to show that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  not  living
      together that would call into question the nature of the  relationship
      and any support it was claimed was needed or provided.  Added  to  the
      inconsistencies in the interview it is arguable that the reasons given
      did not justify the decision.


      5. The grounds disclose an arguable error of  law  and  permission  to
      appeal is granted.

The Hearing

5. For the respondent, Mr Walker moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told  me
that the Judge was wrong to find that the  marriage  between  the  appellant
and sponsor was genuine and subsisting. He told me  that  there  was  little
evidence of a marital  relationship  and  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate
consideration to the care needs of the sponsor's son. He told  me  that  the
evidence before the Judge included an interview record which disclosed  many
inconsistencies & which was not considered by the Judge. He classified  this
appeal is "a reasons challenge", saying that  the  Judge  did  not  properly
engage with the evidence and as a result made  errors  of  fact,  which  are
material errors of law. He asked me to set the decision aside

6. For the appellant, Miss Bird told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors, material  or  otherwise.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge  carefully
considered all of the evidence  and  explained  why  weight  was  placed  on
certain strands of evidence. She described the Judge's findings of  fact  as
"detailed, logical & cogent". She told me that at [16] the Judge dealt  with
discrepancies in the interview record. She told me that  the  Judge  carried
out a thorough  analysis  of  the  evidence  provided,  and  considered  all
matters in the round. She told me that  any  perceived  inconsistencies  are
minimal and that the Judge reached conclusions  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge. She urged me to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. At [3] of the decision the Judge  makes  an  error  in  relation  to  the
burden and standard of proof. This appeal  is  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds
only. In human rights appeals, it is for the Appellant to  show  that  there
has been  an  interference  with  his  or  her  human  rights.  If  that  is
established,  and  the  relevant  article  permits,  it  is  then  for   the
Respondent  to  establish  that  the   interference   was   justified.   The
appropriate standard of proof is whether there are "substantial grounds  for
believing the evidence."

8. The error at [3] is not a material error of law because it is clear  from
reading the decision as a whole the Judge applies  the  correct  burden  and
standard of proof.

9. Between [4] and [7] the Judge summarises the evidence.  Between  [8]  and
[9] the Judge summarises the submissions. The Judge's findings of  fact  lie
between [11] and [32].

10. The Judge starts [12]  by  finding  the  appellant  and  sponsor  to  be
credible witnesses, and then in the following  paragraph  sets  out  reasons
for finding the appellant and sponsor to be credible. At [15] and  [16]  the
Judge considers the marriage interview records in detail  and  explains  why
the Judge finds that the respondent's criticisms of the performance  of  the
appellant and sponsor at interview have no merit.

11. At [17] the Judge reiterates that  she  finds  the  appellant  to  be  a
credible witness.  [18]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  meets  the
eligibility requirements of the rules. At [20]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant and sponsor are in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  that
there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  outside  the
UK. The Judge records that  the  Home  Office  presenting  officer  did  not
challenge the sponsor's evidence relating to insurmountable  obstacles.  The
Home  Office  presenting  officer's  minute,  which  is  attached   to   the
application for permission to appeal, confirms that the  sponsor's  evidence
went unchallenged.

12. The Judge turns to article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal from [23].  At  [24]
the Judge considers section 117B of the 2002 Act,  and  at  [25]  the  Judge
emphasises that the appellant  establishes  both  family  and  private  life
within  the  meaning  of  article  8.  The  Judge   then   carries   out   a
proportionality exercise.

13. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
said that


      Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the  fact-finding
      Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give  rise  to  an
      error of law.

14.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

15. The Judge reached a conclusion that the respondent does  not  like.  She
reached the conclusion after taking correct guidance in law and by  applying
the correct legal test. The Judge found that article 8  family  and  private
life  is  engaged.  The  Judge  took  a  balance  sheet  approach   to   her
proportionality assessment. The conclusion she reached is  well  within  the
range of reasonable conclusions available to the judge.

16. In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v  SSHD  (NIA  2002:  Part
5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
considering,  pursuant  to  section  11  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is an error of law in  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal involving Article 8  proportionality,  the  task  of
the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that point) to  deciding  if  the  First-
tier Tribunal's assessment of where to  strike  the  balance  was  unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that a decision on proportionality of an Immigration Judge who has  properly
directed himself can only be overturned on  reconsideration  on  traditional
public law grounds.

17. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The
Judge correctly directed herself in law. The Judge reached conclusions  well
within the range of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.


18.    The decision does not contain a material error of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.





DECISION

19.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 5 September 2018, stands.



Signed
                   Date 12 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





