
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/11705/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 December 2017                    |        On 3 January 2018           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           Mr Mohammaad Atif hanif
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mian, Counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr Hanif as "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  made  application  to  the
    Respondent for permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was
    refused and he appealed and following a hearing Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Wyman allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert on 25 September  2017.  Her  grounds
    for so granting were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
            decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Wyman)  who,  in  a
            decision promulgated on 22/2/17 allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
            against the Secretary of  State  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
            remain on human right's grounds.

         2.  The  refusal  was  on  grounds  of  previous  submission  of  a
            fraudulently obtained English language  test  result.  Ground  2
            contends  misinterpretation  of  the  respondent  evidence   and
            failure by the judge correctly to apply the reasoning  in  SM  &
            Qadir and other relevant case law. The content of  paragraph  53
            of the decision, together with an absence  of  any  analysis  or
            apparent application of  the  respective  evidential  and  legal
            burdens of proof on the respondent and  Appellant  renders  this
            ground arguable.

         3. Ground 1 argues incorrect application and  inadequate  reasoning
            in relation to the insurmountable obstacles test under EX1.  The
            very brief content of paragraphs 61-67 of  the  decision  render
            this ground also arguable.

         4. There is therefore an arguable error of  law  disclosed  by  the
            application.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Ms Ahmad expanded the Appellant's two grounds of appeal. In  short  the
    Appellant had been refused leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled consequent upon the Respondent being satisfied that
    he had used deception in  relying  on  a  fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC
    Certificate. The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis  that  EX.1  was
    met and the Appellant had given evidence  in  English  and  had  passed
    other English tests. Ms Ahmad argued that the Appellant had  failed  to
    meet EX.1(b) as there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    with his partner continuing outside the United Kingdom. They had sought
    to rely on the fact that the Appellant's wife was born  and  raised  in
    the United Kingdom as insurmountable obstacles and the Judge had agreed
    with this. She submitted  the  Judge  had  failed  to  appreciate  that
    "insurmountable obstacles" is a  high  threshold  and  an  individual's
    preference or choice did not meet the requirements. She referred me  to
    the authority of Agyarko & Ikuga, R (on the  applications  of)  v  SSHD
    [2017] United Kingdom SC 11. Further it was incumbent  upon  the  Judge
    not to simply allow this appeal on the basis that the Immigration Rules
    were met as this is an appeal which  falls  to  be  decided  under  the
    Immigration Act 2014 which came fully into  effect  on  6  April  2015.
    There  is  here  no  finding   that   the   decision   amounts   to   a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's  human   rights.
    Further the Judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  on  a  material
    matter with particular reference to the guidance given in SM and  Qadir
    (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) the Judge  has
    failed to apply the relevant test, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    regarding whether the Appellant employed a  deception.  The  Judge  has
    misinterpreted the evidence and has accordingly erred in law.

 6. Mr Mian also relied on the authority of Agyarko and urged me to  accept
    that the European Court intended the words  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    to be understood in the practical and realistic sense and that this  is
    how the Judge had applied that analysis to this appeal. He repeated the
    arguments put forward in the original appeal as to  the  insurmountable
    obstacles that the Appellant and his partner  would  face  were  he  to
    return to his country of origin and then urged me to  accept  that  any
    fraud was unproven and the issue of the burden and  standard  of  proof
    had been properly dealt with at paragraph 51 of the Judge's decision.

 7. I find that both grounds put forward by the Respondent  are  made  out.
    The Judge has failed to apply the reasoning in SM and Qadir.  The Judge
    has also materially erred by inadequately reasoning, in  what  is  very
    brief content indeed, at paragraphs 61-67 of  his  decision  why  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to this Appellant continuing  his  family
    and private life in his country of origin.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7.(b), before any Judge aside from Judge Wyman.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 29 December 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










