
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11344/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     J E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, instructed by G Singh, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) we make an anonymity  order  prohibiting
    the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members
    of the public identifying the appellant.  We do so on  the  basis  that
    the case involved children in the UK.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court Proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on  [  ]  1981.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 March 2004.  He  did  so  illegally
    with the help of an agent.  On three occasions, the appellant has  made
    applications for an EEA residence card on the basis of his relationship
    with his brother who is an EEA national, namely on 28  September  2008,
    26 March 2010 and 10 November 2010.  Each  of  those  applications  has
    been refused.

 3. On 11 February 2015, the appellant was served with a 'method of  entry'
    request.  He made no return.

 4. On 13 July 2015, the appellant was served with a  notice  that  he  was
    liable to be removed as an illegal entrant.

 5. On 14 January 2016, the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his relationship with his partner ("Ms  O")  and
    her son ("C1") who is a British citizen.

 6. On 13 April 2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave.  The reasons were as follows.

 7. First, although it was accepted that the appellant was cohabiting  with
    Ms O, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that they had been doing
    so for the required two  years  in  order  for  him  to  qualify  as  a
    'partner' for the purposes of the 'partner' provisions in  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 8. Secondly, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    was a 'parent' in respect  of  C1  for  the  purpose  of  the  'parent'
    provisions in Appendix FM.

 9. Thirdly, the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    met  the  requirements  of  the  'private  life'  Rules  in   paragraph
    276ADE(1), in particular para 276ADE(1)(vi) in that  it  had  not  been
    established  that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Nigeria if he returned.

10. Finally, the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were
    exceptional or compelling reasons to justify the grant of leave outside
    the Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal

11. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge Moore.  First, the judge was not satisfied that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), namely  that
    there were "very significant obstacles" to his integration in  Nigeria.
    Secondly, the judge found that the appellant's removal would not breach
    Art 8 of the ECHR, in particular he could not rely  upon  s.117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ( the "NIA Act  2002")
    as it was not established that it would not be reasonable to expect  C1
    (a British citizen) to leave the UK.

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the ground that the  judge
    had misunderstood the meaning of "reasonableness" in s.117B(6)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002 because, applying the approach set out in Upper Tribunal's
    decision in Sanade and others (British children -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)
    [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC), it was not reasonable to expect a British citizen
    child (and the child's family) to leave the EU as a matter of  European
    Law.  Further, the respondent's own policy reflected that position save
    in the case  of  criminality  or  where  a  person  had  a  "very  poor
    immigration history" (see IDI, "Appendix  FM  1.0  Family  Life  (as  a
    Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-year Routes" (August  2015)  at
    para 11.2.3.  As a consequence, s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002  applied
    and so the public interest did not require the appellant's removal  and
    the appeal should have been allowed under Art 8.

13. On 15 December 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

14. The respondent did not file a rule 24 notice.

The Judge's Decision

15. Before Judge Moore, the appellant relied upon para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.

16. As regards para 276ADE(vi), Judge Moore found  that  it  had  not  been
    established  that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration on return to Nigeria and so he could  not  meet
    the  requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  (see   para   20   of   the
    determination).   That finding is not challenged before us and we  need
    say no more about it.

17. Judge Moore then approached the appellant's appeal in three stages.

18. First, he considered whether the appellant, as  the  parent  of  an  EU
    national child, had a right to reside in the  UK  under  EU  law.   The
    basis for that right is found in the case  law  of  the  CJEU  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano (Case C-34/09) [2011] ECR I-1177 and  Dereci  (Case  C-256/11)
    [2011] ECR I-11315.

19. Having set out some of the relevant law, including  a  helpful  summary
    provided by Hickinbottom J (as he then was) in Sanneh  v  Secretary  of
    State for Work and Pensions and another [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin),  Judge
    Moore concluded at para 25 that the appellant could not establish an EU
    right to remain as C1 would not be compelled to leave the UK (and hence
    the EU) if the appellant were removed to Nigeria because he could  live
    with his mother in the UK.  The judge said this:

         "25. In the present case, if the Appellant is compelled  to  return
             to Nigeria (and therefore leave EU territory) [C1] will not be
             compelled to leave  as  well,  because  he  has  an  ascendant
             relative (his mother)  who  (at  present)  has  the  right  of
             residence in the EU, and she can and will in practice care for
             him.  Further, although compelling the Appellant to leave  the
             UK would entail hardship and disruption for  [Ms  O],  as  she
             would have to make alternative childcare  arrangements,  I  do
             not consider the consequences would be so severe as to  compel
             her, and therefore [Ms O] (and [C1]), also to  leave  the  UK.
             Requiring the Appellant to return to Nigeria is therefore  not
             contrary to EU law because it will not infringe  [C1's]  right
             as an EU citizen to reside in the UK; his  mother  can  choose
             whether to stay in the UK or  return  with  the  Appellant  to
             Nigeria, she  is  not  compelled  to  return  to  Nigeria  and
             therefore neither is [C1]."

20. Secondly, having reached  that  conclusion,  Judge  Moore  went  on  to
    consider Art 8 outside the Rules, in particular the issues of C1's best
    interests and the public interest issue in s.117B of the NIA Act  2002.
    At paras 26 to 34 the judge said this:

         "26. I  turn  now  to  the  question  of  whether  compelling,  the
             Appellant to return to Nigeria would be contrary to Article  8
             ECHR, notwithstanding the fact that I have found that  such  a
             decision is compatible with  the  Immigration  Rules  (and  EU
             law).

         27.  In this respect, I am required by section 55 of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to give  primacy  to  the
             best interests of the two children in this case and I consider
             that their best interests would be served by  the  maintenance
             of the family unit, particularly in view of the conclusions  I
             have reached regarding the Appellant's relationship with  [C1]
             (see  paragraph  36  below).   However,  there  are  no  legal
             barriers to prevent the family unit as a  whole  returning  to
             Nigeria, although it must  be  taken  into  account  that  the
             family are likely to be better off economically if they remain
             in the UK as must the fact that [C1] is British citizen and it
             is not in his best interests  to  forego  the  opportunity  of
             growing up and being educated in the UK.  This  latter  matter
             is  addressed  specifically  below  in  the  context   of   my
             consideration of section 117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.

         28.   Turning  to  that  Act,  section  117A  requires  that   when
             considering the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
             person's right to respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
             justified under Article 8(2) I must have regard to the  public
             interest considerations set out in section 117B.

         29.  Section 117B(1) provides that the  maintenance  of   effective
             immigration control is in the public interest.  In  this  case
             it is  to  be  noted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  very  poor
             immigration history.  He entered the  UK  unlawfully  in  2004
             and, prior to the application that  is  the  subject  of  this
             appeal, made 4 unsuccessful attempts for an EEA residence card
             on the basis of alleged relationship with an EEA national.  On
             11 February 2015 he was served with an MOE request to which he
             did not respond.

         30.  Section 117B(2) provides that this is in the  public  interest
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are able to
             speak English.  I note that the Appellant  is  able  to  speak
             English, but also that this only is a neutral factor: Rhuppiah
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             803 at paragraphs 58 - 61.

         31.  Section 117B(3) provides that it is  in  the  public  interest
             that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  are
             financially independent.  The  Appellant  is  not  financially
             independent because he is not working and stated  in  evidence
             that he has never worked since he came to the UK in 2004.   At
             the present time he is being supported by [Ms O],  however  in
             view of his lack of work record or evidence of any skills that
             would assist him to gain employment, I  regard  his  financial
             situation as precarious as it is entirely dependent  upon  the
             continuing support of [Ms O].

         32.  Section 117B(4) provides that little weight should be given to
             a private life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
             partner that is established when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
             unlawfully.   Both  the  Appellant's  private  life  and   his
             relationship with [Ms O] were established when he was  in  the
             UK law unlawfully.

         33.  Section 117B(5), which provides that little weight  should  be
             given to a private life established by a person at a time when
             the person's immigration status is precarious, does not apply.

         34.  In my judgment the application of the considerations listed in
             subsections 117B(1) - (4) weight the  scales  heavily  against
             the Appellant for the purpose of the balancing  exercise  that
             must be conducted under Article 8(2) and  I  do  not  consider
             those considerations to be outweighed by the best interests of
             the children.  This is despite the fact I recognise  that  the
             implications  of  the  Appellant  returning  to  Nigeria   are
             detrimental for the children; either the Appellant returns  to
             Nigeria on his own and the family  is  split,  or  the  family
             return as a unit in which case [C1] is deprived of the benefit
             of growing up  and  being  educated  in  the  country  of  his
             citizenship.   Nevertheless,  I  consider  that  the   primary
             interest of the children is the maintenance of the family unit
             and that this remains achievable if the family so choose."

  21. As will be clear, the judge found that it was in the best interests of
      C1 (and indeed his younger sister) to remain together as a family with
      the appellant and Ms O.  Further, the judge found that it was  not  in
      C1's best interests as a British citizen to "forego the opportunity of
      growing up and  being  educated  in  the  UK".   Nevertheless,  having
      considered the public interest issues set out in s.117B(1)-(5) of  the
      NIA Act 2002, he concluded that the best  interests  of  C1  (and  his
      sibling) did not outweigh the public interest despite the  detrimental
      implication for them if the appellant returned to Nigeria alone, or as
      part of a family unit.

22. Thirdly, the judge turned to s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002  which  was
    principally relied upon before the judge by  the  appellant.    Section
    117B(6) provides as follows:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."


23. Section 117B(6)  sets out three requirements which, if  met,  have  the
    effect  that  "the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal".  The three requirements of s.117B(6), therefore, are:

         (1)  the person is not liable to deportation;

         (2)  the person has a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child"; and

         (3)  it would "not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".

24. There was no issue before the judge in relation to whether or  not  the
    appellant was "not liable  to  deportation":  he  clearly  was  not  so
    liable.

25. At para 36, Judge Moore found that the appellant  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" with C1 who, as  a  British  citizen,
    was a "qualifying child" as follows:

         "36. The first question posed by section 117B(6) is a  question  of
             fact,  namely  whether  the  Appellant  has  a   genuine   and
             subsisting parental relationship with [C1] for the purpose  of
             section  117B(6)(a).   According  to  the  evidence   of   the
             Appellant and [Ms O], the Appellant has lived with [C1]  since
             14 February 2015, he cares for him on a  daily  basis,  taking
             him to nursery, playing with him and feeding him, and has sole
             custody of him when  [Ms  O]  is  at  work.   Further,  [C1's]
             biological father has extremely  limited  contact  with  [C1].
             Although that evidence was not  subject  to  cross-examination
             (because  no  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  attended  the
             hearing) I found it credible and consistent and I  find  that,
             having  regard  to  paragraph  11.2.1.  of   the   Immigration
             Directorate Instructions (August 2015) the Appellant does have
             a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with [C1]."

    That finding was not challenged before us.

26. Then, at paras 37-40, Judge  Moore  considered  the  third  requirement
    under s.117B(6), namely whether it would be reasonable to expect C1  to
    leave the UK.

27. First, Judge  Moore  concluded  at  para  37  that  s.117B(6)  had  "no
    application" to the case as it only applied where  the  effect  of  the
    decision would "necessitate  the  qualifying  child  in  question  also
    having to leave the UK".  The judge said this:

         "37. The next issue is whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect
             [C1] to leave the UK, given that he is a British citizen,  for
             the purposes of section 117B(6)(b).  In  this  respect  it  is
             notable that section 117B(6)(b) appears to be drafted  on  the
             assumption that the removal of the person seeking to  rely  on
             this provision (in this case the Appellant) would  necessitate
             the qualifying child in question also having to leave the  UK.
             In this case this assumption is  not  correct,  since  if  the
             Appellant is removed to Nigeria, [C1] could  stay  in  the  UK
             with his mother.  I therefore consider that section 117B(6)(b)
             has no application in this case."

28. Nevertheless, at paras  38-40,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    application of s.117B(6) on the assumption that it was applicable.   He
    concluded that, in all the circumstances, it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect C1 to leave the UK and go to Nigeria as part of the family unit.
     The judge said this:

         "38. However, if I am wrong about this  and  section  117B(6)  does
             apply, the only circumstances in which the question of whether
             it is reasonable to  expect  [C1]  to  leave  the  UK  becomes
             relevant are those in which [Ms O] choses to return to Nigeria
             with  the   Appellant,   and   therefore   the   question   of
             reasonableness has to be assessed in that context.  This means
             that the scenario being envisaged is one  in  which  all  four
             family members return to Nigeria, so that [C1's]  family  unit
             would not be split up and he would not be deprived  of  either
             adult who care for him on a daily basis.  It is true that such
             a move would reduce the opportunity he has  for  contact  with
             his biological father, however the finding of fact which I was
             invited to make, and have made, is that [C1] enjoys  extremely
             limited contact with his biological father,  who  has  married
             and 'moved on' with his life, while the Appellant has  stepped
             into his shoes.  Further it  is  clear  that  [C1's]  extended
             family, his grandparents and the majority  of  his  aunts  and
             uncles (and presumably  cousins)  are  also  in  Nigeria.   As
             regards [C1's] financial security there is no good  reason  to
             think that his mother and 'step-father' would not be  able  to
             provide him with a reasonable standard of living  in  Nigeria;
             his mother, in particular, is returning with  the  benefit  of
             (sic) Master's Degree  in  Business  Administration  and  this
             qualification should help her to secure employment.   Further,
             while the move would entail significant disruption  for  [C1],
             he is still young, and has not yet  started  'proper'  school,
             and therefore it is likely that with the benefit of his family
             around  him  he  would  assimilate  to  his  new  surroundings
             relatively quickly.

         39.  It is true, however, that [C1] would not  have  been  able  to
             exercise his rights as a British citizen while growing up, and
             Baroness Hale stressed in ZH (Tanzania) at paragraph  32  that
             this fact should not be played down.  However, she also stated
             that at paragraph 30 that it is not a 'trump card', and I note
             that section 117B(6) is drafted on  that  same  understanding,
             since otherwise subsection 117B(6)(b) would be superfluous.

         40.  In this case I find that it would be reasonable to expect [C1]
             to leave the UK, despite the fact  he  is  a  British  citizen
             because  the  circumstances  which  bear   directly   on   his
             interests, as set out in paragraph 38 above, suggest that  the
             impact upon him of returning to Nigeria is very  much  at  the
             lower end of the scale of such cases."

29. Then, in para 41 the judge concluded that the  appellant's  removal  to
    Nigeria "would not be a disproportionate interference with the right to
    a private and/or family  life  under  Article  8(2)  ECHR"  and  so  he
    dismissed the appeal.

Summary of the Parties' Submissions

30. Ms Dirie, who represented the appellant, submitted in essence that  the
    judge had wrongly failed to apply the approach set out in Sanade and in
    the Secretary of State's own IDI, namely that it was not reasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK.   In  the  absence  of
    "criminality" or a "very poor immigration history", she submitted  that
    the judge erred in law in finding that C1 could be  expected  to  leave
    the UK.  The three requirements of s.117B(6) were met and  consequently
    "the public interest" did not require the appellant's removal.

31. Ms Dirie relied upon the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) that the  judge
    ought to have taken into account the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance,
    even under the new appeal regime since the Immigration  Act  2014,  and
    should  have  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   She  submitted  that
    s.117B(6) was determinative of the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

32. Ms Fijiwala, who represented the Secretary of State, submitted that the
    judge had correctly applied s.117B(6) and EU law.

33. She submitted that the Court of Appeal in VM (Jamaica)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 255 had demonstrated that the concession made by the Secretary
    of State in Sanade had been wrongly  made.   The  judge  had  correctly
    applied EU law such that the  appellant  had  no  EU  right  to  reside
    because the effect of his removal would not result in C1  being  forced
    to leave the UK (and hence the EU).  He could remain in  the  UK  cared
    for by his mother.  In VM (Jamaica), Ms Fijiwala submitted,  the  Court
    of Appeal had made it plain that, in those circumstances, it was proper
    to consider  for  the  purposes  of  Art  8  whether  the  family  unit
    (including C1) could be expected to leave the UK  by  accompanying  the
    appellant to Nigeria.

34. As regards SF and others, Ms Fijiwala submitted that that case, on  its
    facts, was not one where the British citizen child of the appellant had
    an alternative carer in the UK  if  the  appellant  were  removed.   Ms
    Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  most  recent  "IDI  (Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section.10b: Family  Life  as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-year Routes" (22 February 2018) made  clear  that  the
    approach in Sanade, based upon a concession by the Secretary  of  State
    in that case, had been wrongly made.  The issue of "reasonableness" was
    not resolved merely by the fact that the child was a British citizen.

35. Ms Fijiwala accepted, however, that in  para  38  the  judge  had  only
    considered the impact of the appellant's removal on  C1  on  the  basis
    that the family would accompany him to Nigeria.  She accepted  that  he
    had failed to consider any impact upon C1 if the family were split and,
    in  particular,  whether  the  effect   of   that   would   result   in
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences".  Although Ms Fijiwala accepted that
    the judge had, at least in part, considered the public interest in  his
    decision, he had not done so in the context of a potential split in the
    family.

Discussion

36. We deal first with  whether  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    reaching his decision in respect of Art 8.

    Error of Law

37. The appellant's case before the judge was founded under Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Nevertheless, perhaps prompted by the  decision  in  Sanade  and
    others and the submissions made on behalf of the appellant,  the  judge
    dealt with the pure EU law issue of whether the appellant had  a  right
    to reside derived from EU law based upon his relationship with C1.

38. Put in that way, the appellant had to establish that the effect of  his
    removal would "compel" C1 to leave the UK and, therefore, the  EU  (see
    Patel v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2028).  He could only derive an  EU  right
    in those circumstances.  The judge was, therefore, correct in  para  25
    to find that the appellant could not  establish  an  EU  right  as  the
    effect of his removal would not compel C1 to leave the EU.   He  could,
    as the judge found, remain in the UK cared for by  his  mother.   As  a
    result of that finding, the judge concluded, in effect, that  C1  would
    not be compelled to leave the EU but, if he did, it would be  a  matter
    of choice by his mother and the appellant.

39. Consequently, the appellant's case under Art 8, and in particular under
    s.117B(6), could not be based upon a  "fixed  point",  namely  that  C1
    would remain in the UK.  In VM (Jamaica),  albeit  in  the  context  of
    deportation, the Court of Appeal recognised that the case  law  of  the
    CJEU (and domestic case law applying it) did not confer an EU right  to
    remain in the UK (either for the child or the parent) where the  family
    had a "choice" whether to accompany the  appellant  rather  than  as  a
    compulsion (see [60] and also Patel at [72]-[73]).

40. At [64] in VM (Jamaica), Sales LJ (with  whom  Arden  LJ  agreed)  said
    this:

         "It follows that the presence of the children in the UK  does  not,
         as a result of the operation of EU law, have to  be  treated  as  a
         fixed point for  the  purpose  of  proportionality  analysis  under
         Article 8.  It was legitimate for the FTT in the 2015 FTT  decision
         to consider for the  purposes  of  its  Article  8  proportionality
         analysis whether the family unit could  be  expected  to  take  the
         option, which EU law allows the Secretary of State to present to KB
         and the family, of relocating to Jamaica with VM."

41. Consequently, we reject Ms Dirie's submission that the judge  erred  in
    law by considering the issue of whether it was "reasonable  to  expect"
    C1 to leave the UK.  The appellant's removal would not breach,  on  the
    judge's finding at para 25, his right to  reside  in  the  UK  and  the
    appellant could derive no EU right through C1.

42. Further, in assessing proportionality, and in  particular  in  applying
    s.117B(6), the judge was not precluded from considering whether it  was
    reasonable to expect C1 to leave the UK despite the fact that C1  is  a
    British citizen.  Although what was said in VM (Jamaica)  was  said  in
    the context of deportation, it has more general application to any  Art
    8  case  and  nothing  said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  justifies  its
    restriction to the deportation context.

43. However, of course, what was said by  the  judge  in  para  38  of  his
    determination in respect of  s.117B(6)  was  said  notwithstanding  his
    view, expressed in para 37, that s.117B(6) had "no application" because
    it was "drafted on the  assumption  that  the  removal  of  the  person
    seeking to rely on this provision ... would necessitate the  qualifying
    child in question also having to leave the UK."

44. That view, in our judgment,  is  untenable.   First,  that  appears  to
    reflect the Zambrano issue.  Section 117B(6) is not  confined  to  such
    (EU) cases.  That is self-evident from the fact that it can apply to  a
    child who is not a British citizen, but has lived in the UK at least  7
    years, to which EU law provides no  assistance.   Secondly,  and  self-
    evidently in  our  view,  s.117B(6)  is  applicable  precisely  in  the
    circumstances where there is a choice as  to  whether  the  child  will
    leave the UK if the individual concerned is removed.   Section  117B(6)
    is engaged, in our judgment, whether the child will or will not in fact
    or practice leave the UK.  It addresses the normative question - should
    he be "expected" to do so.  That issue looks to the best  interests  of
    the child (together with all the circumstances) but also  requires  the
    public interest to be balanced against the impact upon the child (see R
    (MA (Pakistan) and others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and  AM(Pakistan)
    and others v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180).  It is a statutory  'microcosm'
    of the proportionality assessment under Art 8 but which, it is accepted
    by  the  case  law,  when  resolved  in  an  individual's   favour   is
    determinative of the issue of proportionality  (see  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    [17]; AM(Pakistan) at [20] and Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  803  at
    [51]).

45. We were referred to the relevant IDI  in  force  at  the  time  of  the
    decision and appeal "Family Migration: Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life  (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes"  (August  2015).
    It bears a little analysis and consideration of  context.   It  is,  of
    course, guidance or policy  in  respect  of  the  relevant  routes  for
    'partners' and 'parents' under Appendix FM  of  the  Rules  where,  for
    example, para EX.1 is engaged. That applies, inter alia, where there is
    a "genuine and subsiding parental relationship" with  child  who  is  a
    British citizen or who has continuously lived in the UK for at least  7
    years and

         "taking  into  account   their   best   interest   as   a   primary
         consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
         leave the UK" (emphasis added).

46. The same wording is found in the  'private  life'  provisions  in  para
    276ADE(1)(iv) other  Rules.   The  language  of  both  mirror  that  in
    s.117B(6).  Appendix FM (in respect of family life) and para 276ADE (in
    respect of private life) are intended to reflect how the  balance  will
    be struck between the right to respect for private and family life  and
    the public interest under Art 8.2 (see, e.g. para GEN.1.1  of  Appendix
    FM).  That is also the task of Part 5A of the NIA  Act  2002  (see  the
    specific reference in para GEN.1.1).  It was common ground  before  us,
    perhaps not surprisingly, that the guidance reflected the  respondent's
    policy to the application of s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.

47. Paragraph 11.2.3 of the guidance states:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force the British child to leave the EU, regardless of the  age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

48. That passage is, entirely consistent with the legal position  since  it
    is only concerned with a decision where the child  will  be  forced  to
    leave the EU.  It is a statement of EU law.

49. The guidance goes on to state:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen Child to leave the EU without parent or
         primary carer."

50. Ms Dirie placed some  reliance  upon  this  wording.   However,  it  is
    readily apparent to us that is also only concerned with the case  where
    the parent has, in effect, a Zambrano claim because the child would  be
    forced to leave the EU because the "parent" or "primary carer" would be
    leaving the EU.  In other words, the  guidance  thus  far  set  out  is
    simply reflecting an EU law analysis albeit,  in  the  latter  context,
    reading across the effect of the appellant having an EU  law  right  to
    remain as leading to a conclusion that it would  be  "unreasonable"  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

51. The guidance then goes on to state:

         "It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover, amongst others:

           . criminality falling below the threshold set out  in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;




           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

52. Here, the guidance moves beyond an EU law analysis.  As is plain on its
    face, the situation contemplated can only arise where the child  "could
    otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in  the
    UK or in the EU".  In that context, no Zambrano right can be derived by
    the individual as the child would not be forced to leave the EU.    The
    context is, nevertheless, of a British citizen child and  the  guidance
    contemplates  a  refusal  of  leave  to   an   individual,   in   those
    circumstances,  where  inter  alia  the  individual  has  a  level   of
    "criminality" albeit falling short of that set out in paragraph 398  of
    the Rules or a "very poor immigration history".

53. We accept the submission that the guidance sets out  the  Secretary  of
    State's position, in effect,  when  determining  whether  it  would  be
    "reasonable to expect" a British citizen child to  leave  the  UK,  and
    also when that child's best interests (including those seen through the
    lens of British citizenship) may be  outweighed,  such  that  a  parent
    cannot rely upon s.117B(6) to establish a breach of Art 8.


  54. The importance of a child's British citizenship was emphasised by  the
      Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.   The  Supreme
      Court, acknowledging that citizenship carried with it both a right  of
      abode and a range of other benefits and advantages, stated  that  this
      was likely to mean that it was not in such a child's 'best  interests'
      to leave the UK.  That was a powerful  factor  in  the  assessment  of
      'proportionality' under Art 8 although it was not a 'trump card'.

  55. At [31] Lady Hale said this:





         "They are British children; they are British, not just through  the
         "accident" of being born  here,  but  by  descent  from  a  British
         parent; they have an unqualified right of  abode  here;  they  have
         lived here all their lives; they are being educated here; they have
         other social links with  the  community  here;  they  have  a  good
         relationship with their father here. It is not enough to say that a
         young child may readily adapt to life in another country. That  may
         well be so, particularly if she moves with both her  parents  to  a
         country which they know well and where they can easily re-integrate
         in their own community (as might have been the case,  for  example,
         in Poku, para 20, above). But it is very different in the  case  of
         children who have lived here all their lives and are being expected
         to move to a country which they do not know and will  be  separated
         from a parent whom they also know well."





  56. Then at [32], Lady Hale emphasised the importance that should be given
      to a child's British citizenship:





         "Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be played down.
         As citizens these children have rights which they will not be  able
         to exercise if they move to another country.  They  will  lose  the
         advantages of growing up and being educated in their  own  country,
         their own culture and their own language. They will have  lost  all
         this when they come back as adults."





  57.  Nevertheless,  Lady  Hale  accepted  (at  [30])  that  in   assessing
      proportionality:





         Although nationality is not a "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
         importance in assessing the best interests of any child.





  58. In similar vein, Lord Hope (at [41]) said this:





         "It was submitted that the fact  that  the  children  were  British
         citizens  who  had  never  been  to  Tanzania  trumped  all   other
         considerations: para  16.  That  was,  as  the  [Court  of  Appeal]
         recognised, to press the point too far. But there is much  more  to
         British citizenship than the status it gives  to  the  children  in
         immigration law. It carries with it a host of  other  benefits  and
         advantages, all of which Lady  Hale  has  drawn  attention  to  and
         carefully analysed. They ought never to be left out of account, but
         they were nowhere considered in the Court of Appeal's judgment. The
         fact of British citizenship does not trump everything else. But  it
         will hardly ever be less than a very significant and weighty factor
         against moving children who have that  status  to  another  country
         with a parent who has no right to remain here,  especially  if  the
         effect of doing this  is  that  they  will  inevitably  lose  those
         benefits and advantages for the rest of their childhood."





  59. Finally, Lord Kerr reflected the same approach to the importance of
      British citizenship in his judgement at [47]:





         "The significance of a child's nationality must  be  considered  in
         two aspects. The first of these is in its role as a contributor  to
         the debate as to where the child's best interests lie. It seems  to
         me self evident that to diminish a child's right to assert  his  or
         her nationality will not normally be in his or her best  interests.
         That consideration must therefore feature in the  determination  of
         where  the  best  interests  lie.  It  was  also  accepted  by  the
         respondent, however, (and I think rightly so) that if a child is  a
         British citizen, this has an independent value, freestanding of the
         debate in relation to best interests, and this must  weigh  in  the
         balance in any decision that may affect where a child will live. As
         Lady Hale has said, this is not an inevitably decisive  factor  but
         the benefits that British citizenship brings, as so aptly described
         by Lord Hope and Lady Hale, must not readily be discounted."





  60. Whilst the views expressed in the Supreme Court were not said  in  the
      context of s.117B(6) - which had yet to be enacted - they are, in  our
      judgment,  of  great  importance  when  considering  whether   it   is
      "reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK" under s.117B(6).  There
      is no suggestion that Part 5A of  the  NIA  Act  2002  (in  particular
      s.117B(6)) seeks to depart from  a  lawful  assessment  of  Art  8  as
      previously  understood  (see   MA(Pakistan)).    And,   further,   the
      importance of a  child's  British  citizenship  is  reflected  in  the
      respondent's own guidance we have set out above.   The  weight  to  be
      given to a child's 'best interests'  including  their  citizenship  is
      only to be outweighed by a parent's  'criminality'  or  a  'very  poor
      immigration history'.  That, as we shall  see  is  replicated  in  the
      respondent's most recent guidance (see below paras  67  and  68).   It
      goes beyond the "strong reasons"  that  are  required  to  outweigh  a
      child's 'best interests' when  applying  s.117B(6)  to  a  'qualifying
      child' who is not a British citizen but has been continuously resident
      in the UK for at least 7 years  (see  respondent's  guidance  at  para
      11.2.4 and MA(Pakistan) at [49] ("powerful  reasons")  in  respect  of
      such a child who has been resident for at least 7 years).

61. Applying that analysis to this appeal, we are satisfied that the  judge
    erred in law in two respects.

62. First, the judge wrongly considered that s.117B(6) could not  apply  as
    C1 was not forced to leave the UK (see our analysis  above,  especially
    at paras 41-42).

63. Secondly, that error was material because in para 38  of  his  decision
    when considering s.117B(6), he failed to take into  account  fully  all
    the circumstances and give proper weigh to the child's best  interests,
    including his British citizenship.  The judge premised  his  assessment
    on the basis that the family would travel as a unit to Nigeria.   As  a
    consequence, he focused upon the position C1 would find himself in with
    his family in Nigeria.  Although he made reference in para  39  to  the
    fact that if C1 went to Nigeria he would on be  able  to  exercise  his
    rights as a British citizen  whilst  growing  up  in  the  UK,  in  our
    judgment, he failed sufficiently to factor in the  impact  upon  C1  in
    those  circumstances.   Although  the  judge  made  reference  to   the
    "detrimental" effect on the children of returning to Nigeria, and of C1
    being deprived of the benefit of growing up and being educated  in  the
    UK, the judge  did  not  give  adequate  weight,  consistent  with  the
    approach in ZH(Tanzania),  to his finding that he had  previously  made
    in paragraph 27 that it was "not in his best interests  to  forego  the
    opportunity of growing up and being educated in the UK."  He failed  to
    give due weigh to the child's British citizenship.

64. Added to which, the respondent's IDI  in  effect  recognised  that  the
    deprivation of the opportunity to a child of growing up in the UK as  a
    result of his or her British citizenship was generally only  outweighed
    in circumstances amongst others  of  "criminality"  and  "a  very  poor
    immigration history".   That, of course, was the Secretary  of  State's
    policy.  It was a relevant factor to assist  the  judge  when  applying
    s.117B(6) (see SF and others; and Hesham Ali v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60,
    e.g., at [15]-[17] and [46]).

65. In this appeal, apart from the appellant's illegal entry into  the  UK,
    there is no suggestion of any criminality.  He has never  been  charged
    with any offence and, so  far  as  we  can  see,  no  evidence  of  the
    circumstances of his entry were put before the judge and none were  put
    before us.   Perhaps  more  pertinently,  in  the  absence  of  further
    evidence,  whilst  the   appellant's   immigration   history   may   be
    characterised as "poor", we cannot see how the appellant's conduct  can
    be described as giving rise to a "very poor immigration history" simply
    by the fact of his illegal entry.  The  IDI  refers  to  a  person  who
    "repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules".  That  is
    a  characterisation  which  could  not  properly  be  applied  to   the
    appellant, at least on the evidence in this appeal.

66. We understood Ms Fijiwala to accept that, if s.117B(6)  did  not  apply
    then the judge had failed to consider the impact upon  the  appellant's
    child if he remained in the UK and, specifically, whether  the  'split'
    between the appellant and his child would give rise  to  'unjustifiably
    harsh consequences' (see our para 34 above).  Strictly, this  does  not
    arise as we are persuaded that the judge's application of s.117B(6) was
    flawed and, of necessity, the decision must be remade.

67. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8.

    Re-making the Decision

68. At the hearing, we enquired of both representatives whether  there  was
    any reason why we should not remake the decision if we  were  satisfied
    that the judge erred in law.  Both representatives  indicated  that  we
    should do so and made no further  submissions  on  the  merits  of  the
    appeal.

69. As a consequence, no submission was made before us that  the  appellant
    did not fall within the  guidance  of  August  2015  on  the  basis  of
    "criminality" or on the basis of a "very poor immigration history".

70. We were referred  to  the  most  recent  guidance,  "Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes"  (22  February  2018).   The  relevant
    guidance in respect of whether it would  be  "reasonable  to  expect  a
    child to leave the UK" is at pp.74-76 (7 years or  more)  and  pp.76-77
    (British citizen).  As regards  the  latter,  the  guidance  no  longer
    refers to the Zambrano decision.  It,  nevertheless,  contemplates  the
    position where a British citizen child would be compelled to leave  the
    UK in similar terms to the earlier guidance P.76):

         "Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be reasonable to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant  parent  or  primary
         carer facing removal. Accordingly, where this means that the  child
         would have to leave the UK because, in  practice,  the  child  will
         not, or is not likely to, continue to live in the UK  with  another
         parent or primary carer, EX.1.(a) is likely to apply."

71. Further, it repeats, almost verbatim, the substance of the August  2015
    guidance in respect of the circumstances which it  is  envisaged  would
    justify a refusal to grant leave to a parent, where a  British  citizen
    child is involved (pp.76-77):

         "In particular circumstances, it may be appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct  gives
         rise to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify
         their removal, where the British citizen child could remain in  the
         UK with another parent or  alternative  primary  carer,  who  is  a
         British citizen or settled in the UK or who has or is being granted
         leave to remain. The circumstances envisaged include those in which
         the grant of leave could undermine our  immigration  controls,  for
         example the  applicant  has  committed  significant  or  persistent
         criminal offences falling below the thresholds for deportation  set
         out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has  a  very  poor
         immigration history, having repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached
         the Immigration Rules." (our emphasis)

72. Again, this guidance is  concerned  with  the  relevant  routes  for  a
    partner or parent under Appendix FM and not s.117B(6) of  the  NIA  Act
    2002 specifically.  It was, however, not suggested before  us  that  it
    did  not  represent  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  in   applying
    s.117B(6).

73. Whilst we acknowledge that the guidance is not expressed  in  exclusive
    terms, nevertheless the example given  -  like  those  in  the  earlier
    guidance - do not reflect the appellant's conduct in this  case.   And,
    as we have already said, it was  not  suggested  otherwise  before  us.
    Whilst we bear in mind the judge's findings in paragraph  38,  we  also
    bear in mind his finding in paragraphs 27 and 34 that  it  was  not  in
    C1's best interests to forego the opportunity of growing up  and  being
    educated in the UK.  C1's best interests and  his  British  citizenship
    are potent factors in assessing whether it  would  be  'reasonable'  to
    expect him to leave the UK.   They are powerful factors which,  drawing
    on the respondent's guidance, were not outweighed by any criminality or
    very poor immigration history.   We  acknowledge  the  public  interest
    factors set out by the judge at paragraphs 28 to 34.  In the absence of
    any argument to the contrary, we have found the guidance to  assist  us
    in determining the assessment of whether it  would  be  "reasonable  to
    expect" C1 to leave the UK (see SF and others at [12]).   We  give  due
    weight to C1's best interests and nationality; and we  also  take  into
    account the public interests, in particular the appellant's immigration
    history.  In our judgment, there  are  insufficiently  weighty  counter
    factors to outweigh C1's best interests.

74. We are satisfied that it would not be reasonable to expect C1 to  leave
    the  UK  and  that  the  requirements  of  s.117B(6)  are  met.   As  a
    consequence, the public interest does not require the  removal  of  the
    appellant.  His removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    his art 8 rights and unlawful.

Decision

75. Thus, we conclude that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law.
     We set aside the decision  and  remake  it  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  4 May 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we make a fee award of any fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  4 May 2018
