
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11739/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2021                              |On 11 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                          CHATHURI SUSANGIKA PEIRIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Bisson, Counsel, instructed by Lumbini
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Lingam ("the judge") promulgated on 15 April 2020 in which
         she dismissed the human rights appeal of Chathuri Susangika  Peiris
         ("the appellant") against a decision of  the  respondent  dated  12
         June 2019 refusing the appellant's human rights claim (in the  form
         of an application for entry clearance under the  Immigration  Rules
         dealing with refugee family reunion). A subsequent application made
         on 27 September 2019 was refused on 24 December 2019. The substance
         of both refusals was considered by the judge.

      2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 4 November
         2001. At  the  date  of  the  decision  under  challenged  she  was
         approximately 17 years and 7 months old.  Her  father,  Lal  Peiris
         ("the sponsor"), left Sri Lanka on 25 July 2009 owing  to  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution for political reasons. The sponsor  was
         granted asylum in the UK on 13  November  2015.  His  wife,  Sunita
         Damayanthi Kotigalage, was issue with  entry  clearance  under  the
         refugee family reunion provisions on 20 July 2018.

      3. On 29 November 2018 the appellant applied for entry clearance under
         paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules. This  paragraph  sets  out
         the requirements for leave to enter or remain as  the  child  of  a
         refugee. Paragraph 352D (iv) requires, in order to  join  a  parent
         who currently has refugee status, that an applicant:

            was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at the
            time that the person granted asylum left the country  of  their
            habitual residence in order to seek asylum;

      4. The  appellant's  application  was  based  on  an  unusual  set  of
         circumstances. She and her sponsor maintained that, when  he  lived
         in Sri Lanka, and when he left that country, he  had  two  separate
         and independent family units. The sponsor married Sunita Damayanthi
         Kotigalage on 25 February 1983 and they had two  children,  a  son,
         Suresh, born in 1984, and a daughter, Chetana,  born  in  1988.  In
         1994 the sponsor met Renuka Chandrani  Mendis  and  they  formed  a
         relationship. They never married. Renuka and the sponsor had  three
         children together, twin boys born in 1995 and the appellant born in
         2001. The sponsor maintained that he resided with both his wife for
         3 or 4 days a week,  and  that  he  resided  with  Renuka  for  the
         remaining part of the week. Both sets of family were aware  of  the
         other and accepted the living arrangement.

      5. The respondent, in both of her decisions refusing entry  clearance,
         was not satisfied that the requirement in paragraph 352D  (iv)  was
         met. The respondent accepted that the appellant was  the  sponsor's
         daughter, but noted that in his screening interview he  listed  the
         appellant's  mother  as  his  partner  and  Sunita  as  his   wife,
         suggesting to the respondent that the appellant was not part of the
         sponsor's family unit when he  left  the  country.  In  the  second
         decision refusing entry clearance the respondent  took  issue  with
         several of the documents provided by  the  appellant,  particularly
         with Student Record Books relating to the  appellant  covering  the
         periods 2004/05, 2005/06 and 2006/07, a Residency  Report  dated  2
         September 2019, and a 'statement of account' relating  to  a  joint
         bank statement held by the sponsor and the appellant's mother.  The
         respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  WhatsApp  call  logs  and  a
         spreadsheet of calls which commenced  from  May  2016  demonstrated
         that the appellant was part of the sponsor's family unit before  he
         left Sri Lanka, and photographs provided were undated and  were  of
         little assistance in answering the same question.

      6. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision of 12 June 2019 to
         the First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge had before her, inter alia, a large bundle  of  documents
         produced by the appellant  running  to  308  pages  which  included
         statements from the appellant, the sponsor, the appellant's mother,
         the sponsor's wife, the appellant's maternal uncle, a neighbour  of
         the appellant (Jayakodi Magerat) and a friend  of  the  appellant's
         mother (Mr B. Karunapala). The bundle  additionally  contained  the
         Student Record Books  that  accompanied  the  2nd  entry  clearance
         application, the Residency report and the 'Statement of Account' in
         the joint names of the sponsor  and  the  appellant's  mother.  The
         judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor, but the sponsor's  wife
         did not attend due,  it  was  claimed,  to  ill-health.  The  judge
         recorded  the  extensive  cross-examination  of  the  sponsor   and
         recorded the parties' submissions.


      8. In the section of her decision headed  "Findings  and  Conclusions"
         the judge dealt with the concerns raised  by  the  respondent.  She
         considered the issues raised by  the  respondent  relating  to  the
         Student Record Books at [31] to [34], the issues  raised  with  the
         Residency Report at [35], and the respondent's  concerns  with  the
         joint bank account statements at [36]. The judge concluded that the
         appellant and the sponsor had not adequately met these concerns and
         that the evidence adduced by the  appellant  did  not  support  her
         claim to have been part of the sponsor's family unit when  he  left
         Sri Lanka. The absence of independent evidence of financial support
         for the appellant and her family and the absence  of  communication
         between the sponsor and the appellant  until  2016  undermined  the
         reliance  the  judge  could  attach  to  the  statements  from  the
         appellant's neighbour, her  mother's  friend  and  the  appellant's
         uncle. The photographic evidence provided by the appellant  showing
         her and the sponsor did not support her claim, and  the  judge  did
         not accept the sponsor's evidence that his wife was  not  medically
         fit to attend the hearing. the judge found that the requirement  of
         paragraph 352D (iv) had not been made out and, in relation  to  the
         Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules,  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance did not constitute a disproportionate  interference  with
         Article 8 rights. The judge consequently dismissed  the  appeal  on
         human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

      9. The grounds of appeal  take  issue  with  various  aspects  of  the
         judge's decision. These include the judge's approach to the Student
         Record Book (specifically,  the  Book  relating  to  2006/07),  the
         Residency  Report  and  the  joint  bank  account  statement,   the
         photographs and the written statements from various individuals. In
         granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell stated,


             ".... It may well be that the Upper Tribunal concludes, taking
             a step back from the  forensic  criticisms  of  [the  judge's]
             analysis in the grounds of appeal, that the  judge's  ultimate
             conclusion was open to her on the  totality  of  the  evidence
             presented. At this stage, however, I am just satisfied that it
             is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  lw  in  reaching  that
             conclusion. there are many points raised in the  grounds,  two
             of which seem to be particularly arguable:


                    i) The appellant relied on bank statements which showed
                       that her father and mother had a joint bank  account
                       in  2012  [AB/73-75].  If  that  were  correct,   it
                       arguably militated in favour of  a  conclusion  that
                       the sponsor did indeed maintain two  households  (or
                       family units) in Sri Lanka, one  of  which  included
                       the  appl.  The  reason  given  by  the  judge   for
                       rejecting  or  attaching  limited  weight  to   that
                       evidence is arguably unclear: "the type of  evidence
                       mentioned here is without the remit of  the  sponsor
                       and [the appellant's mother]":  [36].  This  is  the
                       point made at [5] of the grounds.


                   ii) The appellant also relied on a residency report from
                       the village headman, at [AB/92]. It seems  that  she
                       might have been mistaken about the contents  of  the
                       letter for the reasons given at [4] of the  grounds,
                       in that the address given was one address, not  two,
                       as the judge seemed to think.

              The remaining grounds are less strong but may be argued."

     10. The respondent provided a rule 24 response which I have considered.
         Mr Bisson adopted the grounds of appeal in his oral submissions. Mr
         Diwnycz adopted the rule 24 response and submitted that  the  judge
         was entitled to hold against the appellant the absence of  evidence
         that could reasonably have been provided.

Discussion

     11. It is readily apparent from the decision that the  judge  carefully
         considered the evidence adduced on the  appellant's  behalf.  I  am
         nevertheless persuaded that the decision does contain legal errors.
         At [31] the judge accurately set out the sponsor's  explanation  as
         to why the 'father' column at page 89 of the bundle, which contains
         the 'Particulars of Student' section of the 2006/07 Student  Record
         Book, was left blank in respect of the sponsor's home address.  The
         sponsor asserted that it was not necessary to  repeat  the  address
         twice as it had already been recorded in respect of the appellant's
         mother in the same document. At [33] the judge accurately described
         page 89, although she mistakenly stated that the appellant's mother
         had inserted her name in the 'Guardian' box  for  2005/06  when  in
         fact this occurred in the 2006/07 Student record Book. Then at [34]
         the judge stated:


             "Based on what I  have  observed  from  the  documents,  I  am
             satisfied that the sponsor's explanation fails to address  the
             issues above. Hence, I am satisfied that the documents  failed
             to show that the sponsor had lived in a family unit  with  the
             appellant and her other family members prior to his flight out
             of Sri Lanka."


     12. The judge has clearly rejected the sponsor's explanation,  but  she
         had not  given  any  reasons  in  support  of  her  rejection.  The
         sponsor's explanation was, to my mind, not inherently  implausible.
         While it may well have  been  open  to  the  judge  to  reject  his
         explanation, it was incumbent on her to explain, if only  in  brief
         terms, why she did not accept that  explanation  as  credible.  The
         judge  has  failed  to  give  legally  adequate  reasons  for  this
         conclusion.


     13. At [35] the judge considered the Residency Report, the  translation
         of which is found at  page  92  of  the  appellant's  bundle.  This
         contained the following extract:


             "I certify that according to documents available  to  me,  LAL
             PEIRIS is a resident of No 56/3A, Halpe  Mawatha,  Kandana  in
             the Grama Niladhari Division No 185/A, Hapugoda - West and his
             name has entered in Electoral Registry from 2004 to 2006 ..."


     14. At [35] the judge stated:


             "Regarding the third (3) concern of the sponsor's reliance  on
             the Residency Report that was provided  with  the  appellant's
             application: the respondent submitted that as the sponsor  was
             only  registered  on  the  electoral  poll  at  his  unmarried
             partner's address from 2004-2006, he showed that the appellant
             did not live in a family unit with the sponsor  when  he  left
             Sri Lanka in Jul 2009. His explanation is that in  2006,  when
             he was appointed as a member of the Colombo Municipal Council,
             he had to use his official address in  the  Colombo  District.
             For electoral purpose, he said he had to remove his name  from
             the address '185/A Hapugado West  Grama  Niladhari  Division'.
             However, the translated version of the Report  Residency  only
             confirms that  the  appellant  was  registered  for  Electoral
             Registry purpose [sic] from 2004-2006 at  the  above  address.
             The same documents confirms the sponsor remained a resident of
             56/3A from 2004-2009. If  that  were  so,  there  is  credible
             explanation [sic] why the appellant's school documents do  not
             reflect the same." [my emphasis]

     15. In the extract above  the  judge  states  "...  there  is  credible
         explanation...", but she must be taken to have meant  there  is  no
         credible explanation. The grounds contend that the judge appears to
         have believed that there were two addresses - '185/A Hapugado  West
         Grama Niladhari Division'  and  '56/3A,  Halpe  Mawatha,  Kandana',
         whereas in fact these composed  a  single  address.  The  sponsor's
         evidence was that his name was removed from the electoral  register
         of the relevant Division, not a seperate address. On the basis that
         the judge appears  to  have  considered  the  Residency  Report  as
         relating to two separate addresses, and to have held  this  against
         the appellant, she has taken into account an irrelevant matter.


     16. The appellant relied on a joint bank account held  by  the  sponsor
         and the appellant's mother. It was the  appellant's  evidence  that
         the account had been closed for some time and  that  she  had  only
         been able to obtain 3 'Statement of Account' documents covering the
         periods 30 December 2011 to 5 January 2012, 30  March  2012  to  26
         April 2012, and 30 April 2012 to 28 May 2012.  At  [36]  the  judge
         noted the sponsor's  evidence  at  the  hearing  that  he  and  the
         appellant's mother had not used the account often as they had their
         own separate accounts. The judge stated:

             "Notwithstanding  the  above,  I  am  satisfied  the  type  of
             evidence mentioned here is without the remit  of  the  sponsor
             and Ms Renuka."

     17. It is, with respect, unclear what the judge meant. She  appears  to
         have rejected the evidence of the  joint  bank  account  which,  as
         Judge Blundell pointed out, militated in favour of the  appellant's
         claim,  but  she  failed  to  give  a  clear  or  legally  adequate
         explanation for doing so. Although the judge then  noted  that  the
         appellant's mother had not verified the sponsor's explanation,  and
         that there was  no  further  evidence  of  funds  remitted  by  the
         sponsor, these  observations  do  not  remedy  the  lack  of  clear
         reasoning.


     18. At [48] the judge notes that, whilst the sponsor, the appellant and
         the appellant's mother claimed that the sponsor lived for 3-4  days
         a week with them, the statement from the  sponsor's  wife  did  not
         state the same in her  statement.  The  judge  does  not  expressly
         explain why this is relevant, but the natural  inference  from  the
         paragraph is that the judge has drawn an adverse inference based on
         her view that the accounts are inconsistent. In her  statement  the
         sponsor's wife stated that the sponsor "...shared his time  between
         each of his families." This evidence was not, on any rational view,
         inconsistent with  that  of  the  appellant,  the  sponsor  or  the
         appellant's mother. To the extent that the judge may have drawn  an
         adverse inference based on an immaterial factor, she erred in law.


     19. There is less merit in the remaining grounds. Whilst it is  correct
         that the judge mistakenly stated  at  [30]  that  it  was  the  2nd
         refusal of entry clearance that was under  appeal,  she  took  full
         account of the evidence provided by the appellant  in  response  to
         the first decision of 12 July  2019  and  the  respondent,  in  any
         event, accepted that the sponsor had provided  correct  information
         relating to the appellant (by reference to the  solicitor's  letter
         dated 15 June 2011). The judge was fully entitled to consider  with
         concern the  absence  of  evidence  of  communication  between  the
         appellant and the sponsor following his flight from  Sri  Lanka  in
         2009 until 2016, and the absence of any financial support  provided
         by the sponsor covering the same period. This fed into the  central
         issue of whether, at the time the sponsor left Sri  Lanka,  he  and
         the appellant were part  of  the  same  family  unit.  The  grounds
         challenge the judge's assessment of the photographs noting that she
         does not claim to be an exert in the assessment of  age.  There  is
         however no such thing as an expert in age assessments and the judge
         was entitled to form her own view as to the  appellant's  age  from
         her appearance in the photographs, although she should perhaps have
         issued a self-direct as to the  unreliability  of  judging  age  by
         purely physical appearance. The judge was  right  in  pointing  out
         that the photographs did not contain any dates. The photographs, in
         any event, are of limited evidential value as they are  a  snapshot
         of a moment and do not provide cogent evidence as to whether,  when
         the sponsor left Sri Lanka, he and the appellant were part  of  the
         same  family  unit.  The  judge  attached  little  weight  to   the
         statements from the appellant's neighbour, her mother's friend  and
         her uncle because of the lack of  independent  supporting  evidence
         that the sponsor provided  financial  support  to  the  appellant's
         family after he left Sri Lanka. There was no  opportunity  to  test
         the assertions made by the statements and the judge was  rationally
         entitled to attach limited  weight  to  those  statements  for  the
         reasons given. The judge was  also  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
         inference from the failure of the  sponsor's  wife  to  attend  the
         hearing and give evidence for the reasons given.


     20. I must determine whether, despite  the  errors  of  law  identified
         above, the decision would inevitably have been the same.  The  rule
         24 response from the respondent invites to so find. The  judge  has
         engaged in detail with the appellant's evidence and has provided  a
         number of cogent reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  to
         have formed part of the sponsor's family  unit  when  he  left  Sri
         Lanka. I am however persuaded, albeit by the narrowest of  margins,
         that, had the errors of law not been committed, the judge may  have
         reached a different conclusion.


     21. There remain several concerns with the evidence provided on  behalf
         of the appellant. Her Student Record Books only go up to  the  year
         2006/07, there is no evidence of the contact and financial  support
         the sponsor is claimed to have provided to the  appellant  and  her
         family in the period  after  he  left  Sri  Lanka   in  2009  until
         relatively recently (the evidence of communication begins in 2016),
         and no adequate explanation has,  to  my  mind,  been  provided  to
         explain why such limited evidence has been provided  of  the  joint
         bank account held by the sponsor and Renuka (there is, for example,
         no explanation as to why the bank has not been approach  to  obtain
         further evidence).  There  is  also  a  relative  dearth  of  other
         independent  evidence  of  the  sponsor's  residence  in  the  home
         occupied by the appellant and her mother,  although  the  sponsor's
         claim that his principle correspondence address was that he  shared
         with his wife and their children must  be  borne  in  mind.   These
         issues fall to be addressed at a  further  hearing  to  remake  the
         decision.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     22. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
            First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
            that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
            Tribunal; or


         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
            necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
            is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
            2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal.

     23. Both parties were agreed that, were I  to  find  an  error  of  law
         requiring  the  decision  to  be  set  aside,  that  it  would   be
         appropriate to remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
         fresh hearing. The judge's errors included factual mistakes and the
         parties indicated that there was likely to be further evidence at a
         remade hearing. In these circumstances it is appropriate  to  remit
         the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  (de  novo)
         hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lingam.


D.Blum                              5 March 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



