
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11441/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2016                         |On 14 October 2016                |
|Extempore                                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                              OLUMUYIWA ADEDURO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Miss S Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie sitting in Belfast, that decision being
    promulgated on 10 March 2016.  Neither the appellant nor the  Secretary
    of State were represented at that hearing, the appellant having elected
    for that decision to be dealt with on the papers.

 2. In brief, the appellant is married to a British citizen.  Both of  them
    are in poor health, the details of those conditions being  set  out  in
    some detail in the refusal letters and there is no need to record  them
    here.

 3. The Secretary of State, having initially been  challenged  by  judicial
    review regarding inadequacies in the initial refusal  letter,  set  out
    her case in a letter of 5 November  2015.   In  summary,  she  did  not
    consider that although the couple were married that the requirements of
    paragraph EX1 or EX2 of the Immigration Rules  were  met  and  on  that
    basis that the appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

 4. The respondent also concluded that as the appellant had not lived  here
    for more than twenty years and there were  no  indications  that  there
    were extreme difficulties in the  appellant  reintegrating  again  into
    life in Nigeria that he did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent then went on to consider whether other than  that  there
    were any good reasons why the appellant should be given leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom and concluded that it would not be  a  breach  of
    either Articles 3 or 8 of the Human Rights Convention for the appellant
    to be removed to Nigeria.  This  then  gave  rise  to  a  human  rights
    decision against which  there  is  an  appeal  under  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

 6. In fairness to the judge there was limited material before him  in  the
    form of medical evidence relating  to  the  conditions  of  either  the
    appellant or his wife.  There was  a  letter  from  one  consultant  to
    another  but  this  does  not  indicate  the  difficulties   that   the
    appellant's wife would have in relocating to Nigeria, rather it is  the
    kind of letter that one would expect from  one  consultant  to  another
    which sets out in brief detail the nature of the condition.

 7. The judge, however, did not in his decision deal with  the  Immigration
    Rules, considering only the issue of Article 8 and  presumably  Article
    3, although the latter does not appear to have been pursued before  him
    with any great determination.

 8. The judge concluded that the ill-health of the appellant  and  that  of
    his partner was a factor to be taken into consideration  of  Article  8
    but referred himself to GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, concluding  that
    the medical condition of the appellant's partner was only one issue  in
    determining whether there were exceptional circumstances. He  concluded
    it would appear that both parties formed the relationship  and  married
    when they were unwell and the appellant's status as an overstayer would
    have to  be  taken  into  account  and  as  a  result  found  that  the
    appellant's removal would not give  rise  to  a  breach  of  Article  8
    because of exceptional circumstances arising.

 9. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted on 12 August 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J  M
    Hollingworth who stated

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the material available to the judge and in relation to the reaching
         of no conclusion  in  respect  of  the  medical  condition  of  the
         appellant's  partner  is  a   factor   to   be   weighed   in   the
         proportionality exercise.  The  appeal  had  been  dismissed  under
         Article 8.  It is arguable that under the  heading  of  "Discussion
         and Conclusions" a fuller analysis should  have  been  set  out  in
         relation to the application of the Razgar criteria and in  relation
         to that the application of the criteria pursuant  to  Section  117.
         It is arguable that this so given  the  judge's  reference  to  not
         being able to reach a conclusion on the papers  at  the  outset  of
         paragraph 18 in the context of the  absence  of  any  comprehensive
         commissioned medical evidence  from  a  suitably  qualified  expert
         given the relationship between that statement and the finding  that
         no exceptional circumstances arose."

10. I consider that the judge has fallen into error in this case in that he
    has failed properly to address  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules first, this being a necessary to precursor  to  asking  the  five
    questions outlined in Razgar.

11. It is  also  of  note  that  the  judge  also  completely  ignores  the
    appellant's own health problems in assessing Article 8.   There  is  no
    indication that that or the health difficulties which are  set  out  in
    significant  detail  in  the  refusal  letter  were  factored  into  in
    assessing whether and if so they were met.

12. Further, and importantly, what the judge does is to ask  whether  there
    are exceptional circumstances arising. That is not  the  correct  test.
    The test to be applied here having considered the Immigration Rules and
    bearing in mind also the factors to be taken into  account  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act whether removal would be  proportionate.   As  the
    grant of permission indicate, there is no basis on which  it  could  be
    said that the proper approach to Article 8 has been  followed  in  this
    case in that firstly, important evidence appears not to have been taken
    into  account.   Second,  there  is  no  indication  of   whether   the
    requirements of  the  Rules  were  considered  which  would  have  been
    relevant to whether the decision was proportionate.

13. In the circumstances I do find that the decision involved the making of
    an error of law and I set it aside. It will be necessary,  I  consider,
    for a full remaking of this  decision  and  accordingly  I  remit  this
    decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  decision  on  all
    material matters.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law, and I set it aside.

   2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision
      on all material issues.

Signed                                  Date: 13 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


