
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11891/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                            |On 8 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MD MIZANUR [R]
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Syed-Ali


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of  State  (to  whom  I  shall  refer  hereafter  as  the
    respondent, as she was  before  the  First-tier  Judge),  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Judge who allowed the appeal of Mr [R] (to whom I shall refer hereafter
    as the appellant as he was before the judge) who had appealed against a
    decision of 22 April 2016 refusing his application for further leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   In the refusal letter it was accepted  that  the  appellant  had  shown
    that he met the requirements to  qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under
    family life as a partner ten year route, but it was concluded that  his
    presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive  to  the  public  good
    because his conduct made it undesirable to allow him to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This was on the basis that it was alleged that he  had
    fraudulently obtained a  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing
    Services (ETS) by using a proxy test  taker  for  a  test  taken  on  9
    January 2013.

3.   The appellant had been in the United Kingdom since  30  November  2009.
    He had married his wife on 11 November 2012 and the couple have a child
    born on [ ] 2013.  Their daughter is a British citizen by birth.

4.   The appellant's evidence before the judge was that he had  not  made  a
    false  representation  nor  had  he  submitted  a  false  English  test
    certificate  and  had  genuinely  sat  for  the  examination  and   had
    successfully completed the assessment and obtained the certificate.  He
    confirmed that at the time when he took the test he was living  in  Bow
    and the journey to do the test was relatively easy.  He referred to the
    bus he took and the tube line.  He recalled that on the day he took the
    test there was nobody next to him nor did he know  anybody  taking  the
    test.  When he had been initially questioned in April  2016  about  the
    taking of the test he  was  unable  to  remember  certain  details  but
    subsequently he refreshed his memory and was able to recall  accurately
    thereafter.

5.   He had good qualifications in  English  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and after arrival had completed a course in business management
    which was taught in English.  He made the point that the respondent had
    not provided any evidence in support of the  allegations  made  against
    him.  He had not contacted ETS about the allegation but  contacted  his
    solicitor  and  followed  instructions  as  to  how  to  challenge  the
    decision.

6.   The judge had before him the witness statements of Ms Collings  and  Mr
    Millington  which  he  summarised.   The  respondent's   representative
    referred to a report by Dr French but that  report  was  not  contained
    within the respondent's bundle.  It was subsequently sent to the  judge
    who  took  it  into  consideration.   The  judge   noted   within   the
    respondent's  bundle  a  print  off  recording  the  results   of   the
    appellant's ETS test as "questionable".

7.   At paragraph 13 of his decision the judge said that the respondent  had
    produced sufficient evidence to show that the appellant had a  case  to
    answer but that evidence in the form of the various witness  statements
    had been the subject of consideration in a number of decisions  by  the
    higher courts which were not the  subject  of  any  particular  dispute
    before him and it was not  necessary  to  recite  them.   He  noted  Dr
    French's report and no issue was  taken  with  it  by  the  appellant's
    representative.  He considered the respondent's  evidence  was  generic
    and secondary.

8.   No information  had  been  given  as  to  why  or  on  what  basis  the
    appellant's results were said to be questionable other  than  suspected
    large scale deception at particular test centres.  He noted  there  was
    no evidential link between the appellant and any fraud or deception and
    none of the evidence provided by the respondent  contained  a  specific
    discussion of actual evidence relating to the appellant.  He considered
    that  the  fact  that  the  results  were  taken  to  fall   into   the
    "questionable" category did not mean that  the  results  could  not  be
    concluded as having been genuinely obtained.   He  concluded  that  the
    Home Office evidence against the appellant was not  conclusive  and  in
    itself failed to reach the required standard of being more likely  than
    not.

9.   The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    response.  That included a photograph of him taken on the  day  of  the
    test and the respondent accepted that this  was  a  photograph  of  him
    taken from the computer but the test was conducted on the  day  of  the
    examination.  The respondent's  case  was  that  an  imposter  standing
    beside him may have stood in for him.

10.  The judge considered  that  the  cross-examination  by  the  Presenting
    Officer  left  the  appellant  unscathed.   He  had  been  helpful  and
    cooperative and gave a detailed account of the day of  the  examination
    in question and detail, including details of his travel arrangements to
    and from the centre.  His  documents  included  evidence  of  long  and
    successful study in and of English.  There  was  therefore  no  obvious
    reason why he should  have  feared  taking  an  English  test  in  2013
    particularly bearing in mind that he had previously successfully  taken
    the test.  He had not been given a  further  opportunity  to  take  the
    test.  The judge considered that  his  taking  of  the  matter  to  his
    solicitor, rather than attempting to contact ETS was reasonable.

11.  Looking at the matter as a whole the judge  found  that  the  appellant
    had given a robust and cogent account of undertaking the test in person
    in 2013.  Beyond raising a case to  answer  the  respondent's  evidence
    fell  short  of  implicating  the  appellant  and  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the judge concluded that the appellant took the  test  in
    person and obtained scores without use  of  a  proxy  or  any  form  of
    deception.  There was therefore no reason to suspect that his  presence
    in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.  The  judge
    noted the respondent did not take  issue  with  the  remainder  of  the
    requirements applicable to the appellant under the Immigration Rules to
    allow him to remain in the United Kingdom under the family  life  as  a
    partner (ten year routes).  The judge concluded that the appellant  met
    the requirements under the Immigration Rules.

12.  He went on to consider whether the claim could  succeed  under  Article
    8.  He concluded that the appellant had an obvious private  and  family
    life with his wife, that it was also obvious that the  right  would  be
    interfered with should he be required to leave the country.  He went on
    to consider whether the interference was in accordance  with  the  law.
    He considered that in this case it  appeared  that  the  appellant  had
    complied with the Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  the  interference
    could not be said to be in pursuit of one of the  legitimate  aims  set
    out in Article 8(2) or proportionate to the pursuit of  the  legitimate
    aim.  The appeal was therefore allowed.

13.  In her grounds of appeal the respondent argued that the initial  burden
    on the Secretary of State had been met and the evidential  burden  fell
    upon the appellant to offer an innocent explanation  and  that  it  was
    clear from the judge's determination that he had not  appreciated  that
    the evidential burden was  met  and  had  he  properly  considered  the
    evidence he would have reached a different  conclusion.   It  was  also
    argued that the ETS  verification  system  was  adequately  robust  and
    rigorous and the Secretary of State had to rely on information provided
    to her by an applicant which had been certified  as  being  true  by  a
    third party, and if the certificate were withdrawn by the  third  party
    as in this case and the third party was no longer able to vouch for the
    validity of the information then  the  basis  of  the  leave  was  also
    removed.

14.  It was also  argued  that  the  only  avenue  of  appeal  open  to  the
    appellant was on the basis of  human  rights  and  the  judge  had  not
    carried out a proper assessment in accordance with the Razgar guidance.
     It was argued that there were no compelling circumstances  to  justify
    the consideration of  the  appellant's  case  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The point was made  that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the
    appellant from returning to Bangladesh with the  sponsor  in  order  to
    continue their family life there.

15.  Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    who accepted that there was an arguable challenge with  regard  to  the
    ETS issue.  There is no mention in his decision of the Article 8 point.



16.  In his submissions Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds and argued that  the
    judge had not apparently considered the relevant case law and had given
    either no or no adequate reasons on the Article 8 issue.

17.  In his submissions Mr Syed-Ali argued that although the judge  had  not
    referred to the case law on the ETS cases  what  he  had  said  in  his
    judgment was entirely in accordance with the principles set out in  the
    case law.  He had properly addressed the generic evidence.  As  regards
    Article 8, though the reasoning  was  not  exhaustive,  the  judge  was
    clearly aware of the law and had considered the  facts.   The  evidence
    had been considered and proper findings had been made.   There  was  no
    material error of law.

18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  As regards the ETS issue, I consider that the challenge is a matter  of
    disagreement only.  The judge did not go through the relevant case  law
    as might have been expected, but it is clear  from  his  decision,  for
    example at paragraphs 13 and 15, that he was aware  of  the  fact  that
    there was an  evidential  burden  on  the  respondent  which  had  been
    discharged, but he then went on to consider whether the  appellant  was
    then able to discharge the burden which switched to him  and  concluded
    that he had done so. His reasoning in this  regard  is  clearly  sound.
    Paragraphs 16, 17 and 19 of the decision in  particular  set  out  good
    reasons why the judge on the particular facts of  this  case  concluded
    that the burden on  the  appellant  had  been  discharged  despite  the
    initial discharging of the evidential burden on the respondent by means
    of the Collings and Millington witness statements.

20.  As regards the Article 8 issue, the judge's reasoning  in  this  regard
    is slender.  However the effect of his decision  is  clearly  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were in his view met and that had
    clear significance to the  lawfulness  of  the  interference  with  his
    family and private life rights and  also  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision.  Ideally no doubt his decision would  have  been  more  fully
    reasoned, but in the circumstances I consider that what he had  to  say
    was an adequate evaluation of the Article 8 issue in the circumstances.
     Accordingly I find no error of law in his decision, and  the  decision
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]


Signed                                  Date 1.2. 18


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

