
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On Friday 2 November 2018                     |On 22 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 TAYYAB [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.   No  application  was
made for anonymity. There is no reason in this case  to  make  an  anonymity
direction of the Appellant's name but I have anonymised  the  names  of  the
two children whose interests are affected by these proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. By a decision promulgated on 12 December 2017, I found an error  of
         law in the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Colyer promulgated
         on 23 February 2017 dismissing the Appellant's appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision dated 12 November 2015  refusing  his
         application for leave to remain  as  a  parent  and  based  on  his
         private life.   I  set  aside  Judge  Colyer's  decision  and  gave
         directions for the re-making of the  decision.   My  error  of  law
         decision is annexed hereto for ease of reference.

      2. By the time the appeal came before me next, on 24 July 2018, a  new
         matter had  arisen  namely  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  a
         further child, [I].  Since this was a new matter,  I  adjourned  to
         give the Respondent time to consider this and to  consider  whether
         consent should be given for me to take this matter into account.  I
         also indicated that a disclosure  order  would  be  sought  by  the
         Tribunal from the Family  Court  in  relation  to  the  proceedings
         involving [I] in order that I could take  the  evidence  from  that
         court into account.   My  adjournment  decision  promulgated  on  1
         August 2018 is also annexed for ease of reference.

      3. The Respondent indicated his consent to the Appellant  raising  the
         new matter of his parental relationship with [I] by letter dated  2
         August 2018.   Unfortunately,  due  to  an  oversight,  the  Family
         Court's consent to disclosure of documents was not  forthcoming  by
         the time of this hearing.  However, both parties agreed that it was
         possible to proceed with Mr [S] giving  oral  evidence  as  to  his
         current circumstances and without the need to  refer  to  documents
         arising from  or  information  in  relation  to  the  Family  Court
         proceedings.

    Evidence

      4. The Appellant's child [I] is  a  British  citizen,  now  aged  five
         years. Mr [S] confirmed that his child [I] lives with him  pursuant
         to a Family Court order.  That arrangement is supervised at present
         by Social Services who meet with him and [I]  every  three  months.
         The next meeting (for a new social worker to introduce herself)  is
         scheduled for the week following this hearing.

      5. [I] has contact with his mother, once per month.  That  contact  is
         for a period of two hours and occurs at a contact centre.  [I]  has
         two half-siblings (of whom the Appellant is not  the  father)  aged
         two years and nine/ten months respectively.  [I] has  contact  with
         those two siblings (who live with their uncle) also once per month.
          The Appellant arranges with their carer to meet between their home
         and his.  [I] attends school in Milton Keynes.

      6. The Appellant does not currently work but hopes to  do  so  if  his
         status is regularised.  He has worked in the past when he has  been
         able to do so.

      7. The background to the arrangements for the Appellant's contact with
         his other child, [H], is set out in sufficient detail in  my  error
         of law decision.  Mr [S] confirmed that he continues  contact  with
         [H] on a weekly basis but, by  agreement  with  [H]'s  mother,  the
         contact days have been changed and [H] now stays with the Appellant
         from Friday to Sunday evening.  Mr [S] confirmed that [H] and  [I],
         who are half-siblings, get on well together.  [H] had  already  met
         [I] before he went to live with the Appellant  and  while  [I]  was
         still in care.

    Submissions

      8. I received written submissions from the Respondent  shortly  before
         the hearing. In short summary,  the  Respondent  accepts  that  the
         Appellant is in a subsisting parental relationship  with  [I].   In
         relation to [H], the Respondent accepts the  fact  of  contact  but
         disputes that [H] is to be considered  to  be  a  British  citizen.
         The Respondent relies on the case of Oladeji  (s.3  (1)  BNA  1981)
         [2015] UKUT 00326 (IAC). The headnote reads as follows:

             "Whilst s.65 of the Immigration  Act  2014,  which  came  into
             force on 6 April 2015 inserts new provisions into the  British
             Nationality Act 1981 for persons born before 1 July 2006  that
             create a registration route for those who would currently have
             an entitlement to registration under the  British  Nationality
             Act 1981 but for the fact that their parents are not  married,
             those provisions (like the  pre-existing  policy  set  out  in
             Chapter 9 of the UK  Visas  and  Immigration  and  Nationality
             Instructions) are predicated on  there  being  an  application
             made under s.3(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981."

         Mr Melvin relied in particular on [29] of that decision which reads
         as follows:

             "[29]      But  this   policy   was   entitled   "Chapter   9:
             registration of minors at discretion -  Section  3(1)  British
             Nationality  Act  1981  "and  para  9.1.1.  made  clear   that
             operation of this section was  dependent  on  there  being  an
             application.  That reflected the statutory requirement set out
             in s.3(1) which provides that: "[i]f while a person is a minor
             an application is made  for  his  registration  as  a  British
             citizen, the Secretary of State may, if he thinks  fit,  cause
             him to be registered as such a citizen." (see also s.1(3)(b)).
              No application was made on behalf of D.A.  We  would  observe
             that a requirement for an application to be  made  by  persons
             seeking to acquire nationality by a voluntary act is  entirely
             consonant  with  international  law,   certainly   where   the
             applicant holds a citizenship already, as in that  context  it
             is not necessarily to be expected that they (or their  parents
             if they are minors) will choose to acquire another.  There may
             also [be] important issues regarding consent of the  parents."



      9. I asked Mr Melvin whether he had any comment on the legal  analysis
         as set out at [18] of my error of law decision which suggests  that
         [H] is in fact a British citizen by operation of law (in particular
         s1(1) British Nationality Act 1981).  That does not depend  on  any
         application for registration.  He said  it  was  his  understanding
         that it was for the parents to decide whether to apply to  register
         but he accepted that I may be right in my analysis and there may be
         an entitlement.  He also pointed out that [H]'s mother has not made
         an application for  permanent  residence  relying  on  her  EU  law
         rights.

     10. To some extent, the position in relation to  [H]  is  now  academic
         given the Respondent's acceptance of  the  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental  relationship  between  the  Appellant   and   [I].    The
         Respondent's written submissions  on  that  relationship  are  that
         "[it] is one in its infancy and  it  is  very  difficult  in  these
         circumstances to make a full best interests  assessment  but  given
         the accepted biological relationship and  the  conclusions  of  the
         family court it would appear that the appellant, should he make  an
         application and subject to what is said above,  may  succeed  under
         the Immigration Rules."

     11. Mr Raza accepted that the Appellant  cannot  meet  the  Immigration
         Rules ("the Rules") under Appendix FM save by application of  EX.1.
         Mr Melvin confirmed that the position in relation to  the  duration
         of leave to be granted would be  the  same  whether  the  Appellant
         succeeds by application of  EX.1  or  outside  the  Rules  applying
         section 117B (6)  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         ("section 117B").

     12. Mr Raza adopted the analysis of the legal position in  relation  to
         [H] as  set  out  at  [18]  of  my  error  of  law  decision.   The
         Appellant's ex-wife has been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK
         since  1996  and  is  therefore  entitled  to  permanent  residence
         (whether or not she has sought a document confirming that  status).



     13. The Appellant also has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
         [I] who is accepted to be a British citizen.  The best interests of
         both children are to remain in the UK living with/  having  contact
         with the Appellant.  It would not be reasonable  to  expect  either
         child to leave with him to return to Pakistan.

     14. Finally, both representatives confirmed that, in  their  view,  the
         outcome of this appeal is not affected by the very recent  judgment
         of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  and  others  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

    Legal Framework

    IMMIGRATION RULES: APPENDIX FM


         Section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         parent


         R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a parent are-

             (a) the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

             (b) the applicant must  have  made  a  valid  application  for
             limited or indefinite leave to remain as a parent or  partner;
             and either

             (c)

                  (i)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section
                  S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

                  (ii) the  applicant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of
                  Section ELTRPT: Eligibility  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
                  parent, or

             (d)

                  (i)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under  S-LTR:
                  Suitability leave to remain; and

                  (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                  LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and

                  (iii)      paragraph EX.1. applies.

         Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         parent


         E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent all
         of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be met.

         Relationship requirements


         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

             (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of  application,  or
             where the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant
             was first granted entry clearance or  leave  to  remain  as  a
             parent  under  this  Appendix,  must  not   have   formed   an
             independent family unit or be leading an independent life;

             (b) living in the UK; and

             (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

             (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7  years
             immediately preceding the date of  application  and  paragraph
             EX.1. applies.

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

             (a) the applicant must have sole parental  responsibility  for
             the child or the child normally lives with the  applicant  and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK), and the applicant must not be eligible to  apply  for
             leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix; or

             (b) the parent or carer with whom  the  child  normally  lives
             must be-

                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                  (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                  a person who has been in a relationship with the applicant
                  for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                  and

                  (iii)      the applicant must not be eligible to apply for
                  leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

             (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-

                  (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child,  or  that
                  the child normally lives with them; or

                  (ii) direct access (in person) to  the  child,  as  agreed
                  with the parent or carer  with  whom  the  child  normally
                  lives or as ordered by a court in the UK; and

             (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are  taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the  child's
             upbringing.

         Immigration status requirement


         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

             (a) as a visitor; or

             (b) with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less,
             unless that leave was granted pending the  outcome  of  family
             court or divorce proceedings;

         E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -

             (a) on immigration bail, unless:

                  (i)   the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that   the
                  applicant arrived in the UK more than 6  months  prior  to
                  the date of application; and

                  (ii) paragraph EX.1. applies; or

             (b)  in  breach  of  immigration  laws  (except  that,   where
             paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any  current  period  of
             overstaying  will  be  disregarded),  unless  paragraph  EX.1.
             applies.

         Financial requirements


         E-LTRPT.4.1. The applicant must provide evidence that they will  be
         able to adequately maintain  and  accommodate  themselves  and  any
         dependants in the UK  without  recourse  to  public  funds,  unless
         paragraph EX.1. applies.

         ...

         English language requirement


         E-LTRPT.5.1. If the applicant has not  met  the  requirement  in  a
         previous application for entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  a
         parent or partner, the applicant must  provide  specified  evidence
         that they-

             (a) are a national of  a  majority  English  speaking  country
             listed in paragraph GEN.1.6.;

             (b) have passed an  English  language  test  in  speaking  and
             listening at a minimum of level  A1  of  the  Common  European
             Framework of Reference for Languages with a provider  approved
             by the Secretary of State;

             (c)  have  an  academic  qualification  which  is   either   a
             Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD awarded by an educational
             establishment in the UK; or,  if  awarded  by  an  educational
             establishment outside the UK, is deemed by UK NARIC to meet or
             exceed the recognised standard of  a  Bachelor's  or  Master's
             degree or PhD in the UK, and UK NARIC has confirmed  that  the
             degree was taught or researched in English to level A1 of  the
             Common European Framework of Reference for Languages or above;
             or

             (d) are exempt from the  English  language  requirement  under
             paragraph E-LTRPT.5.2.; unless paragraph EX.1. applies.

         ...

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

             (a)

                  (i)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                      (aa)  is under the age of 18 years, or was under  the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                      (bb)  is in the UK;

                      (cc)  is a British Citizen or has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

                  (ii) taking into account their best interests as a primary
                  consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
                  child to leave the UK; or

             (b) ...

         GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application  for
         entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  or  remain  made  under  this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not  otherwise  meet  the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph  (2)
         apply.

         (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker  must
         consider,  on  the  basis  of  the  information  provided  by   the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which  would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or  remain,  a
         breach of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
         because  such  refusal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child  or
         another family member whose Article 8 rights  it  is  evident  from
         that information would be affected by  a  decision  to  refuse  the
         application.

         ...

         GEN.3.3.(1)   In considering an application for entry clearance  or
                leave  to  enter  or  remain  where  paragraph  GEN.3.1.  or
                GEN.3.2. applies, the decision-maker must take into account,
                as a  primary  consideration,  the  best  interests  of  any
                relevant child.

                (2)     In  paragraphs  GEN.3.1.  and  GEN.3.2.,  and   this
                paragraph, "relevant child" means a person who:

                    (a)      is under the age of 18 years at the date of the
                    application; and

                    (b)      it is evident from the information provided  by
                    the applicant would be affected by a decision to  refuse
                    the application.

         NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATIONAND ASYLUM ACT 2002: PART 5A


         Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations


             117A Application of this Part


             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B,

                  (b)  ...

             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) ...

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

    Discussion and conclusions

     15. In the absence of  any  reasoned  objection  to  the  analysis  put
         forward at [18] of my error of law decision  and  for  the  reasons
         there set out, I conclude that [H] is indeed entitled to be treated
         as a British citizen.   I  accept  the  documentary  evidence  (not
         rebutted by the Respondent) that the Appellant's ex-wife, [BA]  has
         been in the UK since she was about six months old (in  late  1996).
         She came here with her mother who is a Spanish national.  [BA]  was
         born in Germany.  Her mother's relationship with her  father  broke
         down shortly after they came to the UK and, although [BA] continued
         to have contact with her  father,  she  remained  living  with  her
         mother in the UK.

     16.  [BA]'s mother has been employed  since  coming  to  the  UK.   She
         became self-employed in April 2018.   The  Appellant  has  produced
         HMRC documents for [BA]'s mother beginning in 1986.  There is a gap
         between 1989 and 1998 but records resume in the tax year 1998/1999.
           There are records of continuing employment history for the period
         1999 to 2017.   The  Respondent  has  not  taken  issue  with  this
         evidence.

     17. Based on that evidence, I am satisfied that [BA] became entitled to
         permanent residence, from, at the latest, late 2004, as the  family
         member (daughter) of her mother who was exercising  Treaty  rights.
         It matters not when precisely she became so entitled  provided  she
         was entitled  to  claim  permanent  residence  (and  was  therefore
         settled) when [H] was born on 9 January 2014 as is undoubtedly  the
         case.  Neither is it of any  legal  relevance  that  [BA]  has  not
         applied for a permanent residence card.  Her rights arise under  EU
         law and a permanent residence card is only  a  document  reflecting
         the right which already exists.

     18. For those reasons, I am satisfied that [H] is to be  treated  as  a
         British citizen.  It is accepted that [I] is a British citizen.  It
         is accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with both children.

     19. I accept Mr Raza's submission that the Appellant is unable to  meet
         Appendix FM to the Rules as a result of his relationship  with  [I]
         and [H] unless paragraph EX.1 applies.  Although I accept that  the
         Appellant has not been in the UK unlawfully since he arrived, there
         is nothing to suggest that he provided the  requisite  evidence  of
         his ability to meet the financial requirements under the Rules  nor
         has he provided an English language certificate.  He  is  therefore
         unable to meet all the eligibility requirements.  I therefore  turn
         to consider whether EX.1 applies.

     20. Before doing so, it is necessary to consider the best interests  of
         the two children involved in this case, [H] and [I].   Their  bests
         interests are a primary consideration although they are capable  of
         being outweighed by other factors.

     21. I have limited information about the children save in  relation  to
         their living and contact  arrangements.   Those  arrangements  have
         however been made following orders of the Family Court  which  will
         have considered the children's best interests and  that  those  are
         served, in the case of [H] by living with  his  mother  and  having
         regular (weekly) staying contact with his father and, in  the  case
         of [I] by living with his father (the Appellant) and having regular
         contact with other family members,  namely  his  half-siblings  and
         (supervised) contact  with  his  biological  mother.   I  therefore
         assume that those arrangements are in the best interests  of  those
         children.

     22. I turn then to consider whether, in light of those best  interests,
         it would be reasonable for either or both children to leave the  UK
         if the Appellant were removed.  I can  reach  a  decision  on  that
         point with ease.  Both children have their other parent  living  in
         the UK.  In the case of [H], he lives with  his  mother  who  is  a
         Spanish national, settled by reason of her entitlement to permanent
         residence.  There is no suggestion that  she  would  or  should  be
         expected to leave the UK with the Appellant  and  [H]  if  he  were
         removed.  She is no longer in a relationship with the Appellant and
         has no reason to leave her life here. Furthermore, I  have  already
         found that [H] is entitled to be treated as a British citizen.   It
         would not be reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  UK  (see  for
         example what is said  at  [30]  to  [33]  of  the  judgment  in  ZH
         (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC
         4).  The Appellant had a very short-lived relationship  with  [I]'s
         biological mother who is now married to another man.  Prior to  [I]
         coming to live with the Appellant, he was in care as his mother was
         unable to look after him.  However, he continues  to  have  contact
         with his biological mother and his  half-siblings.   He  too  is  a
         British citizen and the observations made in ZH  apply  with  equal
         force.

     23. The Respondent's policy guidance on family and private life is  now
         set out in a  document  entitled  "Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
         Section 1.0b: Family Life (as a  Partner  or  Parent)  and  Private
         Life: 10 - Year Routes" and was revised  as  at  22  February  2018
         ("the Guidance").  In relation  to  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect a British child to leave the UK, the Guidance says this  (at
         page 76):

             "Where the child is a British citizen

             Where  the  child  is  a  British  citizen,  it  will  not  be
             reasonable to expect them to leave the UK with  the  applicant
             parent or primary carer facing  removal.   Accordingly,  where
             this means that the child  would  have  to  leave  to  the  UK
             because, in practice, the child will not, or is not likely  to
             continue to live in the UK  with  another  parent  or  primary
             carer, EX.1(a) is likely to apply.

             In particular circumstances, it may be appropriate  to  refuse
             to grant leave to  a  parent  or  primary  carer  where  their
             conduct gives rise to public interest considerations  of  such
             weight as to justify their removal, where the British  citizen
             child  could  remain  in  the  UK  with  another   parent   or
             alternative primary carer, who is a British citizen or settled
             in the UK or who has or is being granted leave to remain.  The
             circumstances envisaged include those in which to grant  leave
             could undermine our  immigration  controls,  for  example  the
             applicant has committed  significant  or  persistent  criminal
             offences falling below the thresholds for deportation set  out
             in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has a  very  poor
             immigration  history,  having  repeatedly   and   deliberately
             breached the Immigration Rules."

     24. In the recent case of SR (subsisting parental relationship -  s117B
         (6) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC), UTJ Plimmer concluded that an
         analysis whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK
         "does not necessarily require a consideration of whether the  child
         will in fact or practice leave the UK".  Although the Supreme Court
         in KO (Nigeria) suggested that this might be a relevant  factor  in
         the context in which the best interests issue is  being  considered
         ([19] of  the  judgment),  in  this  particular  case,  it  is  not
         necessary to consider how that might apply. There is no  suggestion
         at the present time that [I] could return to live with  his  mother
         if the Appellant were removed.  This  is  not  a  case  where  both
         parents will be removed if the appeal fails.  Only one parent would
         be removed, namely the Appellant.  That would have  the  effect  of
         breaking the Appellant's direct contact with [H] who  would  remain
         in the UK with his mother and either forcing [I]  back  into  local
         authority care (where he was  before  he  went  to  live  with  the
         Appellant) or obliging him to leave the UK with his father.  If  he
         were to leave with his  father,  that  would  have  the  effect  of
         breaking [I]'s  direct  contact  with  his  half-siblings  and  the
         contact, albeit infrequent  and  supervised,  with  his  biological
         mother.  Although he is of a young  age  and  might  well  be  able
         readily to adapt to life in a new  country,  I  am  firmly  of  the
         opinion that the best interests  of  the  children  are  to  remain
         living in the UK  with  the  same  living/contact  arrangements  as
         presently exist.

     25. The recent judgment in KO (Nigeria) suggests that this is  the  end
         of the assessment.  I should not go on to balance the detriment  to
         the children against any countervailing factors.  Even if that were
         not the approach, however, in this case I am unpersuaded that  such
         countervailing factors exist.  The Appellant's stay in the  UK  has
         been largely if not entirely lawful.  It appears (since  his  leave
         was curtailed to sixty days)  that  his  leave  as  a  student  was
         curtailed because of an issue relating to his sponsor and  not  his
         own fault.  It is not suggested he was not a genuine  student.   It
         is not suggested that his relationship with his Spanish ex-wife was
         not genuine whilst  it  subsisted.   He  remained  here  whilst  an
         application  on  that  basis   was   under   consideration.    That
         application was made in-time and whilst he still had  leave.  Prior
         to withdrawal of that application, he made  the  application  which
         led to the decision under appeal here.

     26. I conclude that it is not reasonable to expect [H] and [I] to leave
         the UK.  I therefore accept that EX.1 is met with  the  consequence
         that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  leave  to  remain  under  the
         Immigration Rules albeit on a ten-year route and  not  a  five-year
         route.

     27. The position would be the same outside the Rules.  Whilst, applying
         section 117B (4), the Appellant's private life may be deserving  of
         little weight (as his status has been precarious), his family  life
         with his children is not to be given less weight  because  of  that
         factor.

     28. The Appellant speaks English and whilst he is not currently working
         (due I think to his status), he has worked in the past and said  he
         would do so  again  in  the  future  if  his  appeal  succeeds.   I
         recognise that those are neutral factors.

     29. I have already concluded that the Appellant's residence in  the  UK
         has been largely if not entirely lawful.  Certainly, this is not  a
         case where there is any strong countervailing factor of maintaining
         effective immigration control.

     30. Section 117B (6) involves substantially the same considerations  as
         apply in relation to EX.1.  For the same reasons as I have  already
         given in that regard, I accept that it is not  reasonable  for  the
         two children involved in this appeal to leave the UK.   It  follows
         that the Appellant would not, as a result of section  117B  (6)  be
         required to leave.

     31. Balancing the factors  for  and  against  the  Appellant,  I  would
         therefore have reached the same conclusion outside the Rules  as  I
         have within  the  Rules.   Removal  of  the  Appellant  would  have
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  two  children  involved,
         particularly [I] who lives with his father.

     32. For the above reasons, I allow this appeal.

    DECISION

    The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


    Signed [pic] Dated: 15 November 2018
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith





                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 22 November 2017                 |12 December 2017             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                MR TAYYAB [S]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bukhari, Bukhari Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Colyer promulgated  on  23  February  2017  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated 12 November 2015 refusing his application for  leave
         to remain as a parent and based on his private life.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He entered the UK  on  16
         May 2009 with leave as a student.  His leave was extended  in  that
         category to 30 August 2014 but then curtailed on 3 March 2014 to  4
         May 2014 (presumably based on revocation of his sponsor's licence).
          On 1 May 2014, he applied for a residence permit as the spouse  of
         an EEA (Spanish) national.  However, the marriage broke down before
         the residence permit was granted and therefore that application was
         withdrawn on  6  August  2015.  Meanwhile,  on  21  July  2015  the
         Appellant made  the  application  which  led  to  the  Respondent's
         decision under appeal.

      3. The focus of the appeal  and  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal is the Appellant's position as parent of  his  son  who  was
         born to his EEA spouse on 9 January 2014.  That  child  is  Spanish
         due to his mother's nationality.

      4. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by the Decision on  the  basis
         that the child's best interests are  to  remain  with  his  Spanish
         mother and that the decision to refuse leave to the  Appellant  was
         not accordingly disproportionate (although the Judge accepted  that
         the Appellant has access to his child).

      5. The focus of the Appellant's grounds is the  Judge's  determination
         of the child's best interests.  It is said that the Judge  was  not
         entitled to find that the child's mother is the primary carer given
         the evidence that the couple share responsibility  for  the  child.
         It is argued that the Judge should accordingly have found that  the
         child's best interests are served by remaining with both parents.

      6. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  on  18
         September 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-

             "...

             2.  The appellant seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  this
             decision on the grounds that the judge made an arguable  error
             of [law] in findings made at paragraphs 60-63 in  relation  to
             the best interests of the child.

             3.  It is arguable that the best interest and  Section  55  of
             the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 needed to be
             considered in light of the order for access made by the  Judge
             of the Family Court on 9 October 2015 which the judge sets out
             at paragraphs 34 and 35.  The judge has made an arguable error
             of law failing to take this order into account in finding that
             the  family  life  with  the  child  could  be  continued   by
             electronic means (paragraph 51)"

      7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law and, if so,  to  re-make  the  decision  or
         remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

    Discussion and conclusions

      8. The terms of the Family Court's orders in  relation  to  the  child
         appear in full at [34] and [35] of the Decision and I do  not  need
         to repeat those.  In short summary, though, the Court  orders  that
         the child should live with the  mother  and  spend  time  with  the
         Appellant once per month from Saturday morning to Wednesday morning
         (before nursery) and for every other week from Monday after nursery
         to Wednesday before nursery.  The same  arrangements  apply  during
         school holidays.  A  further  order  prevents  the  Appellant  from
         removing the child from the UK and the  mother  from  removing  the
         child from the UK except for a holiday for up to 28 days.

      9. Since the focus of the grounds  and  the  grant  of  permission  is
         paragraphs [60] to [63] of the Decision, I set those paragraphs out
         in full:-

             "[60]     I accept the guidance that it is generally the  case
             that it is in a child's best interests to  remain  with  their
             parents unless special factors  apply.   In  this  appeal  the
             child is expected to  remain  with  the  mother  and  continue
             within that family unit in the UK.

             [61]      Section 55 does not override the Immigration  Rules.
             Public interest remains the starting point.

             [62]      I find that the child  no  longer  lives  with  both
             parents as the appellant and the  child's  mother  has  ceased
             their relationship with  each  other.   In  fact  the  child's
             mother is now in a  new  relationship.   Therefore  the  child
             cannot remain with both of  his  parents.   I  find  that  the
             child's mother takes the principal parental role in the  child
             care of the child and that the  appellant  plays  a  secondary
             role.

             [63]      The position, if the appellant returns to  Pakistan,
             is that the child will remain in the United Kingdom and  cared
             by the mother.  The child has been cared  for  by  its  mother
             since birth and it is clearly in his interests to continue  to
             be cared for by his mother.  He  will  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom where  he  may  benefit  from  education  and  welfare
             provision available to an EEA citizen and dependents.   It  is
             clearly in his best interests to remain here with his  mother.
             I find that the best interest of the child is to remain  under
             the care of his mother, the parent with whom he has lived  all
             his life."

     10. I can deal very shortly with Mr Bukhari's submission that the Judge
         was not entitled to find that the child's mother has the  principal
         role in relation to care and the Appellant only a  secondary  role.
         He submitted that this is wrong based on the  evidence  because  of
         the terms of the Family Court's order which provides for the  child
         to stay with the Appellant for three days each week and longer  for
         one week per month.  However,  it  is  abundantly  clear  from  the
         Family Court's order that the arrangements are  for  the  child  to
         live with his mother and for the Appellant to have access.  This is
         not a case of shared parental responsibility or  shared  residence.
         Furthermore, the Appellant's ex-partner's evidence as  recorded  at
         [7] of the Decision is that she  is  the  primary  carer.   It  was
         therefore open to the Judge to find as he did on the evidence.

     11. As Mr Wilding pointed out in his submissions, the Judge  took  into
         account the  evidence  of  the  Family  Court  orders  and  reached
         findings which were open to him on that evidence. He submitted that
         the Appellant's complaint is in reality that the  Judge  has  given
         insufficient weight to the Appellant's relationship with his child.
          He directed my attention to [32] to [39] of the Decision where the
         Judge carried out a detailed analysis of that relationship and  the
         weight to be given to it  in  the  Appellant's  favour  within  the
         Article 8 balance.

     12. I accept that there is no error of law in relation to the  findings
         on the evidence in terms of the  relationship  between  father  and
         child.  However, I am persuaded that there is an error  of  law  in
         relation to the child's best interests.  I can readily  accept  the
         Judge's finding that it is in the child's best  interests  to  live
         with his mother as that has been  the  position  since  his  birth.
         However, there is no consideration by the  Judge  as  to  what  the
         child's best interests require in relation to  continued  (face  to
         face) contact with his father which is the current position.

     13. The Family Court when reaching its views on the arrangements for  a
         child will very clearly consider the best interests of  the  child.
         That Court has concluded that those interests  are  served  by  the
         Appellant  having  continued  face  to  face  access  to  his   son
         (including overnight stays for part of each week).  The  Judge  has
         taken no account  of  that  continued  access  when  assessing  the
         child's best interests.  Of course, such assessment is not the  end
         of the matter in terms of the Appellant's claim as the  finding  of
         what the child's best interests require is a primary  but  not  the
         primary or  the  paramount  consideration.   However,  the  Judge's
         assessment includes no consideration  of  that  factor.   For  that
         reason, there is an error of law disclosed by the Decision.  Whilst
         not  determinative  of  the  Appellant's  appeal,  that  error   is
         sufficient to be material to  the  overall  conclusion.   For  that
         reason, I set aside the Decision.

     14. Both representatives accepted that, if I were to  find  a  material
         error of law in the Decision,  the  appeal  could  remain  in  this
         Tribunal and I could re-make the decision  on  the  papers  without
         further evidence.  However, I have reached the conclusion that I am
         unable to do so without further submissions from  the  parties  for
         the reasons I now set out.

     15.  Mr  Bukhari  made  the  point  in  his  submissions  that  if  the
         Appellant's child were a British citizen or had been in the UK  for
         seven years,  then  the  Appellant  would,  subject  to  any  other
         suitability or eligibility considerations, be entitled to remain as
         a parent under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.   The  problem
         in this case as Mr Bukhari submitted is that the child is a Spanish
         national.

     16. Following the conclusion of the hearing, though, and in the  course
         of reviewing the evidence in this case, it occurs to me  that  this
         may not reflect a wholly  correct  understanding  of  that  child's
         legal immigration and nationality status.

     17. I have regard to the evidence of the child's mother that,  although
         she remains a Spanish national and has never applied  for  or  been
         granted British nationality or permanent status, she has lived here
         from the age of six months, that is to say since about  1997.   She
         is now aged twenty-one years.  She has apparently  therefore  lived
         in the UK as the family member of qualified person(s) (and may also
         have been exercising Treaty rights in her own right) for  a  period
         in excess of five  years  and,  irrespective  of  any  grant  of  a
         permanent residence card, may therefore be a person who is entitled
         to that status.

     18. I have regard also to the position under  the  British  Nationality
         Act 1981 and the EEA Regulations read together.   Section  1(1)  of
         the 1981 Act provides that a person born  in  the  UK  shall  be  a
         British citizen if at the time of the birth his mother  is  settled
         in the UK.  Paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations  2006  (now  paragraph  2(1)  of  Schedule  3  to   the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016) provides that for the  purposes
         of the British Nationality Act 1981, a person who has  a  permanent
         right of residence for the  purposes  of  regulation  15  shall  be
         regarded as a person who is in the UK without being  subject  under
         the immigration laws to any restriction on the period for which  he
         may remain which  is  itself  encompassed  within  the  meaning  of
         "settled"  as  defined  by  section  50  of  the  1981  Act.  Those
         provisions suggest that a child will  be  automatically  a  British
         citizen if their parent has been in the  UK  exercising  EC  Treaty
         rights under the EEA Regulations 2006/2016 for more than five years
         and is therefore  entitled  under  EU  law  to  permanent  resident
         status.   Without  deciding  this  issue,  it  appears   that   the
         Appellant's ex-partner may have been residing  in  accordance  with
         the EEA Regulations for a period of five years (at least)  and  may
         be entitled to permanent residence within regulation 15.

     19. It would of course be wholly  inappropriate  for  me  to  make  any
         findings about that position without hearing from the  parties.   I
         may have misunderstood the factual  position  in  relation  to  the
         child's mother or I  may  have  misunderstood  the  effect  of  the
         legislation as  applicable  to  this  case.  However,  since  these
         matters are capable of impacting on the Appellant's entitlement  to
         succeed based on his  relationship  with  his  child  (particularly
         under the Immigration Rules), I have  given  directions  below  for
         written submissions to  be  made  on  this  point.   I  have  given
         sequential directions because it is necessary first  to  check  the
         factual position in relation  to  the  child's  mother  before  the
         Respondent  is  asked  to  consider  the  child's  status  and  the
         potential impact of the legislation in this case.   If either party
         seeks a hearing in order for further evidence to  be  given  and/or
         tested on this issue and/or to  make  submissions  orally,  I  have
         provided for notice to be given to the Tribunal.



    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer promulgated on 23 February
    2017 is set aside. I make the following directions for the re-making of
    the Decision:-

      1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Appellant must file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent
         written submissions and any further evidence dealing with the point
         raised at [17] to [18] of my decision.

      2. Within 28 days from the service of written submissions and evidence
         on the Respondent, she must file with the Tribunal and serve on the
         Appellant her written submissions in response.

      3. If either party requires an oral hearing to give/test the  evidence
         on the issue raised and/or to make  oral  submissions,  that  party
         must give notice to the Tribunal (copied to the other party) and  a
         hearing will then be arranged.

      4. If no notice is given by either party, the decision will be re-made
         on the papers on the first available date following the exchange of
         submissions provided for at [1] and [2] above.


    Signed [pic] Dated:   6 December 2017
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                         ANNEX: ADJOURNMENT DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2018                               |1 August 2018                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                MR TAYYAB [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This appeal comes before me  for  the  re-making  of  the  decision
         following my error of law decision promulgated on 12 December 2017.
          In that decision, I  also  gave  directions  for  the  filing  and
         service of additional evidence and for  written  submissions.   The
         background to this appeal is set out in that decision and I do  not
         need to repeat it.

      2. By an e-mail dated 17 April 2018,  the  Appellant  filed  with  the
         Tribunal additional evidence intended to show that the  Appellant's
         child's grandmother has been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK
         since 1999 and has therefore obtained permanent residence.   It  is
         therefore submitted by the Appellant that the child's  mother,  the
         Appellant's ex-partner, who came here as a  minor  child  with  her
         mother has permanent residence  obtained  as  her  mother's  family
         member during that period.

      3. Unfortunately, Ms Willocks-Briscoe indicated  that  the  Respondent
         had not received the e-mail and attachments until it was re-sent on
         21 July 2018.  Accordingly, the Respondent was not in a position to
         make any decision about  what  that  evidence  showed  or  to  seek
         further information. Nor has  it  been  possible  to  make  written
         submissions.

      4. As Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed out, there is  no  evidence  linking
         the child's grandmother  with  the  child's  mother,  such  as  the
         child's mother's birth certificate.  Mr Raza accepted that this was
         so and indicated that the  Appellant  had  received  from  his  ex-
         partner a document setting out the arrangements reached between his
         ex-partner's  parents  as  to  her  residence  but,  although   the
         Appellant's ex-partner can provide her birth certificate, she could
         not do so in order for the hearing to go ahead as envisaged today.

      5. There is an additional matter which  has  led  to  my  decision  to
         adjourn this hearing again and that is the fact that the  Appellant
         has discovered that he has another minor child living in the UK who
         is a British citizen.  I was informed that he has  been  granted  a
         residence order in relation to this child, [I].

      6. There are two difficulties standing in the way of dealing with that
         issue at a hearing  immediately.   First,  as  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
         pointed out, and Mr Raza accepted, this is a new matter  which  was
         not before the Respondent or the  First-tier  Tribunal  previously.
         As such, the Respondent has to  consent  to  it.   Although,  as  I
         observed at the hearing, the basis of the  claim  is  the  same  as
         previously, in other words, the Appellant  seeks  to  remain  as  a
         parent, it is different in the sense that the child in question  is
         a British Citizen whereas the child relied on to this point is,  on
         the face of it, a Spanish national unless and until  such  time  as
         his British citizenship can be established (see [18] of my previous
         decision).

      7. Second, the evidence as to the residence order is  something  which
         can be obtained only from the Family Court with its permission.   I
         was provided with the details of the case number and  Court  and  a
         request will be made by the Tribunal for relevant documents  to  be
         obtained from that Court so that those can be  disclosed  in  these
         proceedings.

      8. For those reasons, and with the agreement of the parties, I decided
         that it was in the interests of justice to adjourn  so  that,  with
         the  consent  of  the  Respondent,  all  matters  relevant  to  the
         Appellant's Article 8 rights as a parent can be  canvassed  at  the
         one hearing.  The adjournment will also provide the Appellant  with
         the opportunity to plug the evidential gaps which exist in relation
         to the status of his other child.

      9. I gave directions at the hearing which are set out below.   I  have
         not ordered disclosure of the Family Court documents as that  is  a
         matter for the Family Court to permit.  Those will be disclosed  if
         and when the Family Court gives its permission for such  disclosure
         following the request made to it by this  Tribunal  (in  accordance
         with the protocol which exists).

    DIRECTIONS

      1. By Tuesday 7 August 2018, the Respondent shall indicate in  writing
         to the  Tribunal  and  to  the  Appellant's  solicitor  whether  he
         consents to the Appellant raising and pursuing within this appeal a
         new matter, namely his contact with his other child, [IM].

      2. By Tuesday 21 August  2018,  the  Appellant  shall  file  with  the
         Tribunal and serve on the Respondent further evidence dealing  with
         (inter alia) the following issues:

               i.  The  relationship  between   his   ex-partner   and   the
                  Appellant's child's grandmother, said to be Ms [MA];

              ii. The Appellant's ex-partner's own residence in the UK;

             iii. Any absences of his ex-partner from the UK.

         By the same date, the Appellant is to provide  written  submissions
         setting out his case about what the evidence shows.

      3. By Tuesday 18 September 2018, the Respondent is to  file  with  the
         Tribunal and serve on the Appellant his submissions in reply.

      4. The resumed hearing will be relisted on the  first  available  date
         after 1 October 2018 with a time estimate of  day.


    Signed [pic] Dated: 24 July 2018
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
