
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11749/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34 Without a hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|26th June 2020                           |On 09 July 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 KHURRAM [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

      1. FtT Judge Young-Harry dismissed Mr [S]'s appeal against the refusal
         of his human rights  claim  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 16th October 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
         by FtT judge E M Simpson on 18th February 2020. Directions for  the
         further conduct of the appeal were sent and, in  the  circumstances
         surrounding COVID 19,  provision  was  made  for  the  question  of
         whether there was an error of law and if so whether the decision of
         the FtT Judge should be set aside to be determined on the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions; neither party sought  an
         oral hearing.

      3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and  the  respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me   are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

      4. The appellant was initially granted entry clearance as  a  business
         visitor and within a month married his sponsor.  They  have  a  six
         month old baby. The sponsor is not settled in the UK and  the  baby
         is not a 'qualifying' child.  The appellant  made  a  human  rights
         claim to remain in the UK as the partner of a  person  present  and
         settled in the UK. The FtT judge found that  the  sponsor  was  not
         settled - she had discretionary leave to remain until 2021; this is
         not the subject of appeal. The judge also found that there were  no
         very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  on  return   to
         Pakistan; that the sponsor, although the registered  carer  of  her
         mother had become a carer after her sister  had  another  baby  but
         that he had no doubt that arrangements could be made for  alternate
         care. He noted that on the documentary evidence they did  not  live
         at the same address.  The judge found that the sponsor could return
         to Pakistan with the appellant or could remain in the UK  and  they
         could   maintain   their   relationship   by   'modern   means   of
         communication'.

         Error of law

      5. The appellant takes issue with the lack of a Rule  24  response  by
         the respondent, submitting that means the respondent  has  accepted
         there is an error of law. That is simply incorrect.

      6. The grounds take issue with the claimed lack of  reference  to  the
         best interests of the baby. It is correct that the judge  does  not
         make specific reference to the best interests of the baby but given
         the baby was 6 months old it is trite that the best interest of the
         child would be with both parents and if he  were  removed  and  the
         sponsor didn't leave, then to remain with the sponsor. This  hardly
         needs saying. The failure to undertake a formulaic  best  interests
         assessment is not a material error of law.

      7. The judge considered all the relevant factors, set out clearly  and
         concisely those weighing in favour of the appellant and that it was
         open to the sponsor to go to Pakistan, the country of which she and
         the baby are also citizens. The appellant's  submissions  refer  to
         the sponsor being her mother's carer but the  evidence  before  the
         FtT judge did not provide detail of why the sponsor was required to
         remain or why alternative arrangements could not be made.  Although
         the appellant may disagree with the finding made,  the  judge  gave
         adequate reasons for his conclusion that it was open to the sponsor
         to stay or to go and that alternate arrangements could be made.  As
         a person with discretionary leave to remain it is open to her to go
         or stay. The judge set out the material facts, adopted the  balance
         sheet approach and reached findings that were plainly open to him.

      8. The grounds relied upon refer to the FtT judge failing  to  take  a
         decision 'in the real world'. It is unclear what is meant by  this.
         The 'real world' is that the appellant  met  his  sponsor  11  days
         after arriving in the UK, they were married within a month, he  ran
         a successful business in Pakistan, she was a carer for her  mother,
         they have a baby, there were no obstacles  to  the  couple  or  him
         returning to his country of citizenship either with or without  his
         sponsor and child who are nationals of Pakistan and not settled  in
         the UK.  The  judge  considered  the  sponsor's  circumstances  and
         reached conclusions that were open to him on the evidence.

      9. The grounds are a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

     10. There is no error of law such that the decision is set aside.




         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point  of  law  such  that  the
         decision is to be set aside.

         I do not set aside the decision.


Jane Coker

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 26 June 2020
