
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11101/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 27 March 2019                    |On: 10 April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR TA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Janjua of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department and the respondent is a  citizen  of  and  Pakistan
    born on August 1989.  However, for the sake  of  convenience,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary
    of the State as the "respondent", which are the designations  they  had
    in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of  the  respondent  dated  12  September  2017  refusing  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain pursuant to Appendix FM as a
    partner of a British national. The appellant has two children  born  on
    11 February 2015 and 9 January 2017.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on the 7 June 2018 stating that it is arguable that the Judge  was  not
    properly entitled, in law,  to  allow  this  appeal-especially  if  the
    relevant factors set out in Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 are properly factored in.

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 5. The first-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's appeal and stated
    that despite the lack of documentary  evidence,  he  accepts  that  the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  is  genuine  and
    subsisting. They have two children together and they were consistent in
    their accounts as to how they travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    this, together with the documentary evidence provided established their
    genuine relationship. The respondent's concern is that the  appellant's
    wife is claiming 25% single person's allowance that she receives  which
    means that they are not living together. However, they are in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship.

 6. Although the appellant is living in the United Kingdom in breach of the
    immigration laws, EX1 may be applied to him. The children are three and
    one years of age and  are  fully  focused  on  their  parents  who  are
    responsible for their physical, emotional, social  and  economic  well-
    being. It is in the best interests of the children to remain with their
    parents and live with them even though they are British nationals which
    is not considered to be a trump card. The children  have  relatives  in
    Pakistan. The appellant can  work  in  Pakistan  provide  and  for  his
    family.

 7. They lived in Attock in Pakistan and the appellant claims  that  it  is
    not safe to take the children there. However, the appellant's wife  did
    return there after the birth of her first child  and  took  that  child
    with her. She also returned there to marry the appellant. The Judge did
    not find credible the appellant's wife's evidence that she travelled at
    night and returned before sunrise. The Judge found  that  although  the
    appellant that his wife come from Attock, there is nothing  to  prevent
    them from relocating to another part of Pakistan such as Rawalpindi.

 8. The Judge stated that the children are qualifying children as they  are
    British citizens  because  their  mother  is  a  British  citizen.  The
    appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  them.  The
    question that remains is, the Judge stated,  is  whether  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the qualifying children to return to Pakistan with the
    appellant. The Judge noted that the appellant has never  had  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. He further noted that the appellant chose
    to circumvent the requirements of the immigration rules by  entry  into
    the United Kingdom via Ireland. He also stated that the  appellant  has
    not established that his wife ever worked in Ireland.

 9.  However,  the  Judge  found  that  appellant's   immigration   history
    demonstrates that he has only breached immigration laws,  at  most,  on
    two occasions. The first was  his  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  via
    Ireland and then by choosing to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    leave. These  two  occasions  cannot  reasonably  be  characterised  as
    reaching  the  immigration  rules  "repeatedly"  as  claimed   by   the
    respondent. Therefore, his conduct is not  sufficiently  weighty,  when
    assessed  with  the  respondent's  own  policy,  to  find  that  it  is
    reasonable to expect the appellant's children to go  to  Pakistan  with
    him.  The  appellant  is  therefore  entitled  to  succeed  under   the
    provisions of EX 1 (a).

10. The Judge having said that the appellant succeeds under the  provisions
    of EX 1 nevertheless went on to consider proportionality under  Article
    8 and respect of section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. He then allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

11. The respondent's grounds of appeal state that the Judge failed to  give
    adequate reasons for allowing the appeal.  In  considering  the  public
    interest, and the reasonableness of the children's returned to Pakistan
    the Judge ignored that the relationship  had  no  documentary  evidence
    such as council tax bills and the appellant's sponsor's  single  person
    allowance is at odds with the  Judges  findings  that  they  are  in  a
    subsisting relationship. The Judge finds that there  would  be  nothing
    stopping the appellant and his family relocating  to  another  part  of
    Pakistan.

12. The second  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  Judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in law. The Judge failed to give adequate consideration to
    117B of the 2002 Act. The Judge found that the appellant had never  had
    any  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  tried  to   circumvent   the
    requirements of the immigration rules. The Judge did not carry out  the
    balancing exercise appropriately. He said that being  British  citizens
    cannot be a trump card and the fact that one of the  children  returned
    with their mother to Pakistan shows that there is  family  support  for
    the family in Pakistan. The Judge has not articulated why  in  all  the
    circumstances it would be not reasonable for the family to relocate  to
    Pakistan.

13. I find that the decision of the first-tier Tribunal Judge is  not  safe
    and has a material error of  law.  The  Judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons in light of his own findings for  why  the  appellant  and  his
    family cannot return to Pakistan. The Judge also did  not  resolve  the
    discrepancy in the evidence that the appellant's  wife  is  claiming  a
    single supplement and therefore his finding that there are in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship is materially flawed. I find  that  anxious
    scrutiny has to be applied in light  of  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal.

14. I therefore remit the appeal to First-tier  Tribunal  for  findings  of
    fact to be made. I direct that the appeal be listed  before  any  Judge
    other than Judge Robertson for a hearing de novo.

DECISION

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Dated this 7th day of April 2019
