
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11958/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     BK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          In person
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lingam, promulgated on 8 January 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 13 March 2019.

Anonymity

 2. A direction is set out  below  owing  to  the  fact  that  this  appeal
    concerns a vulnerable minor.

Background

 3. The appellant, who has had no  leave  to  remain  since  January  2005,
    applied for further leave to remain as a partner and the  parent  of  a
    daughter  from  a  previous  relationship  on  29  March   2017.   That
    application was refused owing to his inability to meet the requirements
    of the Rules on suitability grounds owing to  his  previous  use  of  a
    false identity and on eligibility grounds because he was in the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration law.  It was not accepted that he  had
    demonstrated his parental relationship with his daughter,  C  nor  that
    there were any insurmountable obstacles to family life with his partner
    continuing elsewhere.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  judge  found
    that although the application did not  fall  foul  of  the  suitability
    requirements  and  that  discretion  ought  to  have   been   exercised
    differently, the appellant's partner could support an  application  for
    entry clearance and that the temporary separation would not  lead  them
    to  suffer  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life.    The   judge
    considered the appellant's relationship with C outside  the  Rules  but
    concluded that the appellant's temporary separation from  his  daughter
    (whom he had not seen since June 2018) would  not  amount  to  a  human
    rights breach.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration the impact of removing the  appellant  while  proceedings
    were ongoing in the Family Court  for  him  to  have  contact  with  C.
    Furthermore, it was said that a decision was imminent and  if  positive
    it would ultimately entitle the appellant to leave  to  remain  as  the
    parent of a British child.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 7. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 17  April  2019,  stated
    that the appeal was not opposed and that the Tribunal  was  invited  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing limited  to  exceptional
    circumstances in relation to  the  family  proceedings  and  associated
    issues.

The hearing

 8. Prior to the hearing, the appellant submitted  a  bundle  of  documents
    which included a Child Arrangement Order from the Family Court at  East
    London dated 9 April 2019 and reference to further hearings on  4  June
    2019 and 12 July 2019.




 9. Mr Tarlow sought instructions from the Secretary of State  with  regard
    to whether a short period of leave would be granted. He was  instructed
    that the Secretary of State was not  prepared  to  do  so  of  his  own
    volition, but Mr Tarlow was asked to request that I either adjourn  the
    hearing or direct that the respondent  grants  the  appellant  a  short
    period of leave.

10. The appellant complained of his strained financial circumstances in the
    context of pursuing contact with his child. I  noted  that  the  Family
    Court ordered him to pay for the contact centre.

11. I declined to  adjourn  the  appeal  as  this  would  not  address  the
    appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom  which  flow  from  his
    unlawful status. At the end of the hearing, I found that  the  previous
    judge made a material error of law, set aside her direction  dismissing
    the appeal and remade the matter, allowing the appeal,  to  the  extent
    that  Secretary  of  State  grant  the  appellant  a  short  period  of
    Discretionary Leave to enable him  to  continue  participating  in  the
    Family Court proceedings.

Decision on error of law

12. At (41) of the appellant's witness statement dated 5 December  2018  he
    referred to the First Hearing Dispute Resolution appointment listed for
    3 January 2019 in relation to his application for a  Child  Arrangement
    Order. A copy of the hearing notice was  enclosed  in  the  appellant's
    bundle along with other correspondence between the  appellant  and  the
    Family Court. All this material was before the judge.

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider whether the appellant ought to
    have been granted leave to remain for a short period to enable  him  to
    participate in  the  Family  Court  proceedings.  At  [88],  the  judge
    concludes that the appellant can continue his challenge to seek  access
    to his daughter from overseas. There was no consideration as to whether
    this would amount to an Article 8 breach. This is a clear  error  given
    the conclusions in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ  133  regarding  an
    analogous case at [70];

    "In our judgment the AIT did not decide the  hypothetical  question  it
    was incumbent upon it to decide, namely whether the appellant's Article
    8 rights would be violated by a removal when the  case  was  before  it
    i.e. when the contact application was outstanding."

14. Given that omission,  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appellant's  Article  8  appeal.  The  findings
    relating to his family life with his present partner  and  his  private
    life are preserved as they were  not  subject  to  any  challenge.  The
    findings relating to his family life with his child are set aside.

15. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's Article 8 appeal  for
    the following reasons. The appellant was having  regular  contact  with
    his child, now aged 6, until his former partner terminated  it  in  the
    months leading up to his hearing before the Fist-tier Tribunal. He  has
    been granted interim supervised contact with his child.

16. According to the child protection plan, there are issues  of  emotional
    and physical abuse  emanating  from  the  child's  mother  as  well  as
    allegations regarding the  appellant's  behaviour  and  motivation  for
    bringing the proceedings.

17. In his most recent witness statement, the appellant states that  he  is
    fearful that his child will be taken into care and if this is occurred,
    he and his wife would wish to apply to have his child live with them.

18. Given the complex issues involved and that the appellant's contact with
    his daughter is in the process of being assessed, it is obvious that he
    could not take an effective  part  in  these  proceedings  if  he  were
    removed to Uganda. Given the allegations made by  his  former  partner,
    the appellant cannot succeed  in  gaining  contact  with  his  daughter
    without a favourable assessment. Clearly, this cannot happen if  he  is
    not in the United Kingdom.  Therefore,  the  respondent's  decision  to
    remove the appellant when those proceedings are  yet  to  be  concluded
    would amount to a disproportionate interference  with  the  appellant's
    right to a family life with his child.

19. The appeal is therefore allowed pursuant to  Article  8  ECHR,  to  the
    limited extent that the Secretary of State is to grant the appellant an
    appropriate period of Discretionary Leave  which  will  enable  him  to
    pursue the Family Court proceedings to their conclusion.

Summary of decision


    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 01 May 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the following reason. At the time  of  the  respondent's  decision,  the
Family Court proceedings had not commenced.



Signed                                  Date: 01 May 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

