
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11969/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 3 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     GM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Litchfield, counsel instructed by Dotcom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blundell, promulgated on 2 May 2019. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by PJM Hollingworth on 13 June 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No such direction was made previously, however a direction is now  made
    owing to the sensitive  medical  detail  relating  to  the  appellant's
    child.

Background

 3. The appellant applied for asylum on 25 February 2015.  That  claim  was
    refused and her appeals against  that  decision  were  exhausted  by  9
    January 2017. The appellant's son, E, was born  in  June  2015.  On  28
    April 2017, the appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until 30 September 2017 because E required important medical treatment.
    The appellant applied for further leave to remain on 29 September 2017.
    It is the refusal of that application, by way of a  decision  dated  27
    April 2018, which is the subject of this appeal.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter   explained   that   the
    circumstances which resulted in a grant of leave  no  longer  prevailed
    because  the  child's  condition  had  been  stabilised  and  follow-up
    treatment  was  available  in  Albania.  It  was  considered  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave  to  remain  on  any  other  basis.
    Considering Article 3,  the  respondent  considered  that  E's  medical
    problems posed no immediate danger to his health  and  his  needs  were
    generally  maintained  by   the   appellant   in   between   specialist
    appointments. It was said that no exceptional  circumstances  had  been
    raised and the respondent was not prepared to exercise  his  discretion
    in the appellant's favour.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge  refused  to
    adjourn the appeal to enable the Presenting Officer to submit  the  Med
    COI document relied upon by the respondent in the decision letter.  The
    respondent submitted that relevant treatment was available for E  in  a
    private hospital in Tirana, whereas the appellant submitted that  there
    would need to have been  proper  assurances  about  the  transition  of
    treatment from Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) to another  hospital
    in  Albania.  In  addition,  E  suffered  from  social   and   learning
    difficulties.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  E  suffered  from  significantly
    impaired kidney function, urological problems, was due to have  further
    surgery, was prescribed a raft of medication and his health  was  under
    regular review by the renal and urological teams  at  GOSH.  While  the
    judge refused to attach any weight to assertions made about the Med COI
    document in the decision letter, he did not accept that  the  state  of
    E's health met the threshold for an Article 3 breach. Regarding Article
    8, the judge rejected the submission that the appellant  could  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules; he did not accept that  E's  best
    interests were to remain in the United Kingdom with his mother or  that
    the appellant had something  akin  to  a  legitimate  expectation  that
    further leave would be granted. The Tribunal examined the  respondent's
    Asylum Policy Instruction: Discretionary Leave version 7.0 August  2015
    and concluded that it did not state  that  DL  should  continue  to  be
    granted if the circumstances which prompted the first decision remained
    the same.

 7. The judge found the public interest in the removal of the appellant and
    E outweighed their private lives.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds contended that the submission at the hearing  was  that  if
    the circumstances which resulted in the previous grant of DL continued,
    the appellant would be entitled to a further grant. It was argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider that E's recent admission to
    hospital and a letter from GOSH dated 19 March 2019  provided  evidence
    that E's condition had not stabilised, further procedures were planned,
    and  that  the  further  treatment  and  long-term  prognosis  remained
    unclear. Therefore, it was said,  that  the  appellant's  circumstances
    were unchanged, she and E were entitled to a further grant  of  DL  and
    this was determinative of the human rights appeal.  It  was  also  said
    that the judge erred in his assessment that the  medical  evidence  did
    not amount to exceptional circumstances or raise a prima facie case  of
    infringement of Article 3 because, E was a  child.  It  was  said  that
    there had been recent complications,  concerns  over  a  raised  plasma
    creatinine count, E's appointment was being brought forward  and  there
    was a need for a further review under anaesthetic so that  all  options
    could be considered.  Furthermore,  it  was  argued  that  the  judge's
    consideration of E's best interests was  flawed  as  it  was  based  on
    speculation and it failed to take account of the evidence in the letter
    dated 19 March 2019. Lastly, the judge failed in his  consideration  of
    proportionality because if the appellants were  entitled  to  DL  there
    would be no public interest in their removal.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

10. The respondent did not submit a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

11. Ms Litchfield relied on the grounds. In  brief,  she  argued  that  the
    judge did not place due weight on the medical evidence showing that E's
    condition was still being reviewed, his health had not  stabilised  and
    that further procedures were planned. Furthermore, she  contended  that
    E's best interests were  not  adequately  considered  in  circumstances
    where there was an absence of  evidence  to  show  that  treatment  was
    available in Albania. There was also no finding as to whether it was in
    E's best interests to remain in the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  his
    treatment until his condition stabilised. Ms Litchfield also relied  on
    the transfer of treatment  point  and  the  evidence  that  E's  school
    provided him with medical assistance, neither of  which  had  not  been
    considered by the judge.

12. Ms Isherwood argued that it had never been argued  that  E's  prognosis
    had not been clarified, the medical evidence was that he was  receiving
    treatment. She argued that the respondent's policy on DL had  not  been
    provided to the Upper Tribunal and that this was the  position  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Ms Isherwood contended that E's  multiple  medical
    conditions were identified and dealt with by the  judge.  In  addition,
    the judge had considered the evidence from the school at [20].

13. Ms Isherwood was about to discuss  Article  3,  however  Ms  Litchfield
    indicated that this was not being pursued.  With  regard  to  E's  best
    interests, Ms Isherwood read  from  paragraph  27  of  the  appellant's
    statement where she had referred to  treatment  being  unaffordable  in
    Albania rather than unavailable. She argued that  the  evidence  before
    the judge, from Professor Buba, fell short of establishing that E could
    not  receive  treatment  in  Albania  as  a  whole.  Furthermore,   the
    appellant's asylum claim had failed, and she would have support if  she
    were to return to Albania.

14. Ms Isherwood  referred  to  [31]  of  the  decision,  where  the  judge
    expressed that he did not understand the DL argument. She  argued  that
    the judge was correct to say that there was no  legitimate  expectation
    to a further grant of DL when the next review was in 6 months' time.

15. In reply, Ms Litchfield argued that there was ample evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal to show that the prognosis  was  unclear  and  that
    there had been a number of medical problems which  had  come  to  light
    since DL was granted.

16. At the end of the hearing, I informed the parties that I was  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law in  that  the
    medical evidence was not fully considered and the judge's consideration
    of the child's best interests was similarly incomplete.   I  set  aside
    the Judge's findings in relation to Article 8 and  Discretionary  Leave
    and give my reasons below.

Decision on error of law

17. The copy of the respondent's Discretionary Leave policy  relied  on  by
    the appellant is dated 18 August 2015. The appellant and E were granted
    DL on 28 April 2017 and therefore there has been no  change  of  policy
    between that grant and the application for a further  grant  of  leave.
    The  judge  accepted  the  respondent's  contention  that  E's  medical
    condition had stabilised and that he  was  mainly  being  monitored  by
    specialists.  These  findings  do  not  adequately  engage   with   the
    documentary evidence which postdates the grant of DL  which  repeatedly
    show that the prognosis remained unclear, that E  had  complex  medical
    problems requiring specialist care and that a number of medical  issues
    had since arisen. There is no indication in the medical evidence  of  a
    positive change in E's condition since DL was granted. The judge  ought
    to have assessed whether a further grant ought to have been made on the
    same basis as before, on  the  evidence  before  him,  given  that  the
    respondent  produced  no  evidence  of  treatment  being  available  in
    Albania. If the appellant remained entitled to DL owing to E's  medical
    condition, that would be determinative of the Article 8 claim.

18. The judge's conclusion that it was in E's best interests  to  accompany
    the appellant to Albania was similarly flawed given that there  was  no
    evidence before him showing that medical  treatment  was  available  in
    Albania as well as the evidence of  the  ongoing  treatment  which  was
    required. The judge's best interest consideration does not  assess  the
    evidence from E's  pre-school  regarding  the  impact  of  his  medical
    problems on his care. It is particularly notable that  the  staff  have
    undergone  training  in  changing  his  catheter  and  monitoring   his
    temperature. E also has speech and language impairments. The judge  did
    not include consideration of the  need  for  E  to  change  schools  if
    removed to Albania.

19. Most importantly, the most recent letter from GOSH dated 19 March  2019
    from Dr Peter Cuckow, Urology Fellow, describes  the  setbacks  in  E's
    care following recent  surgery  and  speaks  of  plans  to  perform  an
    examination of E's "perineal urethrostomy and the bladder  neck"  under
    anaesthetic  and  restarting  intermittent  catheterisation.  The  GOSH
    letter demonstrates that E's health has not stabilised and that further
    procedures are required, as follows;

         "This young man has dysplastic kidneys and a  duplex  on  the  left
         hand side and clearly these are not functioning well,  the  bladder
         is quite abnormal and  it  may  be  hostile  to  the  ongoing  good
         function of his  kidneys,  which  in  any  event  is  significantly
         impaired. We will have to keep a close eye on things  and  consider
         intervention if things to not stabilise or if there are any further
         infected episodes."

20. I endorse Ms  Litchfield's  point  that  there  had  been  no  adequate
    assessment by the First-tier Tribunal of the lack of  any  arrangements
    made to transfer E's care to a hospital or hospitals in Albania.

21. The above-mentioned matters amount to  material  errors  of  law  which
    render the decision of the First-tier Tribunal unsafe.

22. Ms Litchfield urged me to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    owing to the lack of an adequate consideration of E's  best  interests.
    While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of  such
    consideration. Furthermore, Ms Isherwood advised me that the respondent
    had identified the missing evidence in relation to the availability  of
    medical care in Albania and Ms Litchfield indicated that the  appellant
    would be  obtaining  further  evidence  of  E's  condition.   In  these
    circumstances, I considered it inappropriate to retain  the  matter  in
    the Upper Tribunal.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, save for the  findings
on Article 3.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

