
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11423/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 12 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                             WASIU ADEBOLA AZEEZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Uwe-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by JDS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  Talbot  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The application under appeal was refused on 10 May 2018.  The Appellant
    exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal
    came before Judge Talbot  on  8  April  2019  and  was  dismissed.  The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   His
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 27  June
    2019 in the following terms

         "It was accepted that the Appellant did not rely  on  Appendix  FM.
         The Judge found the Appellant could not meet paragraph 276ADE,  the
         Appellant's credibility was accepted but it could not be said  that
         there were very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  to
         Nigeria.  The  Appellant's  son  is   nearly   21   and,   in   the
         circumstances, removal would not entail a breach of Article 8.

         The grounds argue that the Judge erred in respect of the  obstacles
         to the Appellant's integration into Nigeria, erred  in  respect  of
         Article 8 and overlooked compelling circumstances.

         It is arguable that as matters stand there are more than the  usual
         ties between the Appellant  and  his  son  and  on  the  basis  the
         decision may be flawed. I am less  persuaded  with  regard  to  the
         circumstances the Appellant would face in Nigeria and  his  ability
         to return there but permission is granted on all grounds."



Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria born on 31  May  1969.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the first time on 25 July 2007 as a dependent  spouse  with
    leave valid to 30 November 2009 and the couple's son Hassan (born on  4
    June 1998) joined them in the United  Kingdom  in  2008.  At  the  time
    Hassan was 10 years old. The family lived  together  in  Scotland.  The
    Appellant's wife died on 12 November 2009. The Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain on compassionate grounds was refused in April  2010
    and the same year Hassan moved to live with his aunt in London and  the
    Appellant, living and working in Scotland, would travel every month  to
    see his son. Having been served with notice  of  removal  in  2014  the
    Appellant was granted leave to remain outside the rules on 22 May  2015
    expiring on 22 November 2017. His application to extend this  leave  on
    human rights grounds was refused resulting in this appeal.

 4. The basis of the Secretary of State's refusal was that he did not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules as his son was over  the  age
    of 18 and living with his aunt in London. He did not meet  the  private
    life provisions of the rules because he had  not  been  living  in  the
    United Kingdom for 10 years and there were no significant obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Nigeria. There were no  exceptional  circumstances
    justifying  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. In dismissing the appeal, the Judge found that  the  Appellant  was  an
    honest and credible witness but was unable to conclude that there  were
    very significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria. He found that
    the most compassionate factor before him in  terms  of  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances was the Appellant's relationship with his  son
    who was approaching 21 years of age. He accepted that there was a close
    relationship but found that as the son was an adult  this  relationship
    did not fall within the ambit of family life rather it was an extremely
    important element of his private life. In finding that the Secretary of
    State's decision was proportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration
    control the Judge took account of the fact that the Appellant's stay in
    the United Kingdom had been 'highly precarious' since the expiry of his
    initial period of leave in 2009 and he can have had no expectation that
    his leave would be extended beyond 2017 when Hassan became adult.



Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me Mr  Uwe-Ezeoke  appeared  for  the  Appellant.
    Referring to the grounds he said that everything centres on the  family
    life between the Appellant and his son noting that credibility was  not
    challenged by the Respondent and  was  accepted  by  the  Judge.   Even
    though the Appellant's son  is  now  over  18  he  is  not  leading  an
    independent life. He is living with him. He is in full time  education.
    The Appellant lives in London and works in Manchester and comes back to
    London on his off days. Mr Uwe-Ezeoke submitted that  the  son  is  not
    living an independent life. Kugathas says a child over 18 years is  not
    necessarily living an independent life.  Hassan  has  a  severe  speech
    impediment (see  paragraph  4  of  his  statement  at  page  5  of  the
    Appellant's bundle). Hassan says ever since he was a boy, he has fought
    a  psychological  battle  due  to  this  impediment.  His  father,  the
    Appellant, is a great support  helping  him  to  practice  his  fluency
    techniques. The Judge failed to take  this  into  consideration  or  to
    attach adequate weight. Contrary to the assertion of the  Judge  Hassan
    is not financially independent. The student loan is for studies.  There
    are other expenses. Both the Appellant and Hassan confirmed that he was
    financially dependent. The Appellant says that  he  was  struggling  to
    support his son so took the job in Manchester. The Judge wrongly  holds
    negatively in the balance that he was "eventually  granted  leave"  and
    that his continuing residence was "highly precarious".

 7.  For  the  Respondent  Mr  Walker  said  that  reading  the   evidence,
    particularly the statement of  the  Appellant  concerning  his  working
    arrangements, it is difficult to see how the Judge  has  balanced  that
    evidence in terms of continuing family life. The Appellant  works  away
    five days every week returning to be with  his  son  at  the  weekends.
    These are very exceptional circumstances and it is a very unusual case.
    Both representatives asked me to remake the decision  on  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I gave an extempore decision allowing the appeal and setting aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I remade the decision allowing the
    Appellant's appeal against refusal of leave to remain on  human  rights
    grounds. My reasons are given below.



Decision

 9. As Mr Walker very helpfully conceded this is an unusual case displaying
    exceptional circumstances. The Appellant and  his  wife  met  in  1991,
    their son was born in Nigeria in 1998. In 2008 the family came to  live
    in the United Kingdom. The Appellant was granted leave to remain as the
    dependent of his wife who had a Tier 4 student visa and  as  was  usual
    this leave was for a 2-year period. Unfortunately, his wife  died  just
    before the end of that period and the Appellant's application for leave
    to remain on compassionate grounds was refused. After the  refusal  the
    Appellant's son went to live with his maternal aunt  in  London  whilst
    the Appellant remained in Scotland, where the family  had  been  living
    until the death of his wife, but contact between the Appellant and  his
    son was maintained and it is  accepted  that  a  strong  parental  bond
    remained. The Appellant remained working in Scotland to enable  him  to
    support his son and this is  confirmed  by  the  witness  statement  of
    Mutiat Oladimeji Kuku, the Appellant's sister in law, that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. She says

         "Me and my family are very close to the Appellant and I  have  been
         assisting the Appellant to look after his son since (the  death  of
         his mother). He has been supporting with his son's maintenance  and
         also assisting to bring him up.

         "The Appellant's son is still so dependent  on  his  dad.  ...  The
         Appellant has been a good father and has cared for and supports his
         son financially, this is the reason he lives away  from  us  during
         the week and returns on weekends.  He  also  supports  Hassan  with
         regards to his speech issues..."

10. Having heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his son and Ms Kuku  the
    Judge records that he  finds  the  Appellant  an  honest  and  credible
    witness and he does not suggest that he  doubts  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's son or Ms Kuku. Going on to deal with family life and based
    upon this evidence the Judge finds that

         "although there is no bright line when a child reaches the  age  of
         18 years, I am not satisfied on the evidence  before  me  that  the
         degree of emotional or other  dependency  brings  the  relationship
         within the ambit of Article 8 'family life' as that expression  has
         been judicially interpreted."

    He goes on to find that  it  is  nevertheless  an  extremely  important
    element of the Appellant's private life.

11. In my judgment the Judge falls into clear error and indeed  creates  an
    artificial separation between family and private life a concept that is
    not separated at all by the Convention. In doing so he  fails  he  take
    account of the established caselaw including,  inter  alia,  Ghising  v
    SSHD [2012] UKUT 00160 and  Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  63  both
    referred to in the grounds of appeal. The Judge was right to  say  that
    there is no bright line when a child reaches the age of 18 years and in
    my judgement when a close  parental  relationship  exists,  where  both
    child and parent are still living in the  family  home  and  where  the
    parent is providing financial and emotional support particularly  to  a
    child combatting a significant  impediment  family  life  continues  to
    exists. The Judge erred in law in finding that there was no family life
    and his error was material to his decision to dismiss the appeal.

12. I would add to the above that when dealing with private life the  Judge
    fell into further error when dealing with the  proportionality  balance
    in finding, or at least implying, that the service of a removal  notice
    and a previous failed attempt to extend leave should  be  held  against
    negatively in that balance. The later grant of  leave  because  of  his
    parental relationship with his son shows that, in all  likelihood,  the
    Appellant should have had leave throughout because he  was  caring  for
    his son throughout. Further the finding that the Appellant's continuing
    residence was 'highly precarious' and that

         "he can have had no expectation that leave would be extended beyond
         ... (2017)"

    is a misunderstanding  and  consequent  misdirection.  The  Appellant's
    leave to remain may have been 'precarious' in  accordance  with  recent
    jurisprudence but it is also necessary, as KO (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2018]
    UKSC 53 reminds us in  another  context,  to  consider  the  real-world
    situation. A widowed father bringing up and looking after  his  British
    citizen son will almost certainly have not only the hope but  also  the
    reasonable expectation that in the absence  of  countervailing  factors
    this situation will be allowed to continue.

13. There are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I allow the Appellant's appeal and I set aside that decision.



14. In remaking the decision, I take into  account  my  conclusions  above.
    This is an Appellant who has brought up his son in the  United  Kingdom
    for the last 10 years as a single parent following the tragic death  of
    his wife. He has been assisted by his sister in law. He has worked away
    from  home  during  the  week  firstly  in  Scotland  and  latterly  in
    Manchester to enable him to support his son financially. He  has  given
    strong emotional support and continues to do so. Such support  is  more
    important that in a normal father son relationship firstly  because  of
    the absence of his mother in the child's life and secondly  because  of
    the significant speech impediment from which he suffers. The child (now
    a 21-year-old adult) is a British citizen  and  the  fact  that  he  is
    studying at university and hopes to  go  on  to  do  master's  and  PhD
    degrees is a massive credit to both the Appellant and  the  Appellant's
    sister in law.

15. Taking the balance sheet approach to proportionality these are all very
    significant and weighty positive matters. It is difficult to  find  any
    negative matters in the balance, indeed there are none except  for  the
    need to maintain  effective  immigration  control.  It  is  not  in  my
    judgement an effective use of immigration control to separate a  father
    from his 21 year old financially and  emotionally  dependent  son,  who
    came to the United Kingdom lawfully and who has previously been granted
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom to enable  him  to  continue  his
    paternal relationship with his son.

16. The balance falls heavily in favour of the Appellant and on that  basis
    the appeal against the decision to refuse leave to remain is allowed.



Summary of decision

17. Appeal allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

18. I remake the decision and I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date: 2 August 2019


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

