
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/11723/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th April 2018                         |On 01st May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Sandeep Kadian
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Jones of Counsel, instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Asjad made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 12th June 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  10th  January  1984.   He
    entered the UK  on  28th  January  2006  on  a  student  visa  and  was
    subsequently granted further leave to remain until 20th February  2016.



 3. On 20th January 2016 he made an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis  of  ten  years'  lawful  and  continuous
    residence.  He was refused on 15th April 2016 under paragraph 322(5) of
    the Immigration Rules, a discretionary general ground of refusal.

 4. The Secretary of State said, on a review of his application,  it  would
    appear that he had failed to  disclose  his  earnings  in  full  to  HM
    Revenue & Customs for the tax years 2010  to  2011.   Accordingly,  she
    considered that it would be undesirable for him to  remain  in  the  UK
    based on the fact that he  had  been  deceitful  or  dishonest  in  his
    dealings with HM Revenue & Customs.

 5. In her determination, the judge rejected  the  appellant's  explanation
    for his failure to disclose all of his income.  She said that there was
    no evidence about any family life that the appellant had in the UK, and
    although he had spent ten years here, he had still spent  the  majority
    of his life in India.  There were no very significant obstacles to  his
    returning there.

 6. She concluded:

         "Immigration control is in the public interest as is  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country in terms of ensuring that tax is paid.  In
         carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  I  find  that  the  factors
         weighing against the appellant  outweigh  those  that  are  in  his
         favour and the interference with his private life is  proportionate
         in this case."

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had materially erred in failing to properly consider the core issue  in
    the appeal, namely whether the Secretary of  State's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules or policy guidance in relation to
    refusals of  this  kind.   Even  on  the  judge's  findings,  that  the
    appellant had failed to disclose  relevant  self-employed  earnings  to
    HMRC and/or had failed to give a full picture of his  earnings  in  his
    application  to  the  respondent,  it  was  entirely  unclear  how  the
    applicant's conduct would meet the threshold of behaviour as set out in
    the guidance.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Froom for the reasons set out
    in the grounds on 19th December 2017.

 9. At the hearing Mr Tarlow accepted that the judge had  materially  erred
    in law.

10. The judge did not refer to paragraph 322(5)  in  the  determination  at
    all.  Nor did she consider whether the relevant policy guidance,  which
    sets out the circumstances in which  the  respondent  could  refuse  an
    application for leave to remain under paragraph 322(5), was  applicable
    in the appellant's case.  This was  a  relevant  question  for  her  to
    address when considering the proportionality of the decision.

11. By failing to take into account all relevant  factors  the  Immigration
    Judge erred in law.  Her decision is set aside.



Remaking the Decision

12. Mr Tarlow nevertheless submitted that the appeal ought to be  dismissed
    and said that the conduct of the appellant, in failing to disclose  his
    entire income, and in seeking to blame his accountant for the error was
    sufficient to bring paragraph 322(5) into play.

13. Miss Jones submitted that the policy guidance made it clear that a high
    threshold was required to justify a refusal under paragraph 322(5)  and
    the appellant's conduct plainly came nowhere near that threshold.

Findings and Conclusions

14. Paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules states  that  the  respondent
    may refuse an application for leave to remain on discretionary  grounds
    where

         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the UK in the light of his conduct (including convictions which  do
         not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations or the
         fact that he represents a threat to national security."

15. The respondent has produced policy guidance in relation to the type  of
    conduct which is likely to meet this threshold.  Miss  Jones  helpfully
    provided the current policy guidance, which states as follows:

         "The main types of cases you need to  consider  for  refusal  under
         paragraph 322(5) or referral to other teams are those that  involve
         criminality, a threat to national security, war  crimes  or  travel
         bans.

         A person does not need to have been convicted of a criminal offence
         for this provision to apply.  When deciding whether to refuse under
         this category, the key thing to consider is if  there  is  reliable
         evidence to support a decision that the  person's  behaviour  calls
         into  question  their  character  and/or   conduct   and/or   their
         associations to the extent that it is undesirable to allow them  to
         enter or remain in the UK.  This may include cases where a  migrant
         has entered, attempted to enter or facilitated a sham  marriage  to
         evade immigration control."

16. The appellant explained to the judge that the lack of a declaration for
    2010 to 2011 for his employment with Maztech was as  a  consequence  of
    having been let down  by  his  accountants.   The  judge  rejected  his
    explanation.  She clearly considered the appellant to  be  culpable  in
    failing to declare that income to HMRC.

17.  Nevertheless,  not  declaring  all  relevant  income,  whilst   highly
    regrettable, cannot properly be described as conduct such as  that  set
    out in the policy guidance.  The appellant has  not  been  involved  in
    criminality. It cannot properly be said that his  failure  to  disclose
    calls into question his character conduct and associations. There is no
    suggestion that he has been or is a  threat  to  national  security  or
    subject to a travel ban or has been involved in a sham marriage.

18. No other reason has been relied upon by the respondent in  relation  to
    refusing the appellant indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  ten
    years' lawful and continuous residence.

19. This is a human rights appeal. The  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
    decision to invoke paragraph 322(5) is inconsistent with her own policy
    guidance reduces considerably the weight to be attached to  the  public
    interest in this refusal.  Indeed, it  is  hard  to  discern  what  the
    public interest could be  if  the  appellant  does  in  fact  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20. This appellant has established that he has been in the UK for ten years
    lawfully  and  continuously.   Accordingly  the  present   refusal   is
    disproportionate.

21. The original judge's decision is set aside and is  remade  as  follows.
    The appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                                        Date 30  April
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



