
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11435/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 June 2020                      |25 June 2020                         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                               Fannyann Wright
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     O Agbaje of St John Legal (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on 13 March 1956.
She first entered the United Kingdom on 5 April 2005 with leave valid until
16 March 2007.  Thereafter, the appellant made a number of applications for
further leave most recently on 6 February 2019 when she applied for leave
to remain under Art 8 of the ECHR.  On 21 June 2019, the Secretary of State
refused that application for leave.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination sent
on 19 September 2019, Judge M A Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal under
Art 8 based upon her private and family life.

The appellant sought permission to appeal contending, inter alia, that a
number of the judge's findings were irrational; the judge had failed
properly to assess her mental health problems; and the judge had failed to
make relevant findings on whether the appellant's relationship with her
family in the UK (in particular her grandchildren) amounted to family life
for the purposes of Art 8.

On 21 February 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Appleyard) granted the
appellant permission to appeal.

In directions dated 20 March 2020 (and set out on 14 April 2020), the Upper
Tribunal, in the light of the COVID-19 crisis, indicated a provisional view
that the error of law could be decided on the papers without a hearing.
Submissions from both parties were invited both on the issue of whether the
error of law could be determined without a hearing under Rule 34 and the
substance of the error of law issue.

In response to those directions, both parties filed written submissions.
Both accepted that the error of law issue could be determined without a
hearing. In the light of that, I have concluded that it is just and fair to
determine the error of law issue without a hearing under Rule 34 of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

In her submissions, the Secretary of State conceded that Judge Khan had
materially erred in law in dismissing the appeal under Art 8, in particular
in failing to analyse and make a relevant finding whether the appellant had
established family life in the UK for the purposes of Art 8 of the ECHR.
On behalf of the Secretary of State, it was accepted that the judge's
decision should be set aside and no findings be preserved.

In the light of the respondent's concession, which I accept is correctly
made, I am satisfied that Judge Khan materially erred in law in dismissing
the appeal under Art 8 in that he failed to reach any finding as to whether
the appellant, as she claimed, had established family life in the UK.  That
error was material to his assessment of whether the respondent's decision
breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision and Disposal

For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law.  That decision is
set aside.

It is accepted by the Secretary of State, in making her concession that the
judge's decision should be set aside, that no findings should be preserved.
 In her submissions, the appellant does not seek to preserve any findings
of fact.  It seems to me that the proper disposal of this appeal requires
that the decision is made de novo at a rehearing of the appeal.  The
sensible course, given the task of the judge rehearing the appeal, is that
no factual findings should be preserved.

Given the extent and nature of fact-finding required, and having regard to
para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal
of the appeal is that it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge M A Khan.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                17 June 2020


