
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11939/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 25 January 2018               |On: 7 February 2018                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                               Mr Dilbag Singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, counsel (instructed by MD UK Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 25  October  2017,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  his  private  life  as  an
    unmarried partner of a person present and settled in the UK.

 2. On 22 November 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge I V  Boyes  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge erred in the
    proportionality assessment and failed to apply the Chikwamba principles
    correctly.

 3. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Mold, who  did  not  appear  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  contended  that  the   Judge's   proportionality
    assessment was flawed. He adopted his grounds of appeal.

 4. The Judge erred in the application of the Chikwamba principle. He noted
    that at [36] the Judge referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in
    Agyarko and Others v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11,  and  stated  that  paragraph
    [51] in Agyarko cannot  be  read  in  isolation  but  must  instead  be
    considered in the context of the overall assessment and guidance  given
    in that decision.

 5. She went on to state at [36] that she takes into account  the  decision
    in the case of R (on the application of Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - Temporary Separation -  Proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00189 (IAC) "as referred to in Aygarko" However as noted  by  Mr  Mold,
    the decision in Chen was not referred to at all in Aygarko.

 6. Mr Mold referred to [37] where the Judge stated that following Chen, it
    is apparent  that  proportionality  assessment  is  fact  specific  and
    ultimately it is for the appellant to demonstrate that there would  "be
    significant interference with family life  by  temporary  removal."  Mr
    Mold submitted that the reference to "significant" is  a  reference  to
    the family life being sufficient to engage Article 8. That he submitted
    is supported by the reference in Chen to the case of R (Zhang)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin) which itself referred  to  R  (Mdlovu)  v  SSHD
    [2008] EWHC 2089 which was a case where the engagement of Article 8 was
    found to be very tenuous.

 7. The decision in Chen did not refer to  "significant  interference".  It
    instead just referred to "interference". Paragraph [41] of  Chen  noted
    that the claimant had not placed before the respondent any evidence  to
    show that her removal (if removal notionally took place consequent upon
    the refusal of leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  Article  8)  would
    interfere with any family life being enjoyed.

 8. Mr Mold referred to the determination of the First-tier  Judge  at  [8]
    where she noted that it was confirmed that no issue was  taken  by  the
    respondent that the appellant and his partner were parties to a genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship.  It  was  also  acknowledged  that   the
    suitability, financial, language and accommodation  requirements  under
    Appendix FM were met.

 9. He noted  that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor  is  presently
    undergoing a programme of IUI treatment [38].  She  took  into  account
    that the sponsor's primary concern in respect of  her  husband  seeking
    entry clearance from abroad is her fear that if her husband returned to
    India, the application process could take as  long  as  three  to  four
    years. The Judge found, however, that where there is reliable  evidence
    that the appellant's  application  for  entry  clearance  would  likely
    succeed and having regard to the available data  on  processing  times,
    that her concerns as to a  protracted  separation  were  without  merit
    [38].

10. The Judge accordingly found at [39] that should the appellant return to
    India to regularise his status, any period of separation is  likely  to
    be a short one. She found that the sponsor's willingness "to agree"  to
    a separation of a few months is indicative of her own recognition  that
    a short,  temporary  separation  would  not  amount  to  a  significant
    interference with the family life enjoyed by her and the appellant.

11. Mr Mold referred to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v
    Treebhowan; Hayat v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1054  at  [30].  Lord  Justice
    Elias was considering the proper scope and application of the  decision
    of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. In Treebhowan
    the appellant appealed against the decision of the Upper Tribunal which
    upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  he  had  no  right
    arising out of Article 8 to remain in the UK. In Hayat  (Pakistan)  the
    appellant was the secretary of state who challenged the  conclusion  of
    the Upper Tribunal that Hayat's Article 8 claim should be sustained.

12. Elias LJ referred to the  decision  in  Chikwamba  from  paragraph  [2]
    onwards. He summarised  the  principles  applicable  in  Chikwamba  and
    subsequent Court of Appeal decisions at [30]:

      a) Where an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry  clearance
         pursuant to an Article 8 claim, a dismissal of  the  claim  on  the
         procedural ground that  the  policy  requires  that  the  applicant
         should have made the application from his home state may  (but  not
         necessarily will) constitute a disruption of family or private life
         sufficient to engage Article 8,  particularly  where  children  are
         adversely affected.

      b)  Where  Article  8  is  engaged,  it  will  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with the family or private  life  to  enforce  such  a
         policy unless, to use the language  of  Sullivan  LJ,  there  is  a
         sensible reason for doing so;

      c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will  necessarily  be
         fact sensitive; Lord Brown identified certain potentially  relevant
         factors in Chikwamba. They will include the prospect of length  and
         degree of disruption of family life and whether  other  members  of
         the family are settled in the UK;

      d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there  is  no  sensible  reason  for
         enforcing the policy,  the  decision  maker  should  determine  the
         Article 8 claim on the substantive merits, having had regard to all
         material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant has no  lawful
         entry clearance;

      e) It will be a very rare case where it is appropriate for  the  Court
         of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that   the   lower   Tribunal   has
         disproportionately interfered with Article 8  rights  in  enforcing
         the policy, to make the substantive Article 8 decision for  itself.
         Chikwamba was such an exceptional case. Logically, the Court  would
         have to be satisfied that there is only one proper  answer  to  the
         Article 8 question before substituting  its  own  finding  on  this
         factual question;

      f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the way the Court should
         approach the substantive Article 8 issue as laid down in such  well
         known cases as Razgar and Huang;

      g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in his judgment if the
         secretary of  state  has  no  sensible  reason  for  requiring  the
         application to be made from the home state, the fact  that  he  has
         failed to do so should not  thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the
         substantive Article 8 balancing exercise.

13. Mr Mold contended that [30 b-g] of Treebhowan applied.

14. He noted that in Hayat the appellant entered the UK as a student. Leave
    was extended. Before his leave expired he  again  applied  for  further
    leave to remain as the partner of a points based  system  migrant.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that unlike the appellant in  Chikwamba,  the
    appellant was not seeking leave to settle in the UK  as  a  spouse.  It
    found that the decision was proportionate and served a public end.  The
    decision of the respondent was not sufficiently serious as to amount to
    a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

15. In that case, the substantive application was for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK for only a limited period. The Judge concluded that there was  a
    good reason to reject the  Article  8  claim  and  she  identified  the
    factors which dictated her conclusion. She did not unthinkingly apply a
    policy.

16. The Court of Appeal found that the Judge did not dismiss the Article  8
    application simply on the formalistic basis that the application should
    be renewed from Pakistan because the rules should be obeyed.  Elias  LJ
    noted that  the  Judge  focused  on  three  matters  which  go  to  the
    substantive merits of an Article 8 claim and are also relevant  to  the
    question of whether it was in  any  event  legitimate  to  require  the
    applicant to make his application from Pakistan.  Firstly,  as  persons
    only permitted to be temporarily in the UK, neither the  applicant  nor
    his wife had any legitimate expectation of a right to remain. Secondly,
    the family life could continue in Pakistan, although the wife would not
    wish to return. The third was that any period of  separation  would  be
    short. In Chikwamba, Lord Brown identified the  length  and  degree  of
    family disruption as a factor which would be  highly  relevant  to  the
    question of whether it is proportionate to insist that the  application
    be made from abroad.

17. Mr Mold noted that the sponsor is a UK citizen.  The  processing  times
    would be as long as three months. He referred to the  decision  of  the
    High Court in R  (Zhang)  supra  at  [80].  In  that  case,  the  Judge
    considered whether on the particular facts the  requirement  under  the
    rules to leave the country in order to apply for  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate.

18. Mr Justice Turner concluded that it was not. The claimant's  Article  8
    rights were engaged and infringed. She was in a  loving  marriage.  She
    had no real option but to endure separation from her  new  husband  for
    about two months. She had an impeccable immigration  record.  Both  she
    and her husband were likely to continue to make a valuable contribution
    to the economic well being of the UK. The  claimant  was  reluctant  to
    overstay and return to China. This meant that she  would  be  separated
    from her husband for as long as it took for the application to be made,
    processed and accepted. Her husband was not able to  join  her  because
    his passport was in the possession of the UKBA pending determination of
    his own application.

19. In the circumstances Rule 319C(h)(i) could not lawfully be  applied  to
    the claimant in that case.

20. Mr Mold accepted that the  appellant's  immigration  history  "was  not
    exemplary". He referred to R (Agyarko) at [51]. Lord Reid  stated  that
    whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully or is entitled to  remain
    in  the  UK  only  temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of   this
    consideration depends on what the outcome of  any  immigration  control
    might otherwise be. For example, if an  applicant  might  otherwise  be
    automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the  weight  of  the
    public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal  would  generally  be  very
    considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant, even if residing  in
    the UK unlawfully, was otherwise certain to be granted leave to  enter,
    at least if an application were made from outside the  UK,  then  there
    might be no public interest in  his  or  her  removal.  That  point  is
    illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba.

21. At [52] of Agyarko Lord Reid held that it is necessary to bear in  mind
    that the cogency of the public interest in  the  removal  of  a  person
    living in the UK unlawfully is liable to diminish - or looking  at  the
    matter from the  opposite  perspective,  the  weight  to  be  given  to
    precarious family life is liable to increase - if there is a protracted
    delay in  enforcement  of  immigration  control.  He  referred  to  the
    decision of Lord Bingham and Lord Brown in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] AC
    1159 at [15] and [37].

22. In conclusion, Mr Mold submitted  that  the  factors  relating  to  the
    public interest in requiring the appellant to  apply  from  abroad  had
    diminished.

23. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kotas submitted that it is  not  simply
    enough to say that the application is  likely  to  succeed.  There  are
    other factors. That was the outcome in the appeal relating to Hayat  at
    [52].

24. The Judge properly directed himself in accordance  with  Chen.  He  had
    regard to the other factors which were in play, including how long  the
    process would take. It is likely to be a short period.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account the  poor  immigration  history.  He  had
    regard to the potential problems relating to the  IUI  treatment  which
    might have to be postponed for a short period [39]. He also had  regard
    to medical evidence relating to the sponsor's  depression  since  2009.
    There was nothing to suggest that her mental health  would  suffer  any
    real detriment as a consequence of the short separation. [42]

25. She was entitled to conclude that there was no significant interference
    with family life in these circumstances.

    Assessment

26. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a detailed decision and has set
    out the competing submissions.

27. She noted that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  arrived  in  the  UK
    illegally in 2002. He had remained here  ever  since.  He  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of the claim  that  he  had  private  life
    which was rejected in April 2016.  A  further  application  made  on  3
    February 2016 was refused on 20 April 2016.

28. She noted that he applied for leave to remain as an  unmarried  partner
    of a person present and settled in the UK.  It  had  been  conceded  by
    experienced counsel at the hearing that the  claim  could  not  succeed
    under Appendix FM. It was however contended that there were  compelling
    circumstances making the respondent's decision  disproportionate  under
    Article 8 [9]. That was the basis on which the appellant  advanced  his
    appeal.

29. The Judge has set  out  in  some  detail  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and his sponsor. He  had  entered  and  remained  in  the  UK
    illegally, having arrived here initially in 2002. He had thus  remained
    here unlawfully for the last 15 years.

30. She had regard to the appellant's evidence that they  had  a  religious
    marriage in January 2012  which  was  accepted  as  being  genuine  and
    subsisting. She had regard  to  the  fact  that  his  wife  was  having
    treatment in order to have a child. This  treatment  was  available  in
    India [13].

31. The Judge also had regard to the evidence from the appellant's partner.
    They had been living together for seven years. She had been  living  in
    the UK for 12 years and was settled and in employment. Her GP confirmed
    that she was presently suffering from depression. The Judge noted  that
    she became a citizen in 2012. She had no other family here.  She  found
    out about her husband's immigration  status  in  2010.  She  stated  in
    evidence that she could not go and live in  India  because  that  would
    mean giving up everything that she has established in the UK [17].

32. She was informed that the average time to process  spouse  applications
    from Chandigarh was shown to be 12 weeks. The sponsor stated  that  she
    did not believe it would be so little time.  She stated that if it  was
    done within 12 weeks, "I can agree to that" [18].

33. The Judge found that the evidence did not demonstrate that there  would
    be insurmountable obstacles  to  this  couple  continuing  family  life
    outside the UK should they be willing to do so [22]. The appellant  had
    not lost his linguistic, religious or cultural links to India where  he
    was born, educated and lived until he was  24  years  old.  His  mother
    remained there. The sponsor herself originates  from  that  region  and
    lived there until she came to the UK in 2005, although  she  is  now  a
    British citizen  [22].  There  was  no  evidence  suggesting  that  the
    appellant or the sponsor would not be able  to  use  their  skills  and
    experience of employment in the UK  to  find  employment  in  India  to
    accommodate and support themselves.

34. The Judge had regard to the fact  that  there  was  evidence  that  the
    sponsor suffers from depression and that there was no  suggestion  that
    suitable  support  and  treatment  for  that  condition  would  not  be
    available to her in India. There was nothing in the evidence  to  cause
    her to believe that the appellant is at risk of any harm on  return  to
    India. It was  confirmed  by  counsel  that  no  protection  claim  was
    advanced.

35. Accordingly, she was satisfied that there would  not  be  very  serious
    difficulties as a consequence of the level  of  hardship  amounting  to
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    [22].

36. The Judge accordingly considered the claim as advanced under Article  8
    outside the rules. She referred  to  the  Razgar  principles.  She  was
    satisfied that the appellant has family life in the UK with  a  British
    citizen. If required to leave, there would be interference  with  their
    right to a family life.

37. She found that the interference would be in accordance  with  the  law.
    She assessed the proportionality of the decision. She had regard to the
    provisions of s.117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

38. She was entitled to take into account  under  s.117B  (4)  that  little
    weight should be given to the private life and relationship formed with
    a qualifying partner which was established at a time when the appellant
    was in the  UK  unlawfully.  She  again  noted  that  he  arrived  here
    illegally in 2002 and for the entire period, his residence  in  the  UK
    had been unlawful. No attempt had been made to regularise his status in
    the UK prior to an unsuccessful application made in January 2012 - [30]

39. She repeated that at [32].  His  wife  learned  about  his  immigration
    status in 2010. Accordingly, that relationship developed and a marriage
    took place at a time when she was fully aware that his presence in  the
    UK was unlawful. She found that the public interest  considerations  in
    s.117B(4) accordingly applied in respect of his family life.

40. She noted that Ms Kaur is a British citizen  in  full  time  employment
    with a strong and established private life in the UK. It was  a  matter
    for her whether she would be prepared to continue family  life  in  the
    UK. It was  noted  that  it  has  been  accepted  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in the UK, which had
    been conceded [33].

41. She had in mind counsel's argument that the public  interest  does  not
    require the appellant  to  leave  the  UK  to  undertake  "an  academic
    exercise" of seeking entry clearance from abroad [34].

42. She directed herself at [35] in accordance with paragraph [51]  of  the
    Supreme Court's decision in Aygarko, supra. She noted  that  where  the
    appellant had resided in the UK unlawfully and would be certain  to  be
    granted leave to enter and that the application was  made  outside  the
    UK, then "there might" be no public interest in his removal.   However,
    she stated that paragraph [51] could not be read in isolation  and  had
    to be considered  in  the  overall  assessment  and  guidance  in  that
    decision.

43. Although, as submitted by  Mr  Mold,  the  decision  in  Chen  was  not
    referred to in Agyarko, the Judge had proper regard to the approach  in
    Chen and set it out in full - [36]

44. She noted that the assessment of the proportionality is fact  specific.
    It was for the appellant  to  show  that  there  would  be  significant
    interference with family life by a temporary removal.

45. She  had  full  regard  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the  sponsor's
    undergoing of a programme of IUI treatment [38]. Her prime  concern  in
    respect of the appellant seeking entry clearance from  abroad  was  her
    fear that the process would take three  or  four  years.  However,  she
    found that where there is reliable evidence that  the  application  for
    entry clearance would likely succeed and having regard to the available
    data on processing times, her concerns  over  a  protracted  separation
    were without merit. She also took into account Ms Kaur's  own  evidence
    that she would agree to a period of separation  if  this  involved  the
    matter of a few months rather than years.

46. On  that  basis,  she  found  that  this  was  indicative  of  her  own
    recognition that a short, temporary separation would not  amount  to  a
    "significant interference" with her family life enjoyed by her and  the
    appellant.

47. In assessing proportionality at[40], she reminded herself that Ms  Kaur
    was aware from an early  stage  in  the  relationship  prior  to  their
    marriage in 2012 and prior to the commencement of  fertility  treatment
    that the appellant was here unlawfully.

48. She also found that neither could have had  any  expectation  that  the
    appellant would be entitled to remain in the UK.  Article  8  does  not
    afford the individuals a choice as to  where  they  wish  to  establish
    their home. She also took into account that whilst it is  the  couple's
    desire to start a family of their own, there are currently no  children
    who would be affected by the decision [40].

49. In the circumstances she found that the couple's desire to proceed with
    fertility treatment was not, without more, a compelling circumstance so
    as to outweigh public interest under s.117B(4). She had regard  to  the
    medical evidence produced:  There  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    sponsor's  mental  health  would  suffer  any  real  detriment   as   a
    consequence of the short separation. It was in any event  open  to  the
    sponsor to travel or visit the appellant  in  India  during  the  short
    period involved in the processing of an out of country  application  or
    to maintain regular contact with him.

50. She thus concluded that although there would be  an  interference  with
    family life, the requirement to make an  application  from  abroad  was
    proportionate and served the public interest.

51. The Judge referred to and  considered  other  relevant  factors  before
    reaching the conclusion that Article 8 was not infringed  by  requiring
    him to return to India. That finding was sustainable on the evidence.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction made.





    Signed                              Date 2 February 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

