
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11717/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 22 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR DARSHANBHAI TUSHARBHAI DESAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The Respondent, to whom I
    shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of India  born  on  20  July
    1984.  He arrived in the UK on 15 September 2007 and  sought  leave  to
    remain and was granted leave over a number of years.   His  application
    for indefinite leave to remain was refused on 26 September 2017, due to
    the fact that part of his leave was  based  on  an  application  for  a
    residence card which was refused and thus the Claimant was not entitled
    to benefit from Section 3C leave and had no valid leave after 10 August
    2015.  In any event, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  application
    with reference to paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis
    he was satisfied that the Claimant had used  deception  in  a  previous
    application to gain leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    in 2012, that application having been made on 8 May  2012.   The  TOEIC
    certificate had been declared invalid by ETS on the grounds that  voice
    recognition software detected the presence of a proxy  tester  who  had
    sat the test in the Claimant's place.  The test had been  taken  on  18
    April 2012 at Elizabeth College and the results had been  cancelled  by
    ETS.

 2. The Claimant appealed that decision.   His  appeal  came  before  Judge
    O'Garro of the First-tier Tribunal for hearing on 9 August 2018.  In  a
    decision and reasons  promulgated  on  21  September  2018,  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal, finding at [29] that the Claimant  was  a  credible
    witness; that he gave his evidence in English, had undertaken an HND in
    civil engineering which would have required a  high  level  of  English
    language proficiency [32], and there was no reason for him to have used
    deception or to have employed a proxy test  taker  [33].  At  [34]  the
    Judge held as follows:

         "I have seen the Appellant, heard what he has to say about the  ETS
         tests he took and I believe him.  It is for the Respondent to prove
         the allegation of fraud and she has not done so.  I find  that  the
         Respondent has not provided the standard she is required to provide
         to discharge the burden of  proof  to  the  high  standard  she  is
         required to do in order to satisfy me that the Appellant  had  used
         deception in a previous application.  I find  that  the  Respondent
         has not made out the case against the Appellant".

 3. The Judge then went on to consider the appeal under Article 8,  finding
    at [36]  that  he  had  submitted  no  evidence  there  would  be  very
    significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  India  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  went  on  to
    consider the appeal outside the Rules and found that the  circumstances
    of the case were exceptional, the public interest does  not  carry  the
    most weight on the facts and findings in this particular case  and  the
    decision of the Respondent was not proportionate [52].

 4. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision on two grounds.  Firstly, that the Judge had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings on a material  matter,  the  point  there
    being made that the Judge had  not  adequately  addressed  whether  the
    Claimant had provided an innocent explanation,  it  having  been  found
    that the Secretary of State satisfied the evidential  burden.   It  was
    submitted in relying on the Claimant's  English  language  ability  and
    qualifications the Judge had applied the wrong test  cf.  MA  (Nigeria)
    [2016] UKUT 450 at  57.   The  test  was  whether  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  the  Claimant  employed  deception  and  the  Judge  had
    materially erred in failing to give adequate reasons for holding that a
    person who clearly speaks English would, therefore, have no  reason  to
    secure a test certificate by deception.

 5. The second ground of appeal asserted that the Judge had  further  erred
    in allowing the appeal on the basis of Article 8, the burden  remaining
    upon the Claimant to show that he could not return to  India  with  his
    wife and child without encountering significant obstacles.   The  Judge
    had erred in utilising Article 8 as a general dispensing power, and the
    Judge had failed to identify what about this  particular  case  was  so
    exceptional as to even warrant consideration outside  the  Rules  given
    that the Judge found  the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the  private  life
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith in the following terms:

         "I grant permission principally on ground 2. The judge has referred
         to some of the relevant factors in Section 117B when assessing  the
         Article 8 claim outside the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  it  is
         arguably not clear where or how the judge has factored in the  fact
         that the Appellant and his  family  do  not  meet  the  Immigration
         Rules, that the judge finds there will be no unlawful  interference
         with their family life caused by removal and that  their  stay  has
         been precarious throughout.  It is  arguable  that  the  judge  has
         failed to explain how or why the Respondent's decision breaches the
         family's human  rights  when  those  factors  are  weighed  in  the
         balance, taking  account  in  particular  the  public  interest  in
         removal of those who have no basis of stay.   Section  117B(1)  and
         the  desirability  of  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         control  is  arguably  not  factored  into  the  balance   at   all
         notwithstanding that this is the basis of the  public  interest  in
         cases such as this.

         Ground 1 is weaker, but it is arguable that the  judge  has  placed
         undue weight on the fact that the Appellant speaks English and  has
         failed to explain how else his evidence suffices to  discharge  the
         burden placed on him.  The fact that the Appellant  speaks  English
         is a relevant factor, but it is arguable that the judge  has  found
         in his favour  based  on  this  factor  alone  without  considering
         whether  he  may  have  exercised  deception  notwithstanding   his
         linguistic ability".

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Kenny sought to adopt  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal. At [27]  of  the  decision  the
    Judge accepted that the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of
    showing deception and thus it  fell  to  the  Claimant  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation.  She found there was no reason why  the  Claimant
    would utilise deception or use a proxy test taker but this was not  the
    test.   The  Judge  needed  to  ask  whether  there  was  an   innocent
    explanation cf. Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  Given  that
    the Claimant did not  provide  an  innocent  explanation,  he  did  not
    discharge the burden of  proof,  and  the  judge  failed  to  cite  the
    authority MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) at [57].

 8. In relation to the second ground of appeal, Ms Kenny submitted that the
    decision was not properly reasoned.  The burden was upon  the  Claimant
    to show family life could not continue anywhere other than in  the  UK.
    Ms Kenny submitted that there was no finding by the judge as to whether
    or not it would be in the child's best  interest  to  remain,  nor  any
    proper consideration of the public interest.  She submitted it was  not
    at all clear why full consideration was given to Article 8 outside  the
    Rules given the  Claimant's  inability  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.   She  submitted  that  the  factors  in
    favour of  the  Claimant  were  insufficient  to  justify  the  overall
    conclusion that he should succeed in his appeal.

 9. In his submissions, Mr Khan submitted that the Judge had given adequate
    consideration  to  the  assertion  by  the  Secretary  of  State   that
    dishonesty had been employed to obtain the certificate.  The judge  had
    considered all the relevant authorities  cf.  Gazi  [2015]  UKUT  00327
    (IAC) and SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and was aware  that  the
    burden of proof was on the Secretary of State.  He  submitted  that  an
    innocent explanation had been given by the Claimant.  Bearing  in  mind
    the allegation was made in 2017, which was five years  after  the  test
    had been taken, it was clearly  more  difficult  for  the  Claimant  to
    establish his  bona  fides  due  to  the  passage  of  time.   However,
    materially the Claimant had undertaken a  course  to  prepare  for  the
    test, he had undertaken this course on 24 January  2012,  this  was  an
    English Language City & Guilds, the course also was on 6 February  2012
    and his exam took place in April.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  take
    account of the fact that when the Claimant arrived in the UK in 2007 he
    had already undertaken successfully an IELTS test.

10. Mr Khan accepted that for all sorts of perverse reasons a person  might
    want someone else to take the exam, however this Claimant  had  a  good
    level of English, enough to  undertake an HND in civil engineering,  he
    followed that course and passed it, and this gives rise to a reasonable
    inference that his English is proficient.  There was no blemish on  his
    immigration history, he had never produced a  false  document  or  done
    anything untoward, thus it was  highly  unlikely  that  the  TOEIC  was
    improperly obtained and there was no error of law in this respect.

11. In relation to the Article 8 aspect of the case, Mr Khan sought to rely
    on the decision in Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC).   He  submitted
    that the Judge's findings and reasons met the test, everything was  set
    out in sufficient detail and it was possible for a  person  looking  at
    the judgment to be satisfied as to why the  appeal  had  been  allowed.
    The Judge considered Article 8 outside the Rules using the  traditional
    Razgar analysis.  The Judge expressly stated that she had taken account
    of the public interest considerations at [47].  The Claimant is able to
    maintain himself financially with the support of his brother.  Mr  Khan
    submitted that the public interest in deporting  a  person  who  has  a
    clean record, English language ability, the ability to work,  who  owns
    property and is fully integrated, must be reduced.  He submitted  there
    was no material error of law, the judge had applied  the  proper  legal
    test and was entitled to reach this conclusion.

12. In reply Ms Kenny submitted that the consideration of  the  ETS  should
    not be diminished.  If the judge had erred in her assessment of the ETS
    point, then this impacted on the Article 8 assessment.

13. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.





     Findings and reasons

14.  In respect of the first ground of appeal, I  have  concluded  that  the
Judge erred   materially in law in  her  assessment  of  the  allegation  of
deception by the Secretary of   State. Whilst at [20]-[34]  the  Judge  gave
careful  consideration  to  the  evidence    submitted  on  behalf  of   the
Secretary of State (the "generic  evidence")  and  the    material  caselaw,
directing herself at [28]  that  "there  is  an  evidential  burden  on  the
appellant to advance an innocent explanation" the Judge did  not  go  on  to
make a finding    that the Claimant had provided  an  innocent  explanation.
Further, whilst the Judge  expressly found the Claimant  to  be  a  credible
witness, the reasons she provided all   related to  the  Claimant's  English
language ability and this was the sole basis for her  finding at  [33]  that
the Claimant had not utilised deception.


15.  In respect of the second ground of appeal, as Upper Tribunal Judge
Smith    correctly     identified in the grant of permission to appeal, the
Judge at [35] recorded the fact that    the Claimant cannot meet the
requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules but did not  appear to factor this
into her assessment of the proportionality of his     removal.     Further,
at [52] it is unclear why the strength of the Claimant's private life
falls    within the category of cases that requires great weight to be
given to his private   life.    Whilst the Judge also found at [52] that
"the public interest does not carry the most     weight" no consideration
appears to have been given to section 117B(1) which   provides that: "(1)
The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest." I find that had the Judge correctly directed herself she may not
have     reached the same conclusion on the basis of the evidence before
her.

16.  For the reasons set out above, I find material errors  of  law  in  the
Judge's decision. I    set that decision aside and remit the  appeal  for  a
hearing de novo before the First tier   Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed, with the  effect  that  the
appeal is remitted for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

