
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11119/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2018                         |On 6th  March 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               mary kawanguzi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith of Counsel, instructed by the Legal
Rights Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Asjad promulgated on 15  June  2017  in  which  the  Appellant'  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse her application  for  leave
    to remain as a partner dated 11 April 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Uganda, born on 3 April 1959, who  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 15  June  2002  as  a  dependent  of  her
    husband, who was then in the United Kingdom with valid leave to  remain
    as a student.  The Appellant was granted further periods  of  leave  to
    remain in line with her husband as his dependent until 30 January 2012.
     An application was made prior to the expiry of that period of leave to
    remain which was rejected as invalid for failure to pay a fee  and  two
    further applications for leave to remain  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were refused without a right of appeal on 19 March  2013  and  20
    March 2014.  On 3 November 2015, the Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as the partner of  her  husband,  who  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain in 2011 and subsequently became
    a British Citizen.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 11 April 2016  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    as a spouse as she did not have any extant  leave  to  remain  at  that
    time.   Their  application  was  considered  under  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix  FM  in  the  alternative,  but  refused  as  the   Respondent
    considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    between the Appellant  and  her  husband  continuing  in  Uganda.   The
    application was also refused under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the Appellant had not  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a sufficient period of time and that there would be no very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration into Uganda given  that  she
    had previously resided there for  43  years  and  would  have  retained
    knowledge of life, language and culture there.  In  addition,  she  had
    two sons settled in Uganda.  The  Respondent  also  considered  whether
    there were any exceptional  circumstances,  including  the  Appellant's
    husband's health problems and a psychologist  report  as  well  as  the
    claimed lack of employment opportunities in Uganda; but concluded  that
    medical treatment was available if needed in Uganda and  the  Appellant
    and her husband had sufficient qualifications and  work  experience  to
    enable them to gain employment.

 4. Judge Asjad dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  15  June
    2017 on human rights grounds.  The decision included findings that  the
    Appellant and her husband were both  working  full-time  and  that  her
    husband was fit to work: in these circumstances it  was  unlikely  that
    the Appellant was his full-time carer.  It was also  found  that  there
    was no credible reason why the Appellant's family in Uganda  would  not
    be able to assist her  on  return  to  Uganda,  nor  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor her husband could find suitable work in Uganda where they
    had lived for 24 years and where healthcare was available.  Judge Asjad
    considered the psychology reports before her but gave them only minimal
    weight because the first report was  from  2014  when  the  Appellant's
    husband's health was much worse and the update to the  report  in  2017
    was further to a  telephone  consultation  during  which  she  did  not
    consider that the psychologist had been given all of the new  necessary
    information to conduct a proper assessment.  Overall, Judge Asjad found
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    outside of the United Kingdom,  in  Uganda,  and  no  very  significant
    hurdles  to  private  life  continuing.   Although  the  Appellant  was
    financially independent and was  able  to  speak  English,  these  were
    neutral factors when conducting the balancing exercise  and  there  was
    public interest in this case in ensuring effective immigration control.
     In all of the circumstances,  it  was  found  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate to the public interest in ensuring effective  immigration
    control.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four grounds.  First, that Judge Asjad made  a
    number of factual errors which amounted to errors of  law  in  reaching
    her decision.  The first was  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Appellant's
    case, she did not say that her husband was not fit to work at  all  but
    simply that he was not fit to  continue  in  employment  as  a  teacher
    because of the problems he was having with his voice.  The  second,  in
    finding that the Appellant was working in the  United  Kingdom  at  the
    time of the hearing, when she had in fact only previously  worked  when
    permitted to do so.  Secondly, that Judge Asjad  erred  in  failing  to
    place  appropriate  weight  on  the  psychological  report   and   made
    presumptions on the  information  given  to  the  psychologist  by  the
    Appellant which were reached without proper foundation  or  assessment.
    Thirdly, before the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant relied upon  the
    House of Lords decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40 which was not dealt with at all by the Judge.
     Finally, in  any  event,  Judge  Asjad  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
    balancing exercise for the purposes of determining  proportionality  of
    the decision under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  It was also generally included within the  grounds  of  appeal
    that there was a lack of care in a very short determination.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Scott-Baker  on  13  December
    2017 on all grounds.

 7. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal as originally submitted.  In relation to the  first  ground,  it
    was stated that the factual  errors  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    employment and her husband's fitness to work were material because they
    formed part of the adverse credibility findings against the  Appellant.
    When asked whether in any event the fact that the  Appellant's  husband
    was working more than full-time was inconsistent with  the  claim  that
    the Appellant was his full-time carer, such that the  finding  on  that
    point would stand unaffected anyway, it was submitted that it was never
    the Appellant's case that she was his full-time carer, merely that  she
    provides daily care and support for her husband.

 8. In relation to the second ground of  appeal,  in  paragraph  8  of  the
    decision of Judge Asjad, details about the  psychological  report  were
    not recorded accurately, for example the dates were wrong  and  on  the
    face of the report it was clear that the psychologist  was  aware  that
    the Appellant's husband was working and the Appellant was  not  herself
    permitted to work, which shows, contrary to  the  finding  Judge  Asjad
    about information given  to  the  psychologist,  he  was  appropriately
    informed about the situation.  As such the reasons given for  attaching
    only minimal weight to the report was contrary to the  evidence.   This
    was  further  material  because  of  the  inference  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor her husband had been honest to the  tribunal  or  to  the
    psychologist.

 9. In relation to the third and fourth grounds of appeal, it was submitted
    that nothing in  the  determination  showed  that  a  proper  balancing
    exercise had been conducted for the purposes Article 8.  In particular,
    the Judge had made no reference to the appropriate  tests  or  relevant
    case law; had quoted from an unidentified case and  set  out  no  clear
    assessment of whether or not the Appellant met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was the Appellant's case that she met all of the
    substantive requirements of Appendix FM for a grant of leave to  remain
    as a partner, save for a current lack of leave to remain  and  as  such
    relied on the decision in Chikwamba (as recently endorsed as  a  matter
    of principle in the Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11) to show that her  removal
    would be a disproportionate interference with the right to respect  for
    her private and family life.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted  that
    the decision in Chikwamba had been accepted as a general principle when
    assessing proportionality in Article 8 claims and is not confined cases
    where an application  has  been  refused  merely  because  it  is  been
    considered by the Respondent to be proportionate for a person to return
    apply for entry clearance from abroad.  It is relevant  to  the  public
    interest and its expression in the Immigration Rules.

10. It was further submitted that there was no express consideration of the
    factors set out in section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, including that the Appellant spoke English,  that  she
    had been lawfully resident for nearly 10 years, that  she  had  had  no
    recourse to public funds, that she had previously worked in the  United
    Kingdom and owned her own home here.  The Appellant's  claim  that  she
    had only inadvertently become an overstayer due to  a  problem  with  a
    previous application and her representatives not paying the  applicable
    fee had also not been taken into account.

11. The Home Office Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  Judge  Asjad  had
    adequately considered whether the Appellant met the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules, finding for the reasons given in  paragraph  7  that
    she did not and although the reasons were brief they were adequate.

12. In relation to the Chikwamba point, the  first  issue  is  whether  the
    Appellant had established that entry clearance would be granted to  her
    as  a  partner,  the  second  question  is   then   whether   temporary
    interference with family life would be justified whether it would be  a
    disproportionate interference.  Although it was accepted that there was
    some evidence of employment income of the Appellant's husband,  it  was
    clear that this was insufficient to show that all of  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules would be met, not least because the  specified
    evidence in Appendix FM-SE was not before the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    these circumstances, any failure to consider the  Chikwamba  point  was
    immaterial as the Appellant  had  not  got  past  the  first  point  of
    consideration.  In any event the burden is on  the  Appellant  to  show
    that  the  interference  would  be  disproportionate  and   there   was
    insufficient material before the First-tier Tribunal to  identify  this
    in the present appeal.

13. In relation to Article 8, again it  was  submitted  that  although  the
    reasons given for the findings on this  point  were  brief,  they  were
    adequate.

14. The Home Office Presenting Officer did  not  dispute  the  two  claimed
    errors of fact but in all the  circumstances  of  the  appeal  question
    whether they could have materially affected the outcome.

Findings and reasons

 1. The errors of fact identified by the Appellant in the first  ground  of
    appeal have not been disputed by the Respondent and  I  find  that  two
    errors of fact were made in this case which amount to  errors  of  law.
    First, the finding that it was the Appellant's case  that  her  husband
    was not fit to work when the evidence was that he was working and  only
    unable to carry on specific employment as a  teacher  due  to  problems
    with his voice.  Secondly, the finding that the Appellant was  employed
    at the date of the hearing when there was no evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal to support that finding, only oral evidence that she  had
    worked in the past.

 2. These errors are material as they were used to make adverse credibility
    findings against the Appellant (as the findings were considered  to  be
    contrary to her claim before the First-tier Tribunal) and were used  as
    the basis for the  further  findings  made  in  paragraph  8  that  the
    Appellant  had  deliberately  not  given  full   information   to   the
    psychologist  for  his  report  about  her  husband's   employment   in
    particular.  In any event, that finding was also directly  against  the
    evidence on the face of the first psychologist report which referred to
    the couple's then employment situation.  This finding  in  paragraph  8
    then formed at least a significant part, if not  the  only  reason  why
    only minimal weight was attached to the psychologist's  report.   Those
    factual errors also lead through into an error of law as per the second
    ground  of  appeal,  that  insufficient  weight  was   given   to   the
    psychologist's report as the reasons for minimal weight being given  to
    it were not supported by the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. As to the third and fourth grounds of appeal which were argued together
    at the hearing, I find that the Appellant did raise the Chikwamba point
    which Judge Asjad failed to make any reference to or deal with  at  all
    in her decision, which amounts to an error of  law.   The  findings  in
    this case dealing with the issues of whether the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (either under paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM or would  meet  the  requirements  for  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance as a partner)  as  well  as  the  Article  8  assessment  and
    balancing exercise are essentially contained in just two paragraphs  of
    the decision and to some extent show a lack of care,  for  example,  by
    failing to include the case reference for  the  quote  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 7.

 4. The Judge does not expressly set out any of the applicable law,  either
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, case law  or  the  statutory
    considerations in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, but  has  shown  by  the  language  used  and  factors
    considered that the majority of these points were in  fact  considered.
    For example, paragraph 7 sets out relevant factors and findings to  the
    question of whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing in Uganda (relevant to the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules) and whether there would  be  very
    significant hurdles to her reintegration if removed to Uganda (the test
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules  in  respect  of
    private life).  Those same tests are considered further in paragraph  8
    where more detailed consideration is given to the Appellant's husband's
    physical and mental health, but where it was noted  that  there  was  a
    lack of evidence of any current medical treatment for  mental  illness,
    no need for full-time care and as already found in paragraph 7,  health
    care is available in Uganda as is family support.  Albeit brief,  these
    are clear findings that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  have
    not been met by the Appellant although it  still  questionable  whether
    they are adequate or sustainable in all of the circumstances and taking
    into account the errors set out above.

 5. In terms of the balancing exercise for the purposes of Article 8, Judge
    Asjad does expressly take into account the factors in section  117B(1),
    (2) and (3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  when
    concluding that the decision was not  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the right to respect for private and family life.  However,  there
    is no express consideration of the wider factors  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant in relation to Article 8 as set out in the skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst I do not  therefore  find  that
    all of the Appellant's criticisms of the reasoning and findings in this
    case have been made out, many are.

 6. The issue for me is whether the errors identified above  were  material
    to the outcome of the appeal.  The Respondent submitted that they  were
    not, particularly as there was a lack of evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal as to the Appellant's ability to meet the requirements  for  a
    grant of entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse of a  person
    settled here such that she would not  get  past  the  first  hurdle  in
    relying on the decision in Chikwamba.  There  is  some  force  in  that
    submission given that there was only limited evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal of the Appellant's  husband's  employment  and  no  clear
    submission as to  her  ability  to  meet  the  requirements  for  entry
    clearance.

 7. If each error identified above is taken in isolation,  it  is  possible
    that none would individually be material to the outcome in this appeal.
     However, given the errors of fact which were not disputed; the lack of
    weight given to the psychologist report for a factual reason  which  is
    not sustainable; the complete failure to consider the  Chikwamba  point
    at all, and the very brief findings on Article 8; this  is  a  case  in
    which it can not be said with sufficient certainty that the outcome  of
    the appeal would inevitably have been the same even if those errors did
    not occur.  When reading the decision as a whole, I find that there are
    a number of errors of law (including errors of  fact  which  amount  to
    errors of law) which, at  least  cumulatively,  were  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal and as such it is  necessary  to  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Asjad.

 8. In the event of a material error of law being found, the parties agreed
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham  hearing
centre) for a de novo hearing before any Judge except Judge Asjad.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         1st March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

