
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11244/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 30 September 2020             |On the 06 October 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     DH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Adams, instructed on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")
         who dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated on the 31
         January 2019.

      2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of minors. Unless and until
         a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the appellant is granted
         anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
         indirectly identify her or her family members. This direction
         applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to
         comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
         proceedings.

Background:

      3. The background is set out in the decision of the FtTJ and the
         evidence in the bundle. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan. In
         December 2010 she married her spouse, who is a British citizen with
         a Sudanese family background. They have three children who are all
         British citizens and British passports were obtained for them.

      4. The appellant's spouse has been living on and off in the United
         Kingdom since December 1986 and has a number of university
         qualifications including a PhD. In 2007 he returned to Sudan where
         he held a number of academic and academic management positions. As
         a result of difficulties with the management he decided not to
         continue with his job. It was also said that there were
         difficulties with the security personnel which led to the family
         having to move and being split up for a time. The appellant's
         spouse returned to the United Kingdom in August 2016.

      5. On 5 July 2017, the appellant made an application for entry
         clearance to bring the children to the United Kingdom to visit her
         husband. It was said the visit was for a period of six months and
         that the application made was because she could not qualify for
         spouse Visa as a result of her spouse's lack of employment. It was
         hoped that whilst in the country he would be able to obtain
         employment and application could be made for a spousal visa.

      6. On 1 August 2017 she and the children were issued with entry
         clearance Visa's and they arrived on 25 September 2017.

      7. Before the expiry of her Visa on 1 February 2018, she made an
         application on 31 January 2018 for leave to remain on human rights
         grounds.

      8. In a decision issued on 4 May 2018 the respondent refused that
         application. It was noted that she did not qualify for leave to
         remain under the 10 year partner route as she did not meet all of
         the eligibility requirements of section E-LTRP 2.1-2.1 because she
         was currently in the UK would leave as a visitor. The decision
         referred to EX1 although no consideration was given to it in the
         body of the decision. As to private life, it was noted that she
         could not satisfy the provisions of paragraph 276ADE on the basis
         of her short length of residence, her age and that there were no
         very significant obstacles to her integration to Sudan if required
         to leave the UK taking into account her previous length of
         residence, including her childhood, formative years and a
         significant portion of her adult life, having retained her
         knowledge of life language and culture and that she had family
         relatives remaining there. Under "exceptional circumstances"
         respondent considered whether there are any circumstances which
         would render refusal a breach of article 8 because it would result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant, her spouse
         or the children but on the evidence provided, it was considered
         that there were no compelling evidence that their health in the UK
         could not be maintained by her spouse to a sufficient level in her
         absence. It was considered reasonable to expect her to return to
         Sudan and apply for entry clearance in the appropriate category and
         whilst this may involve a degree of disruption to her private life,
         it was considered to be proportionate to the legitimate aim of
         maintaining effective immigration control.

      9. The appellant appealed that decision and it came before the FtT on
         7 November 2018. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal in a decision
         promulgated on 31 January 2019. There was no dispute that the
         appellant and spouse were validly married, that their relationship
         was genuine and subsisting, that they intend to live permanently in
         the UK and that her spouse was a British citizen living in the
         United Kingdom and that they had three children all of whom are
         British citizens and that all family members had a Sudanese family
         background.  The judge also accepted on the balance of
         probabilities that the parties were telling the truth about their
         intentions both when she applied for entry clearance and when she
         first arrived in the United Kingdom with the children (at [36]). As
         to the best interests of the children, the assessment was made that
         it was in their best interest for them to stay with the appellant
         as their mother and their father whether in the United Kingdom or
         in Sudan. The FtTJ considered the evidence concerning the youngest
         child's medical needs but concluded that he was not on the autism
         spectrum or that appropriate support and advice would not be
         available to him in Sudan. He found that the children were
         bilingual in Arabic and English and that they had spent the
         majority of their lives in Sudan and their cultural heritage was
         also their experience of having lived in Sudan. Having taken into
         account those factors, he did not consider that it been shown that
         their best interests required for them to live in the United
         Kingdom as opposed to Sudan. When considering the issue of
         proportionality and the public interest considerations under S117B,
         he found that the appellant could not meet the requirements of
         paragraph 276 ADE or Appendix FM and in relation to section
         117B(6), the FtTJ did not find this to be a case whether the
         question as to whether it was reasonable to expect the children to
         leave United Kingdom did in fact arise. He proceeded on the basis
         that the appellant could return to Sudan and to apply for entry
         clearance with the possibility that the children and/or her spouse
         accompany her and thus it was proportionate to require her to leave
         the United Kingdom.

     10. Permission to appeal was issued in March 2019. Initially permission
         was refused by the FtTJ on 5 March 2019 and an application was made
         for the application to be reconsidered by the Upper Tribunal. There
         appears to have been delay in considering that application but on
         20 April 2020 permission was granted by UTJ Kamara.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     11. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic the Upper Tribunal issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could take place via Skype. The
         hearing took place on 30 September 2020, by means of Skype for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected to by the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
         practicable, and both parties agreed that all issues could be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There
         were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied
         both advocates were able to make their respective cases by the
         chosen means.

     12. There was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the respondent.  I
         also heard oral submissions from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     13. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Adams relied upon the written grounds
         and the grant of permission which I have taken into account.  The
         written grounds challenge the legal test applied to the issue of
         the assessment of reasonableness and whether the judge applied the
         correct test.

     14. The submissions can be readily distilled into a challenge to the
         assessment of best interests and the overall assessment of the
         issue of reasonableness of return and issues relating to the
         circumstances in Sudan for the adult parties which had not been
         considered or findings reached.   At the oral hearing, after
         hearing submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Walker on behalf
         of the respondent conceded that there was a material error of law
         as set out in the grounds when read with the grant of permission. I
         find the Respondent's concession to be appropriately made, and in
         the circumstances, I give only summary reasons for finding that the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a
         material error of law such that it is necessary to set aside the
         decision.

     15.  Whilst Ms Adams relied upon the grounds in which it was asserted
         that EX 1 was relevant, in reality the statutory provisions
         contained in section 117B (6) were at the forefront of the issues
         relied upon by Ms Adams and  in this appeal which states that the
         public interest will not require the person's removal where that
         person has  a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         'qualifying child' and it would not be reasonable to expect the
         child to leave the United Kingdom.

     16. There is no dispute that the three children are "qualifying
         children' for the purposes of section 117B (6) as they are all
         British Citizens.

     17. The FtTJ set out his assessment of this issues at paragraphs [102]-
         [114]. At paragraphs [102]-[104] the FtTJ considered the
         circumstances of the family; that all of the children are British
         citizens and entitled to live in the UK but that the appellant's
         spouse could look after the children if the appellant returned to
         Sudan.

     18. At [103] the FtTJ stated that "perhaps the most obvious thing that
         needs to be said is that the children do not necessarily have to
         leave the United Kingdom even if the appellant was required to do
         so". At [106] the FtTJ took into account that the family "had made
         choices" which had split the family previously. He then stated at
         [107] "that being so it does not seem to me that this is a case
         where the question as to whether it is reasonable to expect the
         children to leave the United Kingdom in fact arises. Given Mr A's
         status as a British citizen living in this country and is obvious
         and natural involvement in their lives it is possible for them to
         stay with him here."

     19. Both parties are in agreement that the FtTJ applied the wrong test
         and that as a result he did not assess the issue of reasonableness
         in the correct legal context or address particular features of the
         evidence which were relevant to that assessment.

     20. As to the issue of whether the child will leave the UK,  the
         correct test being identified and summarised in Secretary of State
         v AB (Jamaica and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, at paragraphs
         72- 75; the question that the statute requires to be addressed is a
         single question; is it reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         UK?

     21. The Court stated:

             "72. I respectfully agree with the interpretation given by the
             UT to section 117B(6)(b) in JG.

             73.  Speaking for myself, I would not necessarily endorse
             everything that was said by the UT in its reasoning, in
             particular at para. 25, as to the meaning of the concept "to
             expect". However, in my view that does not make any material
             difference to the ultimate interpretation, which I consider
             was correctly set out by the UT in JG. In my view, the concept
             of "to expect" something can be ambiguous. It can be, as the
             UT thought at para. 25, simply a prediction of a future event.
             However, it can have a more normative aspect. That is the
             sense in which Admiral Nelson reputedly used the word at
             Trafalgar, when he said that "England expects every man to do
             his duty." That is not a prediction but is something less than
             an order. To take another example, if a judge says late in the
             day at a hearing that she expects counsel to have filed and
             served supplementary skeleton arguments by 9 a.m. the
             following morning, so that there is no delay to the start of a
             hearing an hour later: although she may not be ordering the
             production of that skeleton argument, that is what she
             considers should happen. That is not a prediction of a future
             occurrence. It carries some normative force.

             74.  Finally, in that regard, I agree with and would endorse
             the following passage in the judgment of UTJ Plimmer in SR
             (Subsisting Parental Relationship - s117B (6)) Pakistan [2018]
             UKUT 00334 (IAC), a case which was decided before decision of
             the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), at para. 51:

                  "... It is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can be
                  said to be of no application or to pose a merely
                  hypothetical question. Section 117B (6) dictates whether
                  or not the public interest requires removal where a person
                  not liable to deportation has a genuine and subsisting
                  parental relation with a qualifying child. The question
                  that must be answered is whether it would not be
                  reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. That
                  question as contained in statute, cannot be ignored, or
                  glossed over. Self-evidently, section 117B (6) is engaged
                  whether the child will or will not in fact or practice
                  leave the UK. It addresses the normative and
                  straightforward question - should the child be 'expected
                  to leave' the UK?"

             75.  I respectfully agree. It is clear, in my view, that the
             question which the statute requires to be addressed is a
             single question: is it reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the UK? It does not consist of two questions, as suggested by
             the Secretary of State. If the answer to the single question
             is obvious, because it is common ground that the child will
             not be expected to leave the UK, that does not mean that the
             question does not have to be asked; it merely means that the
             answer to the question is: No."

     22. That decision was not available to the FtTJ at the date of the
         hearing which took place in November 2018 (his decision being
         promulgated in January 2019) consequently it is not the position
         that he failed to apply a relevant decision but that since his
         assessment, the law has been clarified in a number of important
         decisions by both the Court of Appeal and also by the Upper
         Tribunal which has the effect of making that analysis wrong in law.



     23. As Ms Adams submits at paragraph [114] the judge stated that he
         considered the decision in SR (Pakistan) [2018] UKUT 00334 was
         incorrect in law and would need to be revisited but subsequently
         that decision has been given approval in Secretary of State v AB
         (Jamaica and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 at paragraph 74.

     24. As a consequence, both parties agree that the wrong test was
         applied, and it affected the assessment of section 117B(6).

     25. Ms Adams and behalf of the appellant also identified other relevant
         issues. She submitted that the FtTJ failed to consider the
         circumstances of the youngest child's vulnerability in the light of
         the evidence. At [71] the FtTJ stated that he was not able to
         conclude that the youngest child was on the autistic spectrum nor
         that appropriate support assistance would not be available.
         However, Ms Adams submitted that there was no consideration of the
         evidence which referred to the multiple assessments that the child
         was undergoing in the UK and that he had also been noted as being
         assessed as requiring special educational needs (see witness
         statement at paragraph 16) and associated socialisation and
         communication issues.

     26.  In my view, I accept the submission that this was an issue that
         was therefore relevant to the reasonableness of return in two ways;
         firstly whether it was reasonable for a child in those
         circumstances to leave the United Kingdom on the basis that any
         identified vulnerability was relevant to assessing any sudden
         change of residence/disruption. Furthermore, a child in those
         circumstances would also be deprived of relevant healthcare and to
         be removed from the assessment process which the child was
         undergoing at the time of the hearing.

     27. In SD (British citizen children - entry clearance) Sri Lanka [2020]
         UKUT 43(IAC) the Tribunal held (in the context of an entry
         clearance appeal)

             1.   British citizenship is a relevant factor when assessing
             the best interests of the child.

             2.   British citizenship includes the opportunities for
             children to live in the UK, receive free education, have full
             access to healthcare and welfare provision and participate in
             the life of their local community as they grow up.

             3.   There is no equivalent to s.117B(6) of the Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in any provision of law or
             policy relating to entry clearance applicants.

             4.   In assessing whether refusal to grant a parent entry
             clearance to join a partner has unjustifiably harsh
             consequences, the fact that such a parent has a child living
             with him or her who has British citizenship is a relevant
             factor. However, the weight to be accorded to such a factor
             will depend heavily on the particular circumstances and is not
             necessarily a powerful factor.

             5.   When assessing the significance to be attached to a
             parent's child having British citizenship, it will also be
             relevant to consider whether that child possesses dual
             nationality and what rights and benefits attach to that other
             nationality.

     28. The decision not only highlights the importance of British
         citizenship, which the judge did make reference to at [75],  but
         that in the assessment of reasonableness, the rights and benefits
         in the sense of having full access to healthcare and welfare
         provision is also a relevant consideration. The parties agree that
         this was not addressed in the assessment under S117B(6).

     29. A further issue relied upon by Ms Adams relates to the assessment
         of proportionality. The FtTJ reached the conclusion that the
         appellant could return to Sudan to obtain entry clearance with the
         children being left with their father. Whilst the FtTJ did refer to
         there being emotional problems at [116], that assessment did not
         take account of the effect upon the children, and in particular the
         youngest child who has special needs and the effect upon that
         child of the separation of the family unit or any length of delay
         and the consequences of that delay.

     30. In Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 129
         (IAC)  the Upper Tribunal held that in addressing the "real world"
         context, it included consideration of everything that related to
         the child/children, both in the UK and country of return and how
         removal would affect his or her education, health and relationships
         with family and friends ( see [111]). The advocates agree that this
         was not considered, and thus no assessment was made of the evidence
         and no factual findings were made.

     31. Ms Adams also relied upon paragraph 10 of the written grounds. She
         submitted that the FtTJ failed to make any findings on the
         circumstances in Sudan which related to the adult parties. She
         submitted that this was relevant also to the issue of
         reasonableness of return to Sudan for the children. If the parents
         were to return to Sudan in circumstances which would cause distress
         to them, it would have a similar outcome and effect upon the
         children. She pointed to the evidence given by the appellant and
         her partner that on two occasions they had separated due to the
         security forces and there had been significant upheaval for the
         family. She submitted that this was raised within the written
         evidence and that there was some consideration of this in the oral
         evidence reflected at paragraphs [59 - 61] of the decision. Whilst
         the judge referred to the appellant as being "fearful", she
         submitted that the FtTJ misconstrued the evidence.

     32. Looking at the decision, the FtTJ considered the circumstances in
         Sudan at paragraphs 38 - 41 and in particular in the context of why
         the appellant's spouse decided to leave Sudan and move back to the
         United Kingdom in 2016. Two reasons were given; the first related
         to difficulties with the administration and the University. The
         judge plainly accepted that (see 38). However, the second was that
         he had come to the adverse attention of the Sudanese authorities
         because he had been critical of some of the policies. The judge
         stated at [39] that that reason was "somewhat more problematic".
         This is because he considered that it potentially raised a form of
         international protection and no claim had been made by the
         appellant.  As a result, and because Counsel did not seek to rest
         any part of her case on that factor, the judge did not make any
         findings of fact (at [41]). Ms Adams submitted that it had been
         said in the witness statements that the appellant and a partner had
         lived apart as a result of the security forces following the
         appellant's spouse and that this was relevant to determining the
         situation the children would be returning to. This was not a
         protection issue in the sense of an asylum claim but was relevant
         to the general circumstances in Sudan. I have considered this
         submission and it appears that the FtTJ did not make findings on
         this issue (at [41]) not only because an international protection
         claim had not been made but that because counsel did not seek to
         advance that particular factor and thus the judge stated he could
         only note that there was an allegation about this. I cannot accept
         the submission made by Miss Adams that even if it was not
         specifically advanced, it had to be considered by the FtTJ. Whilst
         there may have been evidence concerning difficulties in Sudan, it
         had not been made clear to the FtTJ how that was relevant to his
         assessment. However that said, I would accept as Ms Adams submitted
         that it was not necessary for the appellant to make a protection
         claim for any issues to be addressed and that at [61] the appellant
         had given evidence as to why the children had not gone to school in
         Sudan. She had given the explanation that she was "fearful" and
         that the judge found that to be an insufficient explanation in the
         context of the appellant's case that they could only go to school
         United Kingdom. It appears from the evidence the basis of her fear
         was as a result of events in Sudan which had affected the
         children's education and therefore that had been an issue which had
         been raised. It is therefore accepted that no findings of fact were
         made concerning the circumstances in Sudan that took into account
         all aspects of the claim.

     33. At the hearing Ms Adams sought to amend the grounds of appeal to
         include a challenge to the decision of the FtTJ and the failure to
         consider the IDI's. The application had not been made on notice to
         either the Tribunal or to the respondent and as Ms Adams conceded
         there has been a lengthy delay from when the grounds were issued in
         March 2019 to the date upon which the amendment was sought in
         September 2020. There has been no explanation for such a lengthy
         delay. However as it is conceded on behalf the respondent that
         there is a material error of law in the decision of the FtTJ which
         has the effect of undermining the findings of fact, analysis and
         outcome and therefore should be set aside, it is not necessary for
         me to address this.

     34. However, I would observe that as I read the decision it was not a
         reluctance to take account of the IDI's but that the FtTJ had not
         been provided with a copy by Counsel (at [112]) and further, the
         argument had not been developed (at[111]). Nonetheless it is now
         procedurally the position that the respondent, through the
         presenting officer has a duty to provide copies of IDI's that are
         relevant to the issues.

     35. For those reasons I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated that
         the decision of the FtTJ discloses the making of a material error
         of law and the decision should therefore be set aside as both
         parties agree.

     36. Ms Adams submitted that the Tribunal should preserve the finding at
         [36] where the judge accepted that it was more likely than not that
         the appellant and her spouse had been telling the truth about their
         intentions both when she applied for entry clearance (that she was
         going to United Kingdom on a temporary basis as a visitor and that
         she was expecting to return see [115]) and when she first arrived
         in the United Kingdom with the children. I agree that that is an
         appropriate finding that should be preserved along with paragraph
         31 which is uncontentious.

     37. As to remaking the decision, Ms Adams in her oral submissions
         stated that if an error was found in the decision set aside that it
         should be remitted to the FtT for a full hearing on the issues
         identified. Mr Walker did not disagree with this.

     38. I have therefore considered whether the appeal should be remitted
         to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that decision I have
         given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the
         First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
         appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     39. I have considered Ms Adams' submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the
         parties  to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues,
         further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of
         Article 8 in the light of the relevant law and in my judgement the
         best course and consistent with the overriding objective is for it
         to be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. The Tribunal will
         be seized of the task of undertaking an assessment of the evidence
         and any updated evidence ( given that the hearing before the FtTJ
         took place in November 2018 and the medical evidence)  making
         findings of fact relating  and will be required to do so on the
         basis of the evidence as at the date of the hearing which includes
         the best interests assessment of the children.  I therefore set
         aside the decision of the FtTJ by consent.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error
on a point of law and therefore the decision shall be set aside and to be
remitted for a further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or her family members.  This direction applies both
to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
     Dated 1 October 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

