
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/11428/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 August 2019                       |On 13 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                               MR DILIP TAMANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kainth, promulgated on 25 April 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 17 July 2019.


Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now



Background

 3. On 31 December 2017, the appellant, then aged thirty-four, applied  for
    entry clearance in order to join his sponsor Lakh Bahadur Tamang in the
    United Kingdom. The sponsor who is a retired member of the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas, was issued with entry clearance on 4 March 2010,  having  been
    granted settlement in the United Kingdom in 2009. He entered the United
    Kingdom on 14 September 2010.

 4. In refusing that application in a decision dated  23  March  2018,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer referred to the Secretary of State's policy  in
    Annex K of the Immigration Directorate Instructions, as  amended  on  5
    January 2015.  The ECO  accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom, that the appellant was a  minor  at  the
    time the sponsor was discharged from  the  armed  forces  and  that  an
    application would have been made for settlement  before  2009  had  the
    sponsor had the option available to him.

 5. The respondent also refused the application under paragraph 320(8A)  of
    the Rules because the appellant  failed  to  present  a  valid  medical
    certificate confirming that he had been screened for  active  pulmonary
    tuberculosis and was free of the  disease.  In  addition,  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant was financially  or  emotionally  dependent
    upon the sponsor, that he was aged 30 or  under  on  the  date  of  the
    application or that the appellant had lived apart from the sponsor  for
    less than  two  years  as  required  by  Annex  K  and  there  were  no
    exceptional compassionate circumstances. Reference was made to  Article
    8 ECHR, Gurung & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising  and  others  [2013]
    UKUT 00567, however the respondent was satisfied that the  reasons  for
    refusal outweighed the consideration of historical injustice.

 6. The appellant appealed that  decision,  enclosing  documents  including
    remittance receipts dating from 2017.

 7. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) reviewed the decision on  12  February
    2009 and  noted  that  the  appellant  had  still  not  provided  a  TB
    certificate nor any new documents.  Considering the  issues  raised  in
    the grounds, the ECM stated that the only evidence of emotional support
    was from 2017 and made 5 weeks  prior  to  the  application.   The  ECM
    considered that given the period of separation of over 7 years, it  was
    reasonable that there be some tangible evidence  of  communication  and
    was satisfied that  emotional  dependency  had  not  been  established.
    Regarding financial support, the ECM noted that evidence  of  this  was
    dated from 2017 rather than throughout the sponsor's 7-year absence and
    consequently he was not satisfied that financial  dependency  had  been
    established.

 8. The ECM did not accept that Article 8 was engaged because the appellant
    is an adult who had spent all his life in Nepal,  he  did  not  qualify
    under the Rules and no exceptional circumstances had been demonstrated.







The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was conceded that the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The
    judge accepted that the appellant and sponsor  enjoyed  limited  family
    life but found the refusal of entry clearance proportionate because the
    appellant was not financially dependent  upon  the  sponsor,  that  the
    parties were not in frequent communication  as  claimed  and  that  the
    sponsor and his wife were responsible for the separation by choosing to
    come to the United Kingdom and leaving the appellant in Nepal.

The grounds of appeal

10. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge failed to consider material
    evidence in the form of money transfer receipts and call logs predating
    the decision in question.  Secondly,  it  was  said  that  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment did not include a proper assessment  of  the
    effect of the historical injustice or identify matters over  and  above
    the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration  policy,  Ghising
    at [32] and, furthermore, the judge had misconstrued the dicta  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Gurung at [42].

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

12. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.

The hearing

13. Ms Jaja  submitted  that  the  second  ground  was  the  stronger.  The
    following  is  a  summary  of  the  points  she  made.  The  judge  was
    categorical about the first Razgar question. There was  no  issue  with
    his Section 117 findings. At [10] of  the  decision  the  judge  quoted
    Ghising and showed that he was aware of the  correct  legal  principles
    but failed to apply them. Reliance was  placed  on  Ghising  from  [59]
    onwards. The decision letter had accepted  that  an  application  would
    have been made for the sponsor to enter the United Kingdom before  2009
    had the option been available. The sponsor's evidence was that he would
    have settled in the UK much earlier. Every box of  Ghising  was  ticked
    and if the judge had applied the judgment,  he  would  have  reached  a
    decision on proportionality in the appellant's  favour.  Regarding  the
    first ground, Ms Jaja argued that the judge failed  to  correctly  note
    the telephone records and remittance receipts and  assess  them,  which
    led to him not considering material evidence.

14. Mr Walker stated that the first  ground  was  made  out  regarding  the
    records of the remittances.  As  for  the  second  ground,  he  further
    conceded  that  there  had  not  been  a  proper  assessment   of   the
    circumstances of the appellant.

15.  Given  Mr  Walker's  concessions  on  both  grounds,  I  indicated  my
    acceptance that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  displayed  a
    material error of law.

16. I was invited to immediately remake the decision by Ms Jaja. She  added
    that the judge made clear findings on  family  life  and  urged  me  to
    remake the decision on proportionality, adopting  those  findings.  She
    wished to call no evidence nor make further submissions. Mr Walker also
    wished to add nothing.

17. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on the remaking.

Decision on error of law

18. Addressing the criticism of  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  historic
    injustice issue, it was apparent that the judge had regard to the terms
    of respondent's the policy in Annex K, the relevant case law  which  is
    reproduced at [32] of his decision and he noted at [40] that this issue
    was a relevant factor to the question of  proportionality.  Nonetheless
    at [44], the judge decided that the separation of the family  unit  was
    solely a consequence of the sponsor deciding to settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom rather than historical injustice. As conceded by Mr Walker, the
    judge's proportionality assessment did not include a proper  assessment
    of the effect of the historical injustice.

    Remaking

19. In remaking this appeal,  I  have  taken  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence  before  me,  including  that  contained  in  the  appellant's
    addendum bundle of evidence sent under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  23
    August 2019.

20. It is common ground that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules at the date of decision and did not  fall  within
    applicable  Home  Office  policy  on  adult  dependants  of  ex-Ghurkha
    soldiers found in Annex K.

21. I have considered what was said in Gurung, at  [45]:  "Ultimately,  the
    question whether an individual enjoys family life is one  of  fact  and
    depends on a careful consideration of all the  relevant  facts  of  the
    particular case." The relevant question, namely whether there existed a
    degree of dependency over and above that which would be expected  in  a
    normal family. While I accept that the  appellant  has  been  at  least
    partially financially supported  by  the  sponsor  and  that  there  is
    telephone contact, I do not consider this to be evidence of a level  of
    dependency beyond what could be expected in  a  normal  loving  family.
    However, even were I to adopt the finding of the  previous  judge  that
    there was "limited" family life between the appellant and  the  sponsor
    and find that Article 8 ECHR is engaged, I would  dismiss  this  appeal
    for the following reasons.

22. The appellant was unable to meet several of the mandatory  requirements
    in Annex K as correctly noted in the decision letter  and  has  yet  to
    provide a TB certificate.

23. To support the claim of dependency the sponsor states that when he  and
    his wife visit Nepal, they only visit the appellant, despite several of
    the appellant's siblings living there.  Indeed,  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor was that one of the  appellant's  sisters  is  responsible  for
    distributing the sponsor's pension among all the siblings remaining  in
    Nepal. The sponsor worries that the appellant, who he  says  has  never
    worked nor studied beyond school level, will never  be  independent  in
    Nepal. The appellant is described as having no medical problems and the
    evidence does not display any compelling or exceptional circumstances.

24. Considering the issue of proportionality, I am required to have  regard
    to the matters set out in section 117B of the  2002  Act,  as  amended.
    Those matters being  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest. In this case, the appellant does not
    speak English and  he  is  not  independent,  albeit  he  is  currently
    financially supported to some extent by the sponsor.

25. I acknowledge the issue of historic injustice and have  considered  the
    findings in Ghising. In particular, I accept  that  the  fact  that  an
    adult child has been prevented from following their parents due  to  an
    historic  injustice  is  a  relevant  factor  in  the   proportionality
    exercise. I would note that the appellant in this case is  not  in  the
    same position as the claimant in that case. He is a decade  older,  has
    not lived with the sponsor for nearly 9 years, there is  a  gap  of  at
    least 5 years in the evidence of financial  dependency,  he  has  close
    relatives still living in Nepal and the sponsor has other  children  in
    the United Kingdom to assist him. I am also bound by what was  said  in
    Pun [2017] EWCA Civ 2016;

    20.  The critical feature  for  the  right  to  rely  on  the  historic
         injustice  is  dependency.   ..Both   the   FTT   and   the   Upper
         Tribunal...have found that there is no dependency and that, to  our
         mind,  prevents  the  historic  injustice  from  having  the   same
         considerable weight it must have  for  adults  dependent  on  their
         parents at the time when the application is made."

26. It  is  argued  that  the  appellant  is  emotionally  and  financially
    dependent on the sponsor. I find that the documentary evidence of  that
    dependency to be sparse,  particularly  during  the  years  immediately
    after the sponsor left Nepal for the United Kingdom.  The  evidence  of
    financial support was evidenced by one money transfer receipt for 2016,
    seven for 2017 and monthly remittances for  2018.  While,  the  sponsor
    claimed that he had given cash to friends and family for the appellant,
    no evidence to support this has been provided at any stage.

27. The point made by the  respondent  stands;  that  being  there  was  no
    documentary evidence of the appellant being  financially  supported  by
    the sponsor until approximately a year prior  to  the  application  for
    entry clearance being made. As for the evidence of  emotional  support,
    the call logs date from 30 November 2017 onwards.  I  have  taken  into
    consideration the indication that telephone contact continued after the
    application and continues to date,  however  there  is  no  documentary
    evidence of telephone contact until shortly before the application  for
    entry clearance was made, as the respondent states in the decision.  In
    essence, there is an absence  of  continuing  emotional  and  financial
    dependency during a five-year period following the sponsor arriving  in
    the United Kingdom in 2010. While  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    sponsor would have settled in the United Kingdom earlier  were  it  not
    for the historic injustice, it is the case that the  sponsor  left  the
    Gurkha Regiment in 1969, whereas the appellant was not born until  1983
    and thus he would not have been able to accompany his father. Given the
    foregoing findings, I have limited the weight which I have attached  to
    the historic injustice issue. I conclude that considering all  matters,
    including the appellant's limited emotional and financial dependency on
    the sponsor, that his circumstances are  insufficiently  compelling  to
    outweigh the public interest considerations applicable in this case.

28. In conclusion, the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant  entry
    clearance was not disproportionate given the circumstances.

29. For the above reasons:


    The First-tier Tribunal judge materially erred in law and his  decision
    is set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


    Signed
                       Date 06 September 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
