
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11795/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 November 2020              |On 2 December 2020               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Raj kumar sharma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The sponsor, Honey Sharma Bakshi
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("the  ECO")  appeals,  with  permission
    granted by Judge Simpson, against a decision which was issued by  Judge
    Adio ("the judge") on 31 March  2020.   By  that  decision,  the  judge
    allowed Mr Sharma's appeal against the ECO's  decision  to  refuse  him
    entry  clearance  as  the  Adult  Dependent  Relative  ("ADR")  of  his
    daughter, Ms Honey Sharma  Bakshi  ("the  sponsor").   The  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis that Mr Sharma's ongoing exclusion from the UK was
    in breach of Article 8 ECHR, notwithstanding his inability to meet  the
    ADR provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 2. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal: Mr Sharma as the appellant;  the  ECO  as  the
    respondent.

Background

 3. The appellant is a seventy-year old Indian national.  He was born on 22
    December 1949.  He has visited the United  Kingdom  in  the  past.   He
    currently holds a multiple entry visit visa, valid  until  2024,  which
    would enable him to travel to the United Kingdom to visit  the  sponsor
    but they have both taken the view that his worsening  health  precludes
    any such visits.  As long ago as April 2019, he made an application for
    entry clearance as an Adult Dependent Relative.  He gave his address in
    Greater Nodia West, near Delhi, and her address in Sutton.   He  stated
    that he was a retired widower and that he lived alone.   He  said  that
    the sponsor was his only child; that he was  dependent  upon  her;  and
    that he needed '24 hours care'.  He had been advised by his doctor  not
    to be alone and to have proper care  from  his  relatives.   Supporting
    evidence was provided with the  application,  including  a  sponsorship
    undertaking made by the sponsor and  backed  by  HSBC  bank  statements
    showing significant credit balances; evidence of the appellant and  the
    sponsor owning their own homes; and proof of the  sponsor's  employment
    for a company called Travelclick, at which she earns a salary  of  more
    than �70,000 per annum.

 4. The respondent refused the application because: (i) the  appellant  had
    failed to provide a tuberculosis certificate; (ii) had not  established
    that he required care which he could not receive in  India;  and  (iii)
    had failed to establish that the sponsor's property in Sutton would not
    be overcrowded in the event  that  he  moved  in  there.   It  was  not
    accepted that the refusal of the application would involve a breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the FtT and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  the
    judge, sitting at Hatton Cross, on 9 March 2020.  The sponsor  attended
    without legal representation.  The  respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting  Officer.   The  judge  received  a  quantity  of  evidence,
    including a number of medical documents, and  he  heard  oral  evidence
    from the sponsor.  He found that the appellant was unable to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules but that the refusal of admission demonstrated a lack
    of respect for the appellant's  family  life  with  the  sponsor.   The
    appeal was accordingly allowed.

 6. The respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal on a  single
    ground.   It  is  submitted  by  her  that  the  judge's  decision   is
    inconsistent,  in  that  he  concluded  in  his  assessment  under  the
    Immigration Rules that the appellant did  not  require  24  hour  care,
    whereas he had decided that Article 8 ECHR would  be  breached  by  the
    appellant's ongoing exclusion because he required 24  hour  care.   The
    judge's decision was said to be confused.  Judge Simpson considered the
    single ground to be arguable.

 7. In submissions before me, Mr Tufan relied upon the grounds  of  appeal.
    He submitted  that  the  decision  was  inconsistent,  as  the  grounds
    alleged.  It had been accepted by the judge that  there  was  a  family
    life between the appellant and the sponsor and there was  no  challenge
    to that finding. The judge had found, in essence, that somebody  needed
    to watch over the appellant but it was perfectly possible for  somebody
    to be employed to do so.  It was not clear why  he  needed  to  have  a
    family member to watch over him, as had been suggested  by  the  judge.
    The decision of the Court of Appeal in Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
    368, [2017] 1 WLR 3345 was relevant.  At [90] of his judgment  in  that
    case, Sales LJ (as he then was) had noted that in a significant  number
    of cases where the ADR rules are applied the interference with  Article
    8 rights would be justified and proportionate.

 8. In reply, the sponsor stated that her mother had died ten years ago and
    that her father had lived  alone  since  her  death.   Her  father  was
    difficult man.  They could arrange a helper but she would not  be  able
    to visit in the evening and it would only last for  a  few  days.   She
    calls her father two or three times per day and she was  worried  about
    him.  His weight had fallen and he now weighed the same as her.  She is
    his only relative and his last wish was to be able to die surrounded by
    his family.  Her aunt had previously visited the appellant but  she  no
    longer did so due to the pandemic.  The sponsor said that she  and  her
    father found it difficult to understand why he was not allowed to  join
    her.  She had enough money to ensure that he would not be a  burden  on
    the public purse.  She worried constantly about him, particularly since
    there had been a murder reported in the area where he lived.  He had  a
    tourist visa but she could not expect him to travel  to  the  UK  on  a
    temporary basis.  They had no intention of breaking the law, and he had
    returned promptly when he had previously come to the UK.  He owned  his
    own home in the Greater Noida area and he had savings and interest from
    those savings.  Her aunt who had previously  visited  lived  about  two
    hours away, the journey comprising tuk tuk and metro.

 9. Mr Tufan did not seek to respond.

Analysis

10. It was accepted before the judge that the grounds of  refusal  relating
    to tuberculosis and accommodation had been addressed  by  the  evidence
    submitted.   The  judge's  sole  focus  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    therefore, was on the following paragraphs of Appendix FM:

         'E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because-

         (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country  who
         can reasonably provide it;

         or;

         (b) it is not affordable.'

11. At [59] of Britcits v SSHD, the Master  of  the  Rolls  emphasised  the
    import of the word 'reasonably' in paragraph E-ECDR 2.5:

         "Second, as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance, the  focus
         is on whether the  care  required  by  the  ADR  applicant  can  be
         "reasonably" provided and to "the required  level"  in  their  home
         country. As Mr Sheldon  confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant. It  is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations,  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home  country.  Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care. They are capable of
         embracing emotional  and  psychological  requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence. What is reasonable is, of  course,  to  be
         objectively assessed."

12. Davis LJ agreed with the Master of the Rolls and with Sales LJ  (as  he
    then was), who added a short judgment of his own, in which  he  focused
    on Article 8 ECHR.  At [90], Sales LJ rejected  a  submission  that  it
    should be assumed in any ADR case that there existed a protected family
    life between applicant and sponsor.  He did so because, firstly, "in  a
    significant number of  cases  where  the  ADR  rules  are  applied  the
    interference  with  Article   8   rights   would   be   justified   and
    proportionate" and, secondly, because he saw no  warrant  for  assuming
    that Article 8 rights were engaged when  proper  legal  analysis  might
    show clearly that it did not.

13. At [12]-[13] of his decision, the judge  found  against  the  appellant
    under paragraphs E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5.  In relation  to  the  former,  he
    found that the appellant did not require '24 hours' medical care'.   In
    relation to the latter, he found that the appellant  could  afford  his
    own medical care in India  and  that  "[o]n  the  evidence  it  is  not
    possible to come to the conclusion that there is no person available in
    the country to help the appellant".  He based that  conclusion  on  the
    evidence that the appellant received some support  from  the  sponsor's
    maternal aunt and a housekeeper who helped on a daily basis.  The judge
    also noted that the appellant could afford his own medical care, either
    on his own or in combination with his daughter in the UK.

14. The remaining analysis in the decision was focused on  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 ECHR.  The  judge  reminded  himself  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368 at [14].  He noted that  the  appellant
    had suffered three heart attacks since 2011; that he continued to  have
    a serious heart condition, with function in the region of 25%; that  he
    had visited his daughter in the UK and that  she  had  visited  him  in
    India, taking three weeks off work to spend time  with  him  after  his
    last heart attack.  He accepted that they spoke two or three times  per
    day.  Taking all matters into account, the judge  accepted  that  there
    was real and effective support and that there was a family life between
    the appellant and the sponsor.  This finding of fact, underpinned by  a
    clear appreciation of the test as expressed in Rai v  ECO  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320, was not challenged  by  the  respondent.   Mr  Tufan  made  no
    application to amend the grounds of appeal in order  to  challenge  it.
    He was correct not to do so; the finding and the reasons  for  it  were
    unarguably open to the judge on the sea of evidence presented to him.

15. The gravamen of the  respondent's  challenge  focuses  on  the  judge's
    assessment of  proportionality,  which  appears  at  [17]-[20]  of  his
    decision.  At [17], he set out the relevant sections of Part 5A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").   At
    [18], he noted that the appellant was unable to meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that this was a matter which militated  in
    the respondent's favour under s117B1(1).  He  then  observed  that  the
    appellant had failed to meet the Rules which, he said,  '[m]ainly  that
    refers to medical care.'  Whilst the appellant did  not  need  24  hour
    medical care, the judge concluded that he needed someone to watch  over
    him throughout the day.  His helper attended in the morning and evening
    and the sponsor's maternal aunt lived two hours away and  had  recently
    had difficulties with her own health.  The judge continued, at [19]  to
    explain why, on his analysis of the appellant's  family  circumstances,
    he was 'left with the only close member of the family who is  his  only
    daughter in the UK.' He then found that the appellant and  the  sponsor
    could afford private medical care in the  UK,  thereby  addressing  the
    concern that he would represent a burden on the NHS if he was  admitted
    to the UK.  He accepted as credible  the  undertaking  which  had  been
    provided with the application for entry clearance.

16. At [20], the judge returned to the appellant's health, noting that  his
    weight had dropped to 56kg and that he needed help  while  walking  and
    using the stairs.  The judge found  that  the  poor  condition  of  the
    appellant's heart was such that 'he needs to  be  around  close  family
    members 24 hours' and that '[h]aving  medication  available  and  funds
    available is not sufficient without having close family members  around
    him at this stage of his life and with his  heart  condition'.   Taking
    into account the need for '24 hours family care'  and  the  risk  of  a
    repetition of the last heart attack in 2018, the judge  concluded  that
    the  respondent  had  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  upon  her  of
    establishing  that  the   appellant's   continued   exclusion   was   a
    proportionate course.

17. The single submission made  by  the  respondent  is  that  the  judge's
    decision is confused  and  contradictory,  in  that  he  found  in  his
    assessment under the Immigration  Rules  that  the  appellant  did  not
    require 24 hour care, whereas he had reached  the  opposite  conclusion
    when he came to allow the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   On  a
    proper reading of the judge's decision, however, there is no  confusion
    or contradiction.  The judge was careful, in  his  analysis  under  the
    Immigration Rules, to consider what care was medically  necessary.   He
    did not consider the appellant to require 24 hour medical care  and  he
    concluded, in any event, that he and the sponsor were sufficiently well-
    off that adequate medical care could be provided in the home if it  was
    required.

18. The judge's analysis on Article 8 ECHR grounds demonstrably took  place
    on a wider canvas, however.  He found, as I have  already  noted,  that
    there was a protected family life between this infirm appellant and his
    daughter in the UK.  He then came to the conclusion that the  appellant
    needed to be around the family members all the time, and that the  only
    real candidate was his daughter.  This did not represent a  finding  on
    the part of the judge that the appellant required the sponsor  to  tend
    to his medical needs.  Had he made that  finding,  it  would  certainly
    have been inconsistent with the earlier part of his analysis.   But  he
    did not; his finding was based on the human predicament  in  which  the
    appellant finds himself.  As the judge noted, he has  very  poor  heart
    function and has suffered three heart attacks.  There  is  not  only  a
    risk that he will have another heart  attack;  there  is  a  very  real
    concern that there will be no  close  family  members  around  in  that
    event.  To criticise the judge's reasoning in this regard would  be  to
    forget what was said by Lord Bingham at [18] of  Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]
    UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC 167:

         "Human beings are social animals.  They  depend  on  others.  Their
         family, or extended family, is the group on which many people  most
         heavily depend, socially, emotionally and often financially.  There
         comes a  point  at  which,  for  some,  prolonged  and  unavoidable
         separation from this group seriously inhibits their ability to live
         full and fulfilling lives. Matters such  as  the  age,  health  and
         vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness and previous  history
         of the family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
         emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural  tradition
         and conditions in the country of origin and many other factors  may
         all be relevant. The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised the
         general right of states to control the entry and residence of  non-
         nationals, and repeatedly acknowledged that the Convention  confers
         no right on individuals or families to choose where they prefer  to
         live. In most cases where the applicants complain of a violation of
         their article 8 rights, in a case where the  impugned  decision  is
         authorised by law for a legitimate object and the interference  (or
         lack of  respect)  is  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage  the
         operation of article 8,  the  crucial  question  is  likely  to  be
         whether the interference (or lack  of  respect)  complained  of  is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  end  sought  to  be   achieved.
         Proportionality is a subject  of  such  importance  as  to  require
         separate treatment."

19. I consider the judge to have had those dicta in mind when he decided as
    he did.  He did not base his  decision  on  the  appellant's  need  for
    medical care which might properly  be  sourced  in  India  but  on  his
    assessment that the appellant's health is so  precarious  that  he  has
    reached the point where he requires the presence of family members lest
    he should fall significantly ill once again.  (So much  is  clear  from
    the part of [20] in which the judge noted that it did not  suffice  for
    the appellant to have access to medication and funds.)  At  that  point
    in life, perhaps more than any other, the fact that  human  beings  are
    social animals who depend upon one another comes to the fore.   As  the
    sponsor said in her considered observations  before  me,  her  greatest
    fear, and that of her father, is that there should be no family members
    around him when his life comes to an end.  It  was  that  consideration
    which the judge weighed against the public interest in the  appellant's
    exclusion in the concluding paragraphs of his  decision.   He  did  not
    fall into legal error in reaching confused or inconsistent findings.

20. Mr Tufan also sought to submit (albeit without an application to  amend
    the grounds) that the judge erred in failing to consider or apply  what
    was said by Sales LJ at [90] of  Britcits.   In  particular,  Mr  Tufan
    relied upon the observation that "in  a  significant  number  of  cases
    where the ADR rules are applied the interference with Article 8  rights
    would be justified and proportionate."  But Sales LJ was not suggesting
    in that sentence that there was a different proportionality test  in  a
    case which failed under the  ADR  Rules,  he  was  merely  stating  the
    expectation that the number of cases which might  properly  succeed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds after having failed under those Rules was likely
    to be small.  That is no more and no less  than  was  said  in  Razgar,
    which was clearly borne in mind by the judge.  Mr Tufan's  reliance  on
    that part of Britcits takes matters no further.

21. In the circumstances, I hold that the respondent's  grounds  of  appeal
    fail to disclose a legal error on the part of the judge  and  that  her
    appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  FtT,
allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds, shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             2 December 2020
