
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11938/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 7 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 justin [s]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Anyiam, Counsel, instructed by KC Law Chambers,
         Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS


    1.   This is an appeal from a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Young dated 10 March 2019.  The appellant is an 18 year old Jamaican
       national born on 24 December 2000.  He entered the United Kingdom on
       7 August 2017 on a visitor visa that was valid  from  21  July  2017
       until 21 January 2018.




       Background
    2.   On 21 December 2017 (prior to the  expiration  of  his  visa)  the
       appellant made a claim for indefinite leave to remain in the  United
       Kingdom as a dependant of his father, Mr [SAS] (the father) who  has
       had settled status in the United Kingdom since 17 December 1999.

    3.   That  claim  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  16  May  2018,
       principally on the ground that it did not come within the  terms  of
       paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules in that the  father  did  not
       have   sole   responsibility   for   the   appellant's   upbringing.
       Responsibility was found to be shared between  the  father  and  his
       mother, [T M], who still lives in Jamaica. No error of law was found
       in relation to this aspect of the decision, and the factual  finding
       is undisturbed.

    4.   What was not addressed or resolved by Judge Young was whether,  in
       the alternative, under paragraph 298(i)(d), there were  serious  and
       compelling family or  other  considerations  which  would  make  the
       appellant's exclusion undesirable.  It is that issue which now falls
       for determination.

    5.   When I set aside Judge Young's decision, I gave permission to  the
       appellant to adduce further evidence. A paginated  bundle  was  duly
       served which contained  unsigned  witness  statements  from  several
       individuals. At the hearing, Mr Anyiam, for the appellant,  informed
       me that he no longer relied on the evidence of the appellant's half-
       brother, [ROS], his half-sister, [JS], or his step-mother,  [SS].  I
       have therefore disregarded those unsigned statements.

    6.   I also directed the service of Skeleton Arguments by both parties.
       Mr Anyiam duly served one, albeit out of time. Miss Cunha,  for  the
       respondent, apologised for failing to comply with my  direction  and
       relied solely on her oral submissions.

       The issues
    7.   At the opening of the hearing, Mr Anyiam and Miss Cunha agreed  as
       to the ambit  of  the  appeal  and  the  issues  which  fell  to  be
       determined. The principal matter, and predominantly one of fact, was
       whether under 298(i)(d) there were serious and compelling family  or
       other considerations which  would  make  the  appellant's  exclusion
       undesirable. The representatives agreed that were I to be  satisfied
       that the appellant had made out his case on this issue,  the  matter
       should be determined in his favour and the appeal should be allowed.
       Were I not to be satisfied, then I should proceed  to  consider  the
       case under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
       outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  adopting  the   staged   approach
       commended in Regina v Secretary of State for the Home Department  ex
       parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph 17,  per  Lord  Bingham  of
       Cornhill.


       The law
    8.   There was broad consensus between Mr Anyiam and Miss Cunha  as  to
       the law to be applied. Both referred me to Mundeba (s  55  and  para
       297(i)(f)), (sub-nom Mundeba v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Nairobi)
       [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC), which concerned the mirror image of  paragraph
       298, namely entry clearance as opposed  to  leave  to  remain.  Miss
       Cunha placed particular reliance on paragraphs 34 and 37.


             34.  In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be  more
             than the parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.
             'Compelling' in the context of paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates
             that    considerations     that     are     persuasive     and
             powerful. 'Serious' read with 'compelling' together  indicate
             that the family or other considerations render  the  exclusion
             of the child from the United Kingdom undesirable. The analysis
             is one of degree and kind.  Such an interpretation sets a high
             threshold that excludes  cases  where,  without  more,  it  is
             simply the wish of parties to be together however natural that
             ambition that may be.


             [...]


             37.   Family  considerations  require  an  evaluation  of  the
             child's   welfare   including   emotional    needs.     'Other
             considerations' come into play where there are  other  aspects
             of a child's life  that  are  serious  and  compelling  -  for
             example where an applicant is living in an unacceptable social
             and economic environment.   The  focus  needs  to  be  on  the
             circumstances of the child in the light of  his  or  her  age,
             social background and developmental history and  will  involve
             inquiry as to whether:-
             (i)  there is evidence of neglect or abuse;
             (ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;
             (iii)     there  are  stable  arrangements  for  the   child's
             physical care.
             The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to  whether  the
             combination  of   circumstances   sufficiently   serious   and
             compelling to require admission


       Evidence
    9.   Mr Anyiam called the appellant and his father  to  give  evidence.
       Each adopted their signed witness statement  as  their  evidence-in-
       chief. There was some limited cross-examination from Ms Cunha and  I
       asked each of them a few questions of my own for  clarification.  Mr
       Anyiam relied on a signed statement from the appellant's mother, who
       was not present to give evidence as she lives in Jamaica.  The  fact
       that her evidence was not tested in cross-examination is a matter  I
       take into account when considering the weight which can be  attached
       to it.


   10. The appellant's evidence was to the effect that he cannot return  to
       Jamaica as his mother is in a relationship with a partner, with whom
       she has a young daughter. He has subjected the appellant to physical
       and mental abuse, such that  he  cannot  reasonably  return  to  his
       mother's home.  He says he cannot live independently due to fear  of
       gang violence. He says he is well supported by  his  family  in  the
       United Kingdom and has been offered places for a  degree  course  in
       business at the University of Leicester, Nottingham Trent University
       and De Montfort University commencing in September  2019.   He  says
       his fees and subsistence will be  covered  by  his  father.  He  has
       predicted grades of B, B, C for the A levels  that  he  sat  earlier
       this year, the results of which are pending.

   11. The father confirmed this, estimating  the  cost  for  international
       student fees to be in the order of �12,000 per  annum.  He  said  he
       would also pay subsistence as the appellant would have to live  away
       from home. He conceded in questions from  me  that  the  appellant's
       sixth form schooling since arriving at the United Kingdom  had  been
       at taxpayers' expense, as had the appellant's occasional use of  NHS
       facilities since he became an over-stayer on his visit visa.

   12.  The  appellant  and  his  father  stated  that  the  appellant  had
       originally come to the United Kingdom for a holiday but  he  carried
       with him a sealed letter from his mother indicating that  she  could
       no longer cope with caring for the appellant.  There  are  no  other
       family members in Jamaica with whom the appellant can stay.

       The respondent's case
   13. Miss Cunha relied, almost exclusively, on the  respondent's  refusal
       letter dated 16 May 2018.  The  preponderance  of  the  respondent's
       reasoning is directed to the question of sole responsibility. On the
       issue which I must now determine, the letter merely states:


             "Furthermore you have failed to provide  evidence  of  serious
             and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
             exclusion of you from the United Kingdom undesirable."


   14. Relying on paragraph 34 of Mundeba (above) Miss Cunha  submits  that
       the appellant has failed to meet the  high  threshold  required  for
       demonstrating serious and compelling family or other  considerations
       under paragraph 298(i)(d). She says the evidence  of  abuse  by  the
       mother's partner is uncompelling, although she did not challenge the
       appellant's evidence on this matter in cross-examination.


   15. She contends that the prospect of gang violence is pure  conjecture,
       unsupported by any evidence. In any  event,  she  submits  that  the
       appellant will not be returning to  his  family  home  but  will  be
       living independently as a university student. She  states  that  his
       family life can continue with his mother and half-sister,  something
       which has pertained for the majority of his life, whilst his  father
       has largely been absent. She suggests that the  appellant  would  be
       equally well served at the University of the West Indies in Kingston
       to which he would have applied had he stayed in Jamaica.


   16.  Miss  Cunha  further  submits,  placing  reliance  on  R  (on   the
       application of Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2017] UKSC 11, that there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  appellant
       making a fresh application for a student visa once he  has  returned
       to Jamaica. She says that the appellant presents as  a  healthy  and
       adaptable young man and, since he has now obtained his majority, the
       Tribunal should give no regard to the fact that he was under 18 when
       he made his application and remained so at the date of  the  refusal
       letter.

   17. In relation to the alternative claim outside the Rules,  Miss  Cunha
       relies on the statutory public interest considerations, particularly
       the  maintenance  of  immigration  control.  She  submits  that  the
       appellant cannot rely on a family  life  considerations  established
       during a period when his immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom
       was precarious.

       The appellant's case
   18. Much of Mr Anyiam's skeleton argument was directed to  duty  of  the
       respondent, and by extension, this Tribunal to have  regard  to  the
       welfare of children. He  expressly  cites  section  55  of  Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and refers me to the statutory
       guidance, Every Child Matters  (2009),  and  to  the  provisions  of
       Article 3 of the United Nations Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the
       Child.


   19. Mr Anyiam states I should treat the appellant as a minor since  that
       was his status at the date of his application, and  remained  so  at
       the date of the respondent's refusal letter.  He  submits  that  the
       appellant's best interests  lie  in  his  remaining  in  the  United
       Kingdom, and that this should be a primary consideration. He  refers
       me to ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2011] UKSC 4, and to Lord Kerr's observation at paragraph 46 that,


             "What is determined to be in a child's best  interests  should
             customarily dictate the outcome of cases such as the  present,
             therefore, and it will require considerations  of  substantial
             moment to permit a different result"


   20. The principal submission on the appellant's behalf is  that  he  has
       satisfied the  requirements  of  rule  298(i)(d)  as  elucidated  in
       Mundeba. Mr Anyiam makes specific reference to the appellant's  ill-
       treatment at the hands of his mother's partner, albeit he was unable
       to locate a confirmatory letter in this regard from the  appellant's
       school in Jamaica which he believed had been before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. He says that the appellant's welfare will  be  jeopardised
       were he to return to Jamaica. He would be liable to ill-treatment at
       his mother's home, and cannot live independently  due  to  financial
       constraints and the  gang  culture  prevalent  in  Jamaica.  Student
       lodgings, though perfectly acceptable in term-time and funded by his
       father, do not provide year-round accommodation  and  for  at  least
       some of the time the appellant would be required to live within  the
       hostile environment of his mother's home.


   21. In relation to Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  Mr  Anyiam
       submits that there would be  a  significant  interference  with  the
       appellant's family life were he to be returned  to  Jamaica.  Whilst
       there may have been a breach of immigration control, and family life
       established when the appellant's status has been precarious, this is
       an instance where the sins of the father should not  be  visited  on
       the son.

       Discussion and disposal
   22. Having regard to the totality of the evidence placed before me, I am
       narrowly persuaded that the requirements of paragraph 298(i)(d) have
       been made out, in that there are serious and  compelling  family  or
       other considerations which  would  make  the  appellant's  exclusion
       undesirable.


   23. I am satisfied that the appellant was  subject  to  some  degree  of
       abuse at the hands of  his  mother's  partner  (albeit  not  of  the
       severity contended for by Mr Anyiam) and that there is a  real  risk
       that this may be repeated were  the  appellant  to  be  returned  to
       Jamaica. Notwithstanding  Mr  Aryiam's  inability  to  identify  any
       corroborative documentary evidence from the  appellant's  school  in
       Jamaica, the appellant's basic narrative was not challenged in cross-
       examination by Miss Cunha and I  consider  the  appellant  to  be  a
       credible witness, who gave his testimony in a measured and  truthful
       manner. There is corroboration for the appellant's  account  in  the
       witness statement of his mother. Whilst I approach her evidence with
       caution, mindful that it was not subject to  cross-examination,  she
       is candid as to the culpable conduct of her partner. In the  overall
       context of this case, I consider that I  can  safely  accept  it  as
       inherently honest. I also  accept  the  unchallenged  evidence  that
       there are no other family members living in Jamaica who might be  in
       a position to accommodate the appellant.

   24.  The  surrounding  evidence  points  to  the  appellant   being   an
       industrious young man who has been welcomed into the extended family
       of his father and become assimilated into their lives  and  that  of
       his schoolmates in the United  Kingdom,  where  he  has  thrived.  I
       consider that this case goes beyond a mere parental wish  for  their
       child to live and be educated in the United Kingdom.  I  agree  with
       Miss Cunha that the prospect of gang violence  is  pure  conjecture,
       and place no reliance  on  it.  However  the  risk  of  physical  or
       emotional harm  at  the  hand  of  his  mother's  partner  has  been
       adequately demonstrated. Whilst that risk  would  be  eliminated  or
       reduced  for  so  long  as  the  appellant  was  living  in  student
       accommodation,  the  appellant   has   no   reasonable   access   to
       accommodation during university vacations other  than  his  previous
       home with his mother and half-sister and  this,  as  I  have  found,
       would not be a safe environment for him.

   25. I reject Miss Cunha's submission that I  should  disregard  entirely
       the fact that  the  appellant  was  a  minor  at  the  time  of  his
       application and determine the appeal on the basis that he is now  an
       adult. Achieving one's eighteenth birthday cannot be regarded  as  a
       bright  line.  The  process  of  emotional   maturity   and   social
       independence is gradual and tribunals must have regard to  the  fact
       that many young people,  particularly  those  engaged  in  full-time
       tertiary  education,  remain  dependent  one  or  more  parent   for
       accommodation and for financial, emotional and practical support.

   26. In my assessment of the evidence, the family considerations in  this
       instance, including the appellant's welfare, are  highly  suggestive
       of past ill-treatment which is a strong indicator of  future  abuse.
       Whilst the appellant is now 18 years and 6  months  old,  he  was  a
       minor when the respondent determined his application,  and  it  does
       not appear that these considerations featured in the  reasons  given
       for refusing leave to remain. The fact that the appellant is now  an
       adult does not detract from this. Nor do I consider  it  appropriate
       to require the appellant to return  to  Jamaica  and  make  a  fresh
       application for a student visa.

   27. Since I am satisfied that the requirements  of  paragraph  298(i)(d)
       are met, this appeal must be allowed under the Immigration Rules.

   28. The foregoing conclusion is sufficient to  be  dispositive  of  this
       appeal and consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules
       is therefore otiose. However, since I heard  full  argument  on  the
       point, and in the event that these proceedings go further and  I  am
       found to have been wrong in my application of the Immigration Rules,
       I propose to set out what  my  findings  would  have  been  on  this
       alternative basis. I do so in attenuated form.

   29. Applying the Razgar approach in assessing the impact of  Article  8,
       my conclusions are: (1) the proposed removal of the appellant  would
       be an interference with the exercise of his right to respect for his
       family life. He is now well settled with his father, step-mother and
       half-siblings and has a social circle in his school  and  community,
       notwithstanding that the majority of life has been spent in  Jamaica
       in the care  of  his  mother;  (2)  this  interference  would  have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation
       of Article 8; (3)  the interference is in accordance with the  law,
       and (4) necessary in a democratic society; but (5) in this instance,
       it is not proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to  be
       achieved.

   30. The best interests of the appellant (a minor  at  the  time  of  his
       application) are that he remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
       father,  step-mother  and  half-siblings  as  he  embarks   on   his
       university education. This is a primary consideration, and one which
       is not readily dislodged. Whilst the  appellant's  family  life  has
       been largely established whilst  his  immigration  status  has  been
       precarious, that was almost entirely the fault of  his  parents  and
       should not be held against him under the statutory  public  interest
       considerations at section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. Whilst I have already noted  that  the  appellant's
       sixth  form  education  was  a  burden  on  taxpayers,  as  was  his
       occasional use of the  National  Health  Service,  the  unchallenged
       evidence of the appellant's father was that he would be  responsible
       for the appellant's university fees, accommodation  and  subsistence
       as the appellant does not qualify for a student loan. Thanks to  his
       father,  the  appellant  has  a  sufficient  degree   of   financial
       independence. The appellant ably demonstrated before me his  fluency
       in the English language and a level of mature self-confidence beyond
       his years. I do not envisage any potential difficulties  in  respect
       of his integration into society. This is an application which  ought
       properly to have been granted by the respondent when  the  appellant
       was a minor, and it would be disproportionate to refuse  it  on  the
       basis that he has subsequently obtained his majority.


   31. In the circumstances, had I not been satisfied that the requirements
       of paragraph 298(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules were  met,  I  would
       additionally have  allowed  this  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights outside the Rules.

   Notice of Decision

   1) An error of law having been found, and the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal set aside, it is remade allowing the appellant's appeal under
      paragraph 298(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules;

   2) No anonymity order is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                                        Date     1  August
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

