
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11067/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2018                             |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             Mrs Kuljinder Kaur
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Raw, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this appeal made application for leave  to  remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom  based  on  her  family  and  private  life.  That
    application was refused and she appealed and following a  hearing,  and
    in a decision promulgated on 31 August 2017, Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C J Woolley, dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Birrell in a  decision  dated  21  March  2018.
    Judge Birrell's reasons for so granting were:  -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, (in time), against a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Woolley) who, in  a
             decision and reasons promulgated on 31 August  2017  dismissed
             an appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to  leave
             to remain on the basis of family and private life in the UK.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in that he  failed  to
             take into           account material considerations  that  the
             Appellant's partner, the Sponsor,  had  two  children  from  a
             previous relationship which would impact on  the  decision  he
             made as to whether to remain in the UK or to go with his  wife
             and child to India: there was no  reference  to  this  in  the
             decision.

         3.   In what is otherwise a detailed and well-reasoned decision the
             Judge makes no reference to the Sponsor's other  children  and
             the impact they had on the proportionality exercise.

         4.   The ground is arguable."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. In a Rule 24 Response to this  application  dated  10  April  2018  the
    Respondent stated at paragraph 2 thereof that she did  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application for permission to appeal  and  at  paragraph  4
    thereof accepted that the Judge had failed to consider the relationship
    between the Appellant's partner and  his  children.  Further  that  the
    Presenting Officer's hearing minute indicated that there  was  evidence
    about these children at the hearing.

 5.  Today  Mr  Melvin  sought  to  withdraw  the  Respondent's  concession
    contained within the Rule 24 Reply arguing that having  now  considered
    the file the Respondent's position was that  there  was  little  to  no
    actual evidence relating to the Sponsor's two  adult  children  in  the
    United Kingdom who apparently have  resided  with  their  mother  since
    their parents' divorce some years ago. I refused that  application  and
    proceeded to hear from both representatives. Mr Raw's position was that
    the Judge should have dealt with this issue as it had  been  raised  by
    the Appellant in her witness statement. Both  representatives  accepted
    that it was not resolved in the Judge's  decision  or  considered  when
    looking  at  the  balancing  exercise  that  was  required.  Mr  Melvin
    emphasised that there was  no  fresh  evidence  in  relation  to  these
    relationships and that it was speculative to rely simply  on  this  one
    point.

 6. Neither representative had any other criticism of the Judge's  decision
    and in the circumstances, were content that, if I found that the  Judge
    had materially erred, the appeal be remitted back to Judge  Woolley  so
    that he could deal with this singular issue which he would have to hear
    evidence upon and put into the required balancing exercise.

 7. I gave consideration as to if I could remake the decision today. I also
    considered whether the judge's failure to deal with it, in  any  event,
    amounted to a material error.

 8. However, I was persuaded that it is an outstanding issue.  I  concluded
    that there was no reason why Judge Woolley should not  resolve  it  and
    that it was in the interests of justice for this singular issue  to  be
    considered by him to see if it impacted upon his balancing exercise and
    proportionality.

 9. The appeal is therefore  remitted  on  that  basis  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by Judge Woolley. Beyond considering  the  omitted
    issue and its impact on the balancing  exercise  the  totality  of  the
    Judge's findings is preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal  on  the  above  basis  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Direction  7(b)  and
in the circumstances it is to be listed once more before Judge Woolley.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 4 May 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard







