
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11599/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th April 2018                            |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [j l]
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. [JL] is a male Nepalese national who appealed against the  decision  of
    the Respondent refusing him permanent settlement in the United  Kingdom
    to join his grandfather.  For ease of  parties,  I  shall  continue  to
    refer to the parties  as  they  were  at  first  instance,  namely  the
    Appellant and Respondent.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  under  Article  8  ECHR  by  Judge
    Greasley in a decision promulgated on 13th July 2017.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged by the Respondent on the basis  that
    the judge had made a material misdirection in law  in  that  there  had
    been an earlier hearing heard on 23rd July 2014.  In a determination of
    1st September 2014 the Tribunal had  dismissed  the  appeal  and  Judge
    Greasley  seems  to  have  proceeded  without  consideration  of   that
    knowledge.  It was therefore respectfully submitted that  the  Tribunal
    should have used  the  first  decision  as  a  starting  point  as  per
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and the failure to do so  meant  findings
    on the most recent Tribunal were fundamentally flawed.  Furthermore, it
    was said that the Tribunal had not  applied  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
    evidence.  The earlier decision had pointed out that evidence  provided
    by Gurkha Police Foundation was hearsay.  In addition it was  submitted
    that the Tribunal had failed to consider all the  relevant  factors  of
    the evidence.

 4. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    arguable error of law by Judge Greasley.

 5. Before me Ms Ahmad relied on her grounds.  Devaseelan did  apply.   The
    judge had not considered the  previous  decision.   As  such  the  case
    should be remitted for a fresh hearing.

 6. For the Appellant Ms Jaja said that  the  Respondent  would  have  been
    aware of the earlier decision but there was no onus  on  the  judge  to
    seek out such a decision if it was not put to  him.   This  was  not  a
    Devaseelan point.

 7. From her knowledge the earlier decision was one to do with a claim  for
    asylum and this decision was an Article 8 claim made outside the Rules.
     There was no error of law by the judge in not considering  a  document
    not put in front of him and the decision should stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. The position here is that the judge cannot be faulted in  any  way  for
    not considering a decision which was not put in front of him. It cannot
    be said that there has been unfairness to either party given that,  for
    whatever reason, the previous decision played no role  in  the  judge's
    decision. Nevertheless the Respondent says that the decision should  be
    set aside because the earlier decision has  now  been  made  available.
    The logic of this position is that in any  case  where  the  Respondent
    fails to appreciate that there was an earlier  decision  she  can  then
    appeal at a later date, after the appeal has  been  allowed,  producing
    the earlier decision and say there should be a rehearing.

10. In my view this proposition is fundamentally unsound.  There  has  been
    no procedural unfairness to the Respondent.  I was  not  told  why  the
    earlier decision had not been lodged and there appears on the  face  of
    it to be no good reason for that. It is because  the  earlier  decision
    was not available to the judge at the date  of  the  hearing  that  the
    Devaseelan point does not apply.

11. The judge considered the case before him in detail  and  concluded  for
    clear reasons that the appeal should be allowed under Article  8  ECHR.
    There were a number of family witnesses who gave evidence before  Judge
    Greasley and  the  judge  accepted  their  evidence.   There  was  also
    unchallenged evidence in relation to continued financial  support  from
    the grandparents and visits back to Nepal (paragraph  28).   The  judge
    concluded, for the reasons stated,  that  maintenance  of  the  refusal
    decision would be a  wholly  disproportionate  and  therefore  unlawful
    decision  taking  into  account  Section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraph 30).

12. There is no real challenge to the careful findings made by  the  judge.
    He considered all the evidence put to him and was entitled to make  the
    findings he did.  There is no error, let alone material error in law.

13. As such the judge's decision must stand.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. No anonymity order is required.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 19thApril 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald










