
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11484/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13 December 2018                    |On 22 February 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             MUMEN A H H DARMISH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a determination that followed  a  hearing
    in Glasgow on 3 November 2017,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds.   The  appeal  was  brought  by  the  appellant
    following the refusal by the respondent of a human rights  claim.   The
    appeal accordingly was made under section 82(1)(b) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended).   It  was  not  brought
    against the refusal of a protection claim.  That is  important  in  our
    view because section  82(1)(b)  creates  a  discrete  right  of  appeal
    against the refusal of such a claim.

 2. It is conceded by the respondent that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the human rights appeal contains an error of law and should
    be set aside.  A clear implication to that effect was  communicated  by
    Mr Govan on behalf of the respondent as long ago as 27 June 2018,  when
    he wrote to the First-tier Tribunal to state that the respondent  would
    be prepared to grant leave commensurate with, in effect,  the  allowing
    of the human rights appeal.

 3. Mr Winter, who appears on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  has  sought  to
    encourage the Upper  Tribunal  to  adopt  a  stance  whereby  it  might
    entertain the ground that the appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.  Mr Winter, as he fairly acknowledges, faces  a  difficulty
    in that regard, given that a  human  rights  appeal  and  a  protection
    appeal are  two  different  things,  clearly  articulated  as  such  by
    Parliament in section 82 and also, when one turns to look at provisions
    regarding the grounds of appeal, in section 84.  There is, accordingly,
    no scope in the Upper  Tribunal's  view  for  the  application  of  the
    legislation or case law that may in certain  circumstances  enable  new
    matters to be raised in respect  of  a  particular  appeal  because  Mr
    Winter's submission, if correct, would turn a human rights appeal  into
    a protection appeal, which it is not.  That is not, of course,  to  say
    that somebody cannot make both a protection claim and  a  human  rights
    claim and receive from the Secretary of State both  a  refusal  of  the
    human rights claim and the refusal of a protection claim.  That is not,
    however, the position in the present case.

 4. So far as humanitarian protection  is  concerned,  as  we  explored  in
    argument with Mr Winter and as  we  now  record,  it  is  open  to  the
    appellant, notwithstanding that he will enjoy  leave  to  remain  on  a
    human rights basis, to make a protection claim to  the  respondent,  by
    reference to the humanitarian position as it  is  in  Libya.   If  that
    claim is rejected, then the appellant  has  a  right  of  appeal  under
    section 82(1)(a) of the 2002 Act to the First-tier Tribunal, subject to
    certification.

 5. The decision of the Upper  Tribunal  is  accordingly  as  follows.   By
    consent, it is found that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.   The
    judge failed to have regard to  relevant  country  guidance  case  law,
    which affected the outcome of the appeal.

 6. We accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and,
    compatibly with the stance of the respondent as set out in  Mr  Govan's
    letter of 27 June 2018, we substitute a decision of  our  own  allowing
    the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


          Signed                                      Date   20 December
2018


    The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
    President of the Upper Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber
