
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11546/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 October 2018                   |On 31 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR YOGARAJ [S]
                       (No anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr Candola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M.Z. Judge of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on
   17 November 1974.  However, for the sake of convenience, I shall continue
   to refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to  the  Secretary  of  the
   State as the "respondent", which are the designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



2.     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the respondent dated 18 April 2016 refusing  his  application
   for leave to remain pursuant to immigration rules and Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pears  I
   dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules but allowed it pursuant to
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.




3. Permission to appeal was granted by PJM Hollingworth on  17  August  2018
   who stated that it is arguable that the Judge attached too little  weight
   to the immigration history of the appellant in respect of his deceptively
   obtained English test certificate. The permission Judge found that as the
   requirements of Appendix FM were not met, found it arguable the Judge the
   public interest consideration was not properly analysed when carrying out
   the proportionality exercise. The Judge having found that relation in  to
   the immigration rules the Judge found that the appellant was not able  to
   demonstrate very significant obstacles to integration into Sri Lanka  and
   his insufficient analysis of the  application  117B  (6)  and  assessment
   under section 55 of reasonableness of return against the public  interest
   factors.


4. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant's wife is a  British  citizen
   and he has two British citizen children born on 2  February  2015  and  2
   February 2015 and  therefore  they  are  under  the  age  of  seven.  The
   respondent asserts that because the  appellant  used  deception  for  the
   English language test certificate  and  used  it  in  connection  with  a
   student visa application the terms of S - LTR 1.6. apply.  The  appellant
   contends that he did not use  fraud  even  if  he  did  the  respondent's
   guidance as set out in the appellant skeleton argument states  that  such
   action does not meet the threshold to apply as section's S- LTR. 1. 6.


5. Evidence provided by the respondent demonstrates that the respondent  has
   discharged his evidential burden of proof that the appellant had provided
   a false English test certificate with his application for further  leave.
   The appellant however has not discharged his evidential burden by raising
   an innocent explanation and found that on the  balance  of  probabilities
   and on the basis of all the evidence that the appellant used deception in
   obtaining his test certificate six years ago.




6.  In  respect  of  EX1,  the  appellant  had  to  show  that   there   are
   insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  his  partner  continuing
   outside the United Kingdom. The appellant does  not  suggest  that  there
   would be insurmountable obstacles to family life with his wife continuing
   in Sri Lanka but in any event the evidence set out has not  succeeded  in
   showing that there would be any.


7. Section 117B of the 2002 act provides that little weight should be  given
   to a private  life  which  has  been  established  when  the  appellant's
   immigration history is precarious. The appellant's immigration was always
   precarious and although he had leave to remain part he  did  not  for  37
   days. The appellant has not been convicted of an offence and the test was
   six years ago. The Judge did not accept that this amounts to a  level  of
   seriousness that warrants the application of S - LTR 1. 6.


8. The respondent has contended that first, the appellant should  return  to
   Sri Lanka without his family and secondly, that they should all go to Sri
   Lanka as a  family  and  rejected  both  propositions.  As  there  is  no
   criminality on  the  part  of  the  appellant  nor  a  sufficiently  poor
   immigration history, section 117B (6) of the 2002  applies  because  they
   are an integrated family unit in the United Kingdom each having Article 8
   rights. Therefore, it will not be  proportionate  for  the  appellant  to
   leave the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  outside  the
   immigration rules but pursuant to article 8.




9.  The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which   I
   summarise. The Judge has erred in treating the child's best interests  as
   a trump card because their interest is not the primary consideration part
   a primary consideration respect of the public interest. In doing  so  his
   balancing exercise was flawed and therefore unreliable.




10. The interplay between  section  117B  (6)  and  the  best  interests  of
   children analysis requires an assessment as to whether it  is  reasonable
   to remove a child or one of their  parents  must  encompass  all  of  the
   relevant public interest factors  set  out  in  section  117B.  The  best
   interests of children are served purely by remaining with  their  parents
   and it is a choice for the adults whether that is with them both to go to
   Sri Lanka or to remain in the United Kingdom with their mother alone. The
   Judge has fallen into error in respect of the best interests of the child
   when conducting the balancing exercise. It must be reasonable to remove a
   child, if the actions of their parents are sufficiently damaging  to  the
   public interest. Given that the appellant has committed fraud, the public
   should be given more weight in regard to maintaining  a  fair  system  of
   immigration and also as a  mechanism  to  deter  future  fraudulent  acts
   against the rules.




11.  The  appellant's  rule  24  response  states  the  following  which   I
   summarise. The appellant's parental relationship with his British citizen
   children and wife was accepted. Therefore, he meets the  requirements  of
   section 117B (a). The next requirement to be met is whether it  would  be
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the United  Kingdom  with  the
   appellant. Notwithstanding the English test certificate, the Judge  found
   that the appellant's conduct does not meet the application of S - LTR. 1.
   6. The respondent's position is that because the  appellant  has  a  very
   poor recent history that the appellant's wife  and  two  children  should
   leave the United Kingdom. The Judge's right not to find so. There  is  no
   material error in the decision.


12. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  both  parties  as  to  whether
   there is an error of law. Mr Candola on behalf of the  respondent  stated
   that a false certificate is a weighty matter when considering the  public
   interest. The children are British citizens  and  they  can  remain  with
   their mother in the United Kingdom. Mr Judge adopted his rule 25 response
   and said that the Judge has made a proper evaluation of all the  evidence
   and come to a sustainable conclusion. He emphasised  that  the  appellant
   has only been without leave for 37 days and has never been  convicted  of
   any offence.



    Decision as to whether there is an error of law




13. The ultimate question in this appeal was whether it would be  reasonable
   for the appellant to return to Sri Lanka with or without his children. It
   was accepted that the appellant's  wife  and  two  children  are  British
   citizens and  cannot  be  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The
   respondent's position is that it would be a matter for the appellant  and
   his wife to decide whether to divide  their  family  with  the  appellant
   going to Sri Lanka alone or keep the family together by returning to  Sri
   Lanka together.




14. The respondent's main complaint is  that  the  appellant  has  committed
   fraud in his English language test six years ago and  that  should  trump
   the best interests of the children which is only a consideration and  not
   the consideration. The Judge however found that the  appellant's  conduct
   does not attract the consequences of paragraph S -  LTR.  1.  6.  of  the
   immigration rules. What remains therefore in respect of  the  appellant's
   immigration history is that he has been in this country without leave for
   37 days. Having so found, the Judge was entitled to treat the appellant's
   immigration history as not being  a  decisive  factor  or  fatal  to  his
   continued stay in this country within his proportionality exercise.




15. The Judge  in  a  careful  and  reasoned  decision  considered  all  the
   evidence  in  the  appeal  and  considered  the  jurisprudence  and   the
   respondent's policy. This included that the appellant had used  deception
   in obtaining a false English language certificate six years ago.




16. The respondent's argument is merely quarrel with the  Judge's  findings.
   The Judge reached conclusions  to  which  he  was  entitled  on  all  the
   evidence before him. There is no perversity in the findings made  by  him
   because he gave clear reasons for allowing the  appellant's  appeal.  The
   judge found that the appellant's children are British citizens  who  were
   born in the United Kingdom. He found that the eldest child has aspects of
   autism and the youngest child has impaired hearing and other  issues  set
   out in the medical evidence. The Judge  was  entitled  to  find  in  that
   regard that their best interests is to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
   strong reasons would be necessary to require them to leave and found that
   the respondent has not provided any.




17. In his balancing exercise, the Judge found that the appellant  does  not
   meet the requirements of the immigration rules as he has not demonstrated
   significant obstacles with his reintegration in to Sri Lanka and  neither
   has he suggested that would be the case. The Judge was entitled  to  find
   notwithstanding that finding that it could  not  be  reasonable  for  the
   appellant to return to Sri Lanka. He found that  the  appellant  has  not
   been convicted for any offence nor  does  he  have  a  sufficiently  poor
   recent immigration history. The Judge found that the  best  interests  of
   the children demonstrate that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
   appellant to leave his family in the United Kingdom and go to  Sri  Lanka
   alone.


18. This was the conclusion that the Judge was  entitled  to  on  the  bases
   that to require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom would result in
   the breakup of this family who are all, other than the appellant, British
   citizens. I find no material error of law in the decision  and  I  uphold
   it.




19. I dismiss the respondent's appeal. That finalises this appeal.




DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                         Dated this 22nd day of October 2018










