
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11606/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 29 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                 Deepa Limbu
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Balroop, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated 30.4.19, dismissing her  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  1.5.18,  to  refuse  her
    application for entry clearance as the adult dependent relative of  her
    mother, settled in the UK as the widow of a former Gurkha soldier  from
    Nepal.

 2. The grounds allege that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in:

      a) Failing to provide adequate reasons for finding family life was not
         engaged;

      b) Failing to accord appropriate  weight  to  the  issue  of  historic
         injustice when conducting the article 8  proportionality  balancing
         exercise;

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    14.6.19, on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly apply the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, where the key issue was held  to
    be whether family life between the appellant and her sponsoring  mother
    had been severed. It was arguable that the  proportionality  assessment
    was  flawed,  failing  to  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  historic
    injustice relating to the children of ex-Gurkhas.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    decision of Judge Beg should be set aside  and  the  appeal  remade  by
    allowing it.

 5. The relevant factual background is as follows. The appellant  was  born
    and raised in Nepal in 1988, after her father retired in 1987 following
    13 years' service in the Brigade of Gurkhas. He passed away in 1994. In
    2006, her mother exercised her right to apply for settlement in the  UK
    at a time when the appellant was already  an  adult  and  knowing  that
    adult children of Gurkha veterans  do  not  automatically  qualify  for
    settlement in the UK. The appellant is now 31 years of age.

 6. It is common ground that Gurkha veterans discharged  before  1997  were
    denied an opportunity to apply for settlement in the  UK,  until  2004.
    This is what has become known as  the  'historic  wrong'  or  'historic
    injustice.' Policy introduced in 2009 provided an opportunity for adult
    children of Gurkha  veterans  to  apply  for  settlement  but  only  on
    exceptional  circumstances.  The  policy  was  amended  to  remove  the
    requirement of exceptionality following the guidance cases of R(Gurung)
    v SSHD [2013]and Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOCs -  historic  wrong  -
    weight) [2013] UKUT 567, where it was held  that  where  article  8  is
    engage and but for the fact of the  historic  injustice  the  appellant
    would have settled in the UK long ago, this will  ordinarily  determine
    the  outcome  of  the  article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  the
    appellant's favour where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State or Entry Clearance Officer consist solely of the public  interest
    in maintaining a firm immigration control. In Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ
    320, the Court of Appeal held that the real issue under  article  8  is
    whether as a matter of fact the appellant  has  demonstrated  a  family
    life with his or her  parents  which  existed  at  the  time  of  their
    departure to settle in the UK and has endured beyond it notwithstanding
    that they left Nepal.

 7. At [13] the judge accepted the remittances sent by the sponsor  to  the
    appellant in Nepal and that the evidence of messages  demonstrated  she
    had maintained contact with her daughter. At [15] the judge found  that
    the sponsor has  maintained  a  close  relationship  with  all  of  her
    children. At [16] the judge found that the  appellant  and  her  mother
    enjoyed family life together in Nepal and found "that that relationship
    continued when the sponsor came to the United Kingdom." The judge  went
    on to find that the sponsor financially supports the appellant, finding
    at [18] that the appellant is unemployed, living in  the  family  home,
    and reliance on her mother to send funds for her maintenance. The judge
    also found that there was a level of emotional  support  between  them,
    maintained through telephone contact. The judge also  took  account  at
    [14] of the difficulties the appellant has in  requiring  hearing  aids
    for bilateral senso-neural hearing loss.

 8. However,  purporting  to  apply  the  Kugathas  principles,  the  judge
    concluded that the relationship did not go beyond normal emotional ties
    to to relationship of "real committed and effective support" within the
    meaning and purpose of article 8. It is complained, with  reason,  that
    this  conclusion  was  left  entirely  unreasoned  and  it  is  further
    suggested that it flies in  the  face  of  the  accepted  evidence  and
    findings of fact.

 9. Applying Rai, the question was whether the family life that  the  judge
    accepted existed between mother and daughter in Nepal had continued, or
    had been severed. In this regard, the judge made  several  findings  of
    fact in the appellant's favour and, whilst at [17] the judge found that
    the appellant was capable of living an independent life, there  was  no
    finding that she was in fact living independently of  the  family  life
    that existed with her  sponsoring  mother.  Indeed,  all  the  evidence
    pointed to the contrary.

10. Mr Balroop relied on the grounds as  drafted.  Very  fairly,  Mr  Tufan
    accepted that if article 8 family life has continued, then the historic
    injustice is  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  sole  public  interest  in
    maintaining firm and fair immigration control.

11. I am satisfied that the findings of the judge should have  led  to  the
    inevitable conclusion  that  family  life  had  not  been  severed.  It
    followed that family life was engaged for the purpose of article 8.  It
    also  follows  that  the  judge  should   then   have   conducted   the
    proportionality balancing exercise, attaching significant weight to the
    historic injustice. In that regard, it appears that the respondent  did
    not  rely  on  any  public  interest  other  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.

12. In the light of the findings of fact, I am satisfied that in accordance
    with the guiding principles from the case law  the  judge  should  have
    given greater weight to the historic injustice in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise and found the decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance
    disproportionate.  The appeal should have been allowed.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.

Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a whole fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been allowed.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
