
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11658/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     OO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Goba, Solicitor Advocate instructed on behalf
                    of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings

 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated on the 5  June
    2019, dismissed her human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is set out within the determination
    at paragraphs 1 and in the papers before the  Tribunal.  The  appellant
    entered the UK in 2006 as a visitor and in 2012,  2014  and  2016  made
    applications on human rights grounds (family and  private  life)  which
    were refused. The present application was  made  on  the  5th  December
    2016.

 3. The Respondent refused her claim on human rights grounds in a  decision
    letter dated 15 May 2018.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision having submitted grounds of appeal
    by her former representatives. The hearing came before the  First  Tier
    Tribunal on the 14th May 2019. The appellant was not in attendance  but
    was represented by Counsel. It had been submitted  that  the  appellant
    could not attend the hearing due to her medical condition and also that
    as she had recently changed her solicitors, they had not  obtained  her
    file or been in the position to provide  any  bundle  of  documents  or
    obtain a medical report. In that decision at paragraphs 7-16  the  FtTJ
    set out the procedural history of the appeal which included a  previous
    application for an adjournment made and granted in  December  2018  and
    that directions had been issued (see paragraphs 9-11).

 5. In a determination promulgated on the 5 June 2019, the judge  dismissed
    her appeal having reached the conclusion that an adjournment should not
    be granted and thus decided the appeal in the absence of the  appellant
    and any documentation save for that sent to the respondent.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  the  18th
    July 2019.

 7. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Goba appeared before
    the Upper Tribunal and relied upon the grounds as  drafted  and  placed
    reliance on the medical evidence but particularly that which  was  sent
    to the FtTJ on the 15th May 2019, the day after the  hearing  which  is
    set out at page 24 of the bundle.

 8. I was also able to hear submissions from Ms Everett, Senior  Presenting
    Officer on behalf of the Respondent. Given that the issue  was  one  of
    unfairness and the reliance on  the  material  available  to  the  FtTJ
    before promulgation of the decision, she left it  to  the  Tribunal  to
    decide the issue of whether there had been any procedural irregularity.

 9. After hearing their respective submissions, I  informed  the  advocates
    that I had reached a conclusion that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed the making of an error on a point of law. I outlined
    the parties my reasons in summary for reaching that decision. I now set
    out for the avoidance of doubt why I had reached that conclusion on the
    evidence before me.

10. The thrust of the grounds relates to a point of  procedural  unfairness
    and the decision made to refuse the adjournment request made on  behalf
    of the Appellant and on the basis that a medical  report  was  provided
    the day after the hearing ( but before promulgation  of  the  decision)
    which supported the basis of the adjournment.

11. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to  adjourn
    a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules
    which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to"  when  exercising  any
    power under the Rules. It follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
    considered on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The  overriding
    objective is deal with cases fairly and  justly.  This  is  defined  as
    including "(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to
    the  importance  of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
    anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

12. The grounds refer to the decision of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). In that case it was held that  If  a  Tribunal
    refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such  decision  could,  in
    principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:  these  include  a
    failure to take into account all  material  considerations;  permitting
    immaterial considerations to intrude; denying  the  party  concerned  a
    fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct   test;   and   acting
    irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be  whether
    the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.
    Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is
    important to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not
    whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
    that of fairness: was there any deprivation  of  the  affected  party's
    right to a fair hearing?

13. There is no dispute as to the factual history and it was  open  to  the
    FtTJ to assess the  application  for  an  adjournment  by  taking  into
    account that history  and  that  there  had  been  a  previous  hearing
    adjourned in December 2018 to enable the applicant to give instructions
    to her solicitors and for a medical  report  to  be  produced  and  for
    witness statements to be filed by the 11 January 2019. It  was  further
    open to the FtTJ to take into account  the  contents  of  the  previous
    letters produced relating to  the  appellant's  medical  circumstances.
    However, a medical report was provided to the FtTJ on the day following
    the hearing which answered the questions and the issues the FtTJ had to
    address and importantly, whether the appellant was fit  to  attend  the
    hearing and give evidence. Mr Goba has provided a copy of the  delivery
    slip (see page 27) and it seems to be common ground that the report was
    sent to the FtT. Given the contents of the report which  addressed  the
    issues, this was material which was relevant to whether the adjournment
    should have been granted. It would have been open to the  FtTJ  in  the
    circumstances  to  either  re-open  the  hearing  by   giving   further
    directions as the material was produced prior to  the  promulgation  of
    the decision.

14. Whilst the judge made reference  to  the  principles  set  out  in  the
    Procedure Rules at paragraph 15 the judge failed to take  into  account
    the relevant report prior to the promulgation of the decision which did
    support the oral submission made on behalf of the appellant.

15. Having considered the grounds and in the context  of  the  decision  of
    Nwaigwe as set out above, I am satisfied that it has  been  established
    that there  was   procedural  unfairness  and  that  as  a  result  the
    Appellant was not  able  to  attend  the  hearing  or  provide  further
    evidence that would have been relevant to  the  factual  basis  of  her
    claim. I observe that it appears to be the position that the  appellant
    may not be able to give oral evidence. Even if that  is  the  case,  it
    does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  appeal  should  be   adjourned
    indefinitely but that the terms  of  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    should be taken into account and that a witness statement may stand  in
    lieu of any oral evidence.  In the alternative, a medical  practitioner
    may be in the position to outline any measures or adjustments that  can
    be made to enable the appellant to give oral evidence. Again, the Joint
    Presidential Guidance sets out what appropriate measures can be  taken.
    Those issues are to be addressed in case management hearing as set  out
    below.

16. For those reasons I therefore find that it is  been  demonstrated  that
    there was a material error of law in the judge's decision.

17. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge in its entirety. I have
    taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper
    Tribunal which recognises that it may not be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal shall proceed to remake the decision when it is satisfied that
    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or  other  opportunities  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the  nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective 2, it is appropriate to
    remit  the  case  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Having  exercised  my
    discretion and by considering the practice statement,  the  case  falls
    within (a) given that there was a procedural unfairness and also  under
    (b) given that the court will be able to take into account any evidence
    submitted on behalf of the appellant and any witnesses and therefore  I
    am satisfied that the appropriate course is to remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. Both parties were in agreement
    that the correct course to adopt was to remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal who would have the opportunity to consider  the  evidence
    and to make an assessment of the evidence as a whole  and  findings  of
    fact.

18. In terms of the hearing, I make the following directions:

          1. There  shall  be  a  case  management  hearing  on  the  first
             available date before a FtTJ.

          2. No  later  than  3  days  before  that  CMHR  the  Appellant's
             representatives shall provide an expert medical report dealing
             with the appellant's history and diagnosis and  whether  there
             are any adjustments that can be made by the Tribunal in  order
             for her to give evidence and/or to confirm whether she is able
             to give oral evidence.

          3. At the CMHR it will expected that the representatives will  be
             able to address the issues  set  out  in  AM  (Afghanistan)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
             1123 in which Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President, referred  to
             the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of  2010:  Child,
             Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note")
             and also the Practice Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal
             Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the appeal is allowed; the decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal shall be set aside and remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
further hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed [pic]                            Date: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


