
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11996/2018
                                                               HU/12004/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2019               |On 25th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                                    [N A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel instructed by BLC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  They are sisters now aged 15
    and 16. On 30 October 2018 they made an application for indefinite
    leave to enter the UK for settlement as the children of a parent
    settled in the United Kingdom.  Their applications were refused by the
    respondent on 10 May 2018 and those decisions were maintained following
    review by an Entry Clearance Manager on 11 December 2018. Their appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal judge Aziz on 19 February 2019 and
    dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 5 March
    2019.


The decision of FtT Judge Aziz


 2. The background to the applications and the reasons given by the
    respondent for refusing the applications are set out at paragraphs [2]
    to [9] of the decision. The evidence received by the Tribunal is set
    out at paragraphs [11] to [58] of the decision. The appellant's father
    and sponsor Mr [FP] did not give evidence because of his vulnerability
    and mental health. The Judge confirms, at [72], that he draws no
    adverse inference against the appellant's father for his failure to
    give evidence. Instead, the Tribunal heard evidence from the
    appellant's paternal uncle Mr [FR].  His evidence is set out at
    paragraphs [21] to [54] of the decision.  The Judge's findings of fact
    and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [68] to [100] of the
    decision.


 3. It is uncontroversial that the appellant's father arrived in the UK
    with his son (the appellants brother) who was at the time about three
    years old, in 2009. The Judge noted the claim being advanced is that
    the appellant's mother, Sadia Noreen went missing in March 2009 and has
    not returned. The Judge noted, at [70], that neither party sought to
    submit evidence as to the information provided by the appellant's
    father in his application for a visit visa made in 2009 regarding the
    family circumstances in Pakistan, and in particular, what was said
    about the care of the appellant's whilst their father was visiting the
    UK.


 4. The Judge found, at [68], that Mr [FP] is the biological father of the
    appellants.  At paragraphs [69] to [91], the Judge considered the claim
    made by the appellants that their mother disappeared in March 2009 and
    that since that time, their father has had sole responsibility for
    their upbringing.  At paragraph [78], the Judge stated:


         "... I am not persuaded that the evidential burden has been
         discharged and that the Tribunal has been persuaded that the
         appellants' mother simply walked out on her three children a decade
         ago and they have not heard anything from her. In such
         circumstances I am not persuaded that she can be presumed dead and
         the appeal cannot succeed under paragraph 297(i)(d) of the
         immigration rules."


 5. At paragraphs [79] to [91] of the decision, the judge addressed whether
    in the alternative, the appellants can satisfy the requirement set out
    in paragraph 297(i)(e) of the immigration rules. That is, one parent is
    present and settled in the UK and has had sole responsibility for the
    child's upbringing. The judge considered the evidence regarding the
    mental health of the appellants father and at paragraph [81], stated
    that he could not accept "... That the sponsor has been or is even
    capable of exercising genuine parental responsibility over any of his
    children since the onset of his severe mental health problems ...".
    The judge considered the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia that has
    been made and the evidence given by the appellants' paternal uncle,
    [FR] as to the arrangements for the care of the appellants brother, and
    the way in which decisions are made concerning the parenting of the
    appellants and their brother. At paragraphs [89] to [91], the judge
    stated:


         "89. ... I simply do not believe Mr [R] when he asserts that
         despite having taken custody of his son for all the reasons which
         he has cited, that the sponsor is still exercising sole
         responsibility over the child. I simply do not believe him when he
         says that the sponsor still exercises sole responsibility over each
         of his children and that when he is able to find the right moment,
         he speaks to him calmly about a parenting issue, that they have a
         discussion, but that it is the sponsor who makes the final decision
         and dictates what should be done. I find that he is embellishing
         his evidence in order that it fit within the requirements of the
         immigration rules.


         90.  If any of the above does not materially undermine the
         appellants' appeals, then the following does. In a moment of
         candour, Mr [FR] indicated in his evidence that after the
         appellants arrive in the United Kingdom they will move in with him
         and his wife and that he will apply for a residence order through
         the Family Court as he did for the sponsor's son. I find this to be
         the true position in these appeals and Mr [R] is to be credited for
         such honesty. However, such evidence undermines the entire basis
         upon which these applications are being made. Namely, that the
         appellants will come to the United Kingdom and reside with their
         father who will be exercising parental responsibility over them.
         The fact Mr [R] needs to act in this way demonstrates to the
         Tribunal that the sponsor is not capable of exercising parental
         responsibility over the appellants.


         91.  For the above reasons, I am not persuaded that the sponsor is
         exercising sole responsibility over the appellants and as such,
         their appeals cannot succeed under paragraph 297(i)(e) of the
         immigration rules."


 6. At paragraphs [92] to [96] of the decision, the judge addressed whether
    in the alternative, the appellants can satisfy the requirement set out
    in paragraph 297(i)(f) of the immigration rules. That is, one parent is
    present and settled in the UK and there are serious compelling family
    or other considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable
    and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care. The
    Judge considered the current arrangements. The judge noted, at [92],
    the evidence that the appellants are currently living in a house which
    has been inherited by their father and paternal uncle, [FR]. The
    appellants are being supported by their paternal aunt, [TN] and her
    husband, [MA]. The judge referred to the affidavit of [TN] and [MA],
    noting that they ensure that the girls are safe and act on instructions
    from Mr [A] and Mr [R]. At paragraph [95], the judge stated:


         "there is very little on the evidence before the tribunal to
         suggest that there are serious and compelling family or other
         considerations which made the appellants' exclusion from the United
         Kingdom undesirable in line with paragraph 297(i)(f) of the
         immigration rules. The evidence from the sponsor and his siblings
         all makes reference to the children being safely looked after and
         cared for in Pakistan. They are attending school and are being
         financially supported from the United Kingdom. I am not satisfied
         that the circumstances of the appellants are such that it engages
         paragraph 297(i)(f) of the immigration rules."


 7. Having concluded the requirements of paragraph 297 of the immigration
    rules could not be met by the appellants, the judge went on to consider
    whether an Article 8 claim can succeed outside the rules.  At paragraph
    [98], the judge stated:


         "it is said that the appellants are being cared for by their
         paternal aunt and her husband in Pakistan. Assuming that this is
         correct (and leaving aside my finding that I am not persuaded that
         the appellant's biological mother did disappear without trace in
         2009), then they are being accommodated in a family home which is
         jointly owned by the sponsor. They are attending school and
         settled. They are being financially supported from the United
         Kingdom. There is nothing on the evidence before the tribunal to
         suggest that there are any exceptional or compelling circumstances
         which would warrant consideration of the applications outside of
         the immigration rules. The best interests of the children of for
         them to continue being cared for by their family in Pakistan."


 8. At paragraphs [99] to [100], the judge stated:


         "99. ... If compassionate and compelling circumstances do exist,
         they have not been properly put. That much is clear from the way
         that these appeals have been brought. I have found that the
         evidence has been embellished in order that it fit within the
         immigration rules and that the true position as to the motives
         behind these applications was revealed towards the end of
         examination-in-chief, when [FR] confessed that once the children
         arrive in the United Kingdom that they will not be living with
         their father (as was stated in the application forms and by their
         counsel at the appeal hearing). The appellants would be living with
         him and his wife and he will seek to make applications to the
         Family Court that residence orders be made in their favour. Ms
         Edwards rightly pointed out in her submissions that no evidence has
         been submitted dealing with any sort of assessment having taken
         place as to whether [FR] and his wife are suitable guardians and
         whether it is in the appellants' best interest to be moved to a
         foreign country and be raised by family members abroad. These are
         important considerations in any Article 8 ECHR assessment.


         100. It appears that having taken custody of the sponsor's son,
         that [FR] now seeks custody of the sponsor's two daughters. This
         appears to be the real motive behind the applications. If that is
         indeed the case, then the applications should have been made on
         that basis and supported by appropriate evidence, rather than what
         has been done, which is to put forward a false narrative that once
         the appellants arrive in this country that they will be living with
         their biological father who will be exercising sole responsibility
         over them."


The appeal before me


 9. The appellants advance a number of grounds of appeal. First, they
    allege that the decision is infected by procedural impropriety and
    procedural unfairness. They claim that the conduct of the judge gave a
    perception that the judge had entered the arena in the conduct of the
    proceedings.  Second, the judge made a fundamental misdirection in law
    in failing to determine the appellant's human rights appeals under
    Article 8. Third, the judge erred in the application of paragraph 297
    of the immigration rules.  The appellant's claim that the requirements
    of paragraph 297(i)(d) are met because there was sufficient evidence
    that the whereabouts of the appellant's mother had not been known since
    she had gone missing in 2009, and there was a "presumption of death".
    They claim the presumption of death had not been rebutted by the
    respondent.  Furthermore there was no evidential basis upon which the
    judge could properly reach the conclusion that he did at paragraph [81]
    of the decision, that the sponsor has not been or is not capable of
    exercising genuine parental responsibility over his children since the
    onset of his severe mental health. Finally, in reaching the decision,
    the judge failed to have regard to the best interests of the children.


10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on 20th
    June 2019.  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup observed:


         "... Whilst the Judge adequately dealt with all the issues arising
         under the rules, it is arguable that the consideration of family
         life outside the Rules pursuant to article 8 ECHR was inadequately
         addressed, including the best interests of the children. It may be
         that on the inadequate evidence in this case no different outcome
         may be achieved. However, Article 8 was dealt with in a perfunctory
         way that is arguably unsustainable."


The matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Aziz should be set aside as erroneous in law, and if it is
set aside, to remake the decision.


11. Mr Ahmed submits that the judge took the immigration rules as being
    determinative of the appeal. He refers to paragraph [98] of the
    decision in which the judge stated that "... There is nothing on the
    evidence before the tribunal to suggest that there are any exceptional
    or compelling circumstances which would warrant consideration of the
    applications outside of the immigration rules.".  Mr Ahmed submits that
    the failure to meet the rules is not the end point, and the judge
    failed to properly address the Article 8 claim outside the immigration
    rules.


12. Mr Howells submits that it was open to the Judge to conclude that the
    appellants are unable to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297 of
    the immigration rules for the reasons set out in some detail, in the
    decision. He accepts that the judge does not adopt the five-stage
    approach referred to in Razgar, but he submits that is immaterial. He
    submits it is implicit from a careful reading of the decision, that the
    judge concludes that the refusal of entry clearance is not
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.


13. After hearing submissions, I informed the parties that in my judgement
    the decision of FtT Judge Aziz is infected by a material error of law,
    such that I set aside the decision.


14. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC
    11 confirms that the fact that the immigration rules cannot be met,
    does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between the individual and
    public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.
    Although the appellant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules was
    not the question to be determined by the FtT Judge, it was capable of
    being a weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether
    such refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing
    immigration control.


15. In my judgement, the judge erred in his assessment of the Article 8
    claim.  The appellants were not required to establish any exceptional
    or compelling circumstances which would warrant consideration of the
    applications outside of the immigration rules.  The fact that the
    immigration rules were not met did not absolve the judge from carrying
    out a full merits-based assessment outside the rules under Article 8.
    I accept, as Mr Ahmed submits, the failure to satisfy the requirements
    of the immigration rules was capable of being a weighty, though not
    determinative factor in an assessment of whether the respondent's
    decision amounts to a disproportionate interference with the
    appellants' right to enjoyment of family and private life in the UK.
    It follows that in my judgment, the decision of the judge to dismiss
    the human rights appeal is infected by error of law.  It cannot stand
    and I set it aside.


Re-making the decision


16. Directions were issued to the parties in advance of the hearing  before
    me, reminding the parties that the Tribunal is empowered to permit  new
    or further evidence to be admitted in the remaking of a decision,  and,
    in any case where this facility is sought, the parties must comply with
    Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   No
    such application has been made by the appellants  and  I  declined  the
    oral application made by Mr Ahmed  to  remit  the  matter  for  hearing
    afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.  No further  witness  statements
    have been made by the appellants, their father or their paternal uncle.
     I have been provided with no explanation,  let  alone  a  satisfactory
    explanation,  as  to  why  any  new  evidence  could,  with  reasonable
    diligence, not have been made available to the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the initial appeal, and  why  no  application  to  adduce  evidence  in
    accordance with the Tribunal Rules, has been made. There  has  been  no
    Notice sent to the Tribunal and served upon the respondent, as required
    by the directions issued to the parties, indicating the nature  of  any
    evidence that the appellants wish to reply upon. The  parties  were  on
    notice of the presumption that, in the event of the  Tribunal  deciding
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  to  be  set  aside  as
    erroneous in law, the remaking of the decision will take place  at  the
    same hearing.


17. The only ground of appeal  available  to  the  appellant  is  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellants to show, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  they  have
    established a family life with their father and brother and that  their
    exclusion from the UK as a result of the respondent's  decision,  would
    interfere with that right. It is then for the respondent to justify any
    interference caused. The respondent's decision must  be  in  accordance
    with  the  law  and  must  be  a  proportionate  response  in  all  the
    circumstances.


18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz found that Mr  [FP]  is  the  biological
    father of the appellants.  FtT Judge Aziz was not  persuaded  that  the
    appellant's have established that their  mother  simply  walked  out  a
    decade ago and they have not  heard  anything  from  her.  He  was  not
    persuaded that the appellant's mother  can  be  'presumed  dead'.   The
    appellants' father has lived  in  the  UK  since  2009.   Although  the
    appellants have remained living in Pakistan apart from their father and
    brother since 2009, I find that the appellants enjoy family  life  with
    their father. I also find that the decision to  refuse  the  appellants
    leave to enter, may have consequences of such gravity as to engage  the
    operation of Article 8, and  I  accept  that  the  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law, and that  the  interference  is  necessary  to
    protect the economic well-being of the country.


19. The issue in this  appeal,  as  is  often  the  case,  is  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  I should make it clear that in reaching my decision, I  have
    had regard to s55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  that
    requires the respondent to make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  her
    functions  in  relation  to  immigration,  asylum  or  nationality  are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are  in  the  UK.   I  take  into  account  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011] UKSC  4.
    Lady Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC: which states  that  "in  all
    actions concerning children, whether undertaken by ... courts  of  law,
    administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of
    the child shall be a primary consideration.".


20. Although a primary  consideration,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is
    automatically in the interests of any child to be  permitted  to  enter
    the United Kingdom, irrespective of age,  family  background  or  other
    circumstances.  As a starting point it is plainly in the best interests
    of the appellants to be with both their parents.  FtT  judge  Aziz  was
    not persuaded that  the  appellants  biological  mother  did  disappear
    without trace in 2009.  That was a finding open to the judge and  there
    is no reason for me to depart from that finding.   In  any  event,  the
    appellants have been separated from  their  father  and  brother  since
    2009.  He has visited the appellants on four  occasions  since  he  was
    granted leave to remain in the UK and he regularly speaks  to  them  on
    Skype. The appellants have also been  able  to  maintain  contact  with
    their brother.


21. I have carefully  considered  the  Affidavit  of  [MA]  and  [TN],  the
    appellants paternal aunt  and  her  husband.   They  confirm  that  the
    appellants' father is  now  permanently  living  in  the  UK  with  the
    appellants' brother, however the appellants  are  living  in  Pakistan.
    They confirm that both girls are enrolled at a local school and  living
    in the same village, in a  house  adjacent  to  their  house,  that  is
    jointly owned by the appellants father and Mr [FR], their uncle.   They
    confirm that  the  appellants  father  and  their  paternal  uncle  are
    responsible for all decisions regarding the appellants and they support
    and send money from the UK. [MA] and  [TN]  confirm  that  they  always
    ensure that the appellants are safe.


22. It is generally in the interests of children to have both stability and
    continuity of social and educational  provision,  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they  belong.
    They have that stability in the current arrangements.  The  appellants'
    father has a  long-standing  diagnosis  of  paranoid  schizophrenia,  a
    severe and enduring mental illness. In view of their father's health, a
    Contact and Residence Order was made by the High Court Family  Division
    on 24th August 2011, that the appellants brother shall reside  with  Mr
    [FR] and [MB], his paternal uncle and aunt,  and  they  will  make  the
    appellant's brother available for contact with his father, such contact
    to be supervised by Mr [FR].  It is in  my  judgement  clear  from  the
    evidence that the appellants will not in  fact  be  living  with  their
    father, but arrangements will have to be made for them to be cared  for
    by their paternal  uncle  and  aunt,  in  much  the  same  way  as  the
    arrangements for their brother.  That much is clear from  the  evidence
    given by Mr [FR] before FtT Judge Aziz.  In my judgement, it cannot  be
    in the best interests  of  the  appellants  to  uproot  them  from  the
    stability that they now enjoy, to an uncertain future in the UK.


23. As I have said in my error of law decision, the ability to satisfy  the
    immigration rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but is capable of being a weighty,  though  not  determinative  factor,
    when deciding whether such refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim of enforcing immigration control.


24. The appellants are unable to satisfy the requirements of the
    immigration rules for the reasons set out at some length by FtT Judge
    Aziz.  Having carefully considered the evidence whilst I accept that
    the appellants might prefer to continue their relationship with their
    father and brother together in the UK, that does not equate to a right
    to do so in law.  On the evidence before me, there are no exceptional
    circumstances capable of establishing that the refusal of entry
    clearance for settlement amounts to a disproportionate interference
    with the appellants right to enjoyment of family life.  Having
    carefully considered the evidence before me, and taking all the
    relevant factors into account including the best interests of the
    appellants I find that the decision to refuse the applications for
    leave to enter is not disproportionate to the legitimate aim of
    immigration control. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on Article 8
    grounds.


25. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I remake the
    decision, dismissing the appellants appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Decision:


26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Aziz is set aside.


27. I remake the decision, dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.


28. No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          23rd September 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can, in the circumstances, be no fee
award.



Signed                                  Date          23rd September 2019


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
