
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/11534/2016
     hu/11536/2016
     hu/11539/2016
     hu/11541/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Civil and Family  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On 10th October 2018                 |On 23rd October 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     fra
                                     ooa
                                    odtaa
                                    odaa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs A Chaudhry of Counsel instructed by Crown &
                    Mehria Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appealed against a decision of Judge Saffer (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd October 2017.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian citizens.  FRA and OOA are partners and are
    the parents of ODTAA and ODAA.  The children were born in the UK on 6th
    June 2014 and 11th June 2010 respectively.  FRA  and  OOA  now  have  a
    third child who is not a party to these proceedings but who was born in
    the UK on 6th July 2017.  OOA is the father of the children and FRA the
    mother.

 3. On 21st October 2014 the first two Appellants submitted an  application
    for leave to remain in the UK relying on family and private life.  That
    application was refused on 6th January 2015.  On 31st December 2015 the
    Appellants presented representations for the reconsideration  of  their
    human rights application for leave to remain based  upon  their  family
    and private lives.  These applications were refused on 13th April 2016.



 4. The appeals were heard on 11th October 2017.  The judge found that  the
    Appellants could not satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules and was not
    satisfied that there were  any  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
    rules which meant that Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the  1950  Convention)  should  be  considered.   In  the
    alternative, if wrong in that conclusion, the judge went on to consider
    Article 8 and dismissed the appeals.

 5. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted by  Judge  Ford  on  9th  April  2018.   The
    grounds seeking permission contended that the judge had  dismissed  the
    appeals without proper scrutiny, failed to properly consider  the  best
    interests of the  minor  children,  and  had  not  properly  considered
    Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  but  dismissed  the  appeals
    simply because the Appellants could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

 6. On 27th July 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law.  The Respondent contended there was  no  material  error.
    The Appellants relied upon MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705  on  the
    basis that the fourth Appellant had more than seven  years'  continuous
    residence in the UK and the judge had not adequately considered whether
    it would be reasonable for her to leave the UK.  It was also  contended
    that the judge had erred in failing to consider section 117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 7. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 2nd August 2018, promulgated on  9th
    August 2018.  I found that the judge had erred in law and set aside the
    FtT decision.  I set out below paragraphs 20-34 of my  decision,  which
    contain my conclusions and reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         "20. I observed that the judge erred factually at  paragraph  1  in
             recording  that  the  children  were  born  in  Nigeria.   The
             evidence indicates that they were born in the UK.   The  first
             and  second  Appellants  have  three  children,  although  the
             youngest is not a party to these proceedings.   The  error  in
             relation to the location of the birth of the children  is  not
             material as the judge accepted that the fourth  Appellant  had
             accrued more than seven years' continuous residence in the UK.
              Mr Sills was correct not to  rely  on  the  first  Ground  of
             Appeal which has no merit whatsoever.

         21.  I find that the second and third grounds are in  fact  linked.
             In my view the judge erred in law in conducting an  inadequate
             assessment of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

         22.  The judge was wrong at paragraph 33 to conclude that Article 8
             could not be considered outside the Immigration  Rules  unless
             there were compelling circumstances.  However, the judge  does
             make the point in paragraph 34, that if he was wrong  in  that
             conclusion, he will go on to consider Article  8  outside  the
             Immigration Rules in  any  event.   The  correct  approach  is
             outlined in paragraph 48 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 in which it
             is stated that if the relevant  test  within  the  Immigration
             Rules is not met, but refusal of the application would  result
             in unjustifiably harsh consequences such  that  refusal  would
             not be proportionate, then leave to remain  could  be  granted
             outside the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
             circumstances.

         23.  I find no error of law in the consideration by  the  judge  of
             proportionality  so  far  as  the  first,  second  and   third
             Appellants are concerned.  The error in my view relates to the
             fourth Appellant who it is accepted had resided in the UK  for
             in excess of seven years at the date of hearing.

         24.  The judge makes reference to MA (Pakistan) and section 117B(6)
             of the 2002 Act at paragraph 29, but in my view  errs  in  not
             adequately considering section 117B(6),  and  not  considering
             and applying the guidance  in  MA  (Pakistan).   For  ease  of
             reference I set out below section 117B(6);

                  (6)      In the case of a person  who  is  not  liable  to
                      deportation, the public interest does not require the
                      person's removal where -

                      (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                           relationship with a qualifying child, and

                      (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the United Kingdom.

         25.  In this case the judge at paragraph 40 finds it reasonable  to
             expect the children to go with their parents to  Nigeria,  and
             at  paragraph  41  referring  specifically   to   the   fourth
             Appellant, states that

                  'Even if I was to consider her case  before  that  of  her
                  parents and excluding their behaviour I  would  reach  the
                  same  conclusion  regarding  her  best  interest  and  the
                  reasonableness  of  requiring  her  to  leave  the  United
                  Kingdom for the reasons set out above'.

         26.  With respect, in my view the judge's  approach  is  incorrect.
             The best interests of the children should be considered  as  a
             primary  consideration  without  any  consideration   of   the
             behaviour of the parents.  Having assessed the best interests,
             if the child is a qualifying child, the judge must then go  on
             to consider whether it is reasonable to expect that  child  to
             leave the UK.

         27.  In  considering  reasonableness,  the  judge  must  take  into
             account all factors relevant to the public interest, including
             the behaviour of the parents.

         28.  The judge  has  not  correctly  applied  the  guidance  in  MA
             (Pakistan) in considering reasonableness.  At paragraph 46  it
             was stated in summary that the fact that a child has  been  in
             the UK for seven years must be given "significant weight  when
             carrying out the proportionality exercise".  In cases where  a
             child has been in the UK for seven years or longer, there must
             be a very strong expectation that the child's  best  interests
             will be to remain in the UK with his  parents  as  part  of  a
             family unit, and that must rank as a primary consideration  in
             the proportionality assessment.

         29.  At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan) it is stated;

                  'However, the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for
                  seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in
                  the proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons,
                  first, because of its relevance to determining the  nature
                  and strength of the child's best  interests,  and  second,
                  because it establishes as  a  starting  point  that  leave
                  should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the
                  contrary'.

         30.  The above guidance was not followed by the judge.  The  fourth
             Appellant  had  in  excess  of  seven  years'  residence,  and
             therefore when considering whether it would be reasonable  for
             her to leave the UK, the judge should  have  considered  as  a
             starting point that leave should be granted unless  there  are
             powerful reasons to the contrary.  That was not  the  approach
             taken.

         31.  In considering powerful reasons, the judge did  not  have  the
             benefit of MT and ET (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKUT  00088  (IAC)  in
             which at paragraph 34 the President of the Upper Tribunal gave
             an example of the immigration history of a parent which  would
             not amount to powerful reasons.

         32.  I therefore conclude that the judge erred in consideration  of
             Article 8, specifically in relation to the  fourth  Appellant.
             The decision must therefore be set aside.

         33.  I do not find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal  to
             the FtT.  There are findings that have not  been  successfully
             challenged and can be preserved.  Those findings are contained
             in paragraphs 20-27.

         34.  When I announced that I was reserving my decision in  relation
             to  an  error  of  law,  it  was  suggested  that  it  may  be
             appropriate to remit this case to  the  FtT,  and  that  there
             should in any event be a further hearing.  In  my  view  there
             should be a further hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
             issue to be decided relates  to  the  fourth  Appellant.   The
             Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied, but at the next hearing
             there will need to be a consideration of the best interests of
             the fourth Appellant, and consideration of section 117B(6), in
             particular whether in the circumstances it would be reasonable
             for the fourth Appellant to leave the UK.  This will  need  to
             be assessed by considering the guidance in MA  (Pakistan)  and
             MT and ET."

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 10th October 2018

 8. Mrs Chaudhry, on behalf of the Appellants, indicated that there was  no
    further documentary evidence and no  oral  evidence  would  be  called.
    There was no skeleton argument.  I  ascertained  that  I  had  all  the
    documents to be relied upon, which were the documents before  the  FtT.
    These consist of the Home Office  bundle  dated  16th  March  2017,  an
    Appellants'  bundle  comprising   28   pages,   and   the   Appellants'
    supplementary bundle comprising 3  pages.   In  addition,  there  is  a
    bundle prepared on behalf of the Appellants comprising 38  pages  which
    was prepared for  the  Upper  Tribunal  error  of  law  hearing.   This
    contains the FtT decision, and the Grounds of Appeal, and does not  add
    anything to the Appellants' case.

 9. I heard oral submissions from Mr Bates on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.
    With reference to MT and ET Mr Bates pointed out that the comments made
    at paragraph 34 of that decision in relation to behaviour by  a  parent
    which does not amount to powerful reasons for finding it reasonable  to
    remove a child, are not included in the head note to the decision.

10. Mr Bates pointed out that MT and ET was decided prior to  new  guidance
    issued by the Respondent in relation to  family  migration,  which  was
    issued on 22nd February 2018.  I was  asked  to  note  that  the  first
    Appellant  had  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a  student  and  subsequently
    overstayed, and the second Appellant  had  arrived  illegally  and  had
    never been granted leave.

11. In relation to the fourth Appellant, there was inadequate  evidence  of
    any medical issues as there was no diagnosis or prognosis, and no up-to-
    date evidence.

12. Mr Bates submitted that the best interests of  the  children  would  be
    served by remaining with their parents.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    family would be returned to Nigeria together,  and  English  is  widely
    spoken in that country.  Letters in support of the family, contained in
    the Appellants' bundle, came from individuals now resident  in  the  UK
    who originated from Nigeria.

13. I was asked to find that  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellants  had
    extended family in Nigeria, and that the  family  are  not  financially
    independent.  Mr Bates submitted  that  there  was  significant  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

14. I then heard submissions from Mrs Chaudhry on behalf of the Appellants.
     I was asked to note that the fourth Appellant has now resided  in  the
    UK continuously for in excess of eight years having been born  in  this
    country.  She is in education.  She is still undergoing medical  tests.
    She is at an age where she is forming her own private life and does not
    rely exclusively upon her parents.

15. I was asked to follow the case law which indicates that it would not be
    reasonable to expect the fourth Appellant to leave the UK unless  there
    are powerful reasons, and there are no such powerful  reasons  in  this
    case.

16. Mrs Chaudhry submitted that Home Office guidance is  in  fact  in  line
    with the guidance in MA (Pakistan) in that  it  indicates  that  strong
    reasons will be required to refuse a case where  the  outcome  will  be
    removal of a child with continuous UK residence of seven years or more.

17. I was asked to find that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  remove  the
    fourth Appellant, and therefore her parents' appeal should  be  allowed
    with reference to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I start by setting out the preserved findings  of  the  FtT  which  are
    contained at paragraphs 20-27 of that decision;

         "20. I am satisfied that when OOA came here in 2006 he did so using
             a visa that he was not entitled to as he had no  intention  of
             returning to Nigeria and he accordingly lied  to  the  ECO  or
             instructed  the  agent  to  lie  to  the  ECO  regarding   his
             intentions.

         21.  I am satisfied that when FRA came here in 2008 she did  so  to
             study as I have no real reason to doubt that.

         22.  I am satisfied that the adults began a relationship in 2008 as
             I have no reason to doubt that.  I am  satisfied  that,  apart
             from a period in 2014/2015 when they had relationship  issues,
             they have been in a genuine and subsisting relationship  since
             2008, and live in a relationship  akin  to  marriage  for  two
             years as they have had three children,  and  I  have  no  real
             reason to doubt them.

         23.  I am satisfied that OOA has worked  without  permission  given
             his acceptance that he has.  I accept that family and  friends
             have provided financial support as I have no reason  to  doubt
             that evidence.

         24.  I am satisfied that the family involve  themselves  in  church
             life as I have no reason to doubt that evidence.

         25.  It is clear from the Respondent's  guidance  on  public  funds
             produced by Miss Hashmi that since 22nd April 2016 (nine  days
             after the Respondent's decision) reliance on the NHS  and  the
             state education system has not been considered to be  reliance
             on public funds.  The test in section 117B however is  whether
             they are financially independent which they  plainly  are  not
             given their reliance  on  family  and  friends  for  financial
             support, accordingly Miss Hashmi's submission does not  assist
             the family.

         26.  FRA and OOA are both over the age of  18.   Neither  has  been
             here for twenty years.  They are both in  good  health.   They
             both speak the languages  used  in  Nigeria  where  they  were
             educated and understand the cultural and social  mores.   They
             both have family with whom they are in touch.  I do not accept
             they would be unable to work as there is no  evidence  of  any
             such  impediment.   Whilst   FRA   currently   has   childcare
             responsibilities, OOA does not.   There  is  no  corroborative
             evidence to suggest  that  having  children  whilst  unmarried
             carries anything like the societal approbation suggested.  Nor
             has any evidence been adduced to support  the  assertion  that
             there would be a real  risk  to  them  of  kidnapping,  ritual
             murder, or being robbed.  The  suggestion  that  their  family
             could find them anywhere in Nigeria is  plainly  absurd  given
             the sheer size of Nigeria and lack of evidence of any  ability
             to get access to state computers that  identify  where  people
             are (if there are such records) or  a  desire  to  search  for
             them.  Their ability  to  speak  English  here  is  a  neutral
             factor.  They are not financially independent.  I  reject  the
             suggestion that the family and friends here will not  continue
             to support them in Nigeria as none attended to  give  evidence
             to that effect.  I am not satisfied that their application met
             the rules as ODAA had not been here for  seven  years  at  the
             date of application and there are no significant obstacles  to
             them integrating easily back into life in Nigeria either  with
             or without family support.

         27.  ODTAA is 3.  He is Nigerian.  He has not been here  for  seven
             years.  He is healthy.  He is not integrated in the  education
             system given his tender years.  He will be able to  learn  any
             language he needs in Nigeria.   The  suggestion  he  would  be
             unable to integrate into life in Nigeria with the  support  of
             his parents, on whom he is entirely reliant is absurd.   Given
             his age the 'reasonableness test' does not apply, but even  if
             it  did,  it  plainly  would  be  decided  against  him.   His
             application under the rules was hopeless.  The same applies to
             ODGAA even though she is not a party to these proceedings".

20. It is accepted on behalf of the Appellants that they cannot satisfy the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I am asked to consider  Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention outside the rules.  I find that Article  8  is
    engaged.  The Appellants have established  family  life  together,  and
    private lives.

21. The factual matrix to some extent is set out in the preserved  findings
    of the FtT.  I find that the first Appellant entered the UK legally  as
    a student on 22nd April 2008.  Her leave expired on  31st  August  2011
    and she thereafter overstayed.  The second  Appellant  entered  the  UK
    illegally in 2006 and has never had leave to remain.

22. The best  interests  of  children  must  be  considered  as  a  primary
    consideration but not a paramount consideration.  Factors  relevant  to
    considering the best interests of children are set out in paragraph  35
    of  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.   The  factors   involve
    considering the age of the children, the length of time they have  been
    in the UK, how long they have been in education and  what  stage  their
    education has reached.  There must also be consideration of the  extent
    to which the children have been distanced from the country where it  is
    proposed they return, how renewable their connection with that  country
    may be, and to what extent they would have linguistic, medical or other
    difficulties in adapting to life in that country,  and  the  extent  to
    which the course proposed would interfere with their  private  life  or
    their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

23. The FtT found, and the finding is preserved, that the best interests of
    the third Appellant who is now 4 years of age, and the  youngest  child
    who is not a party to the proceedings, would be to  remain  with  their
    parents, and  if  their  parents  return  to  Nigeria,  so  should  the
    children.  If this appeal related only to the first, second  and  third
    Appellants,  the appeals would be dismissed.  That however is  not  the
    case, and I find that the appeals rest upon the position of the  fourth
    Appellant.

24. I am satisfied that the fourth Appellant attends school although  there
    was no up-to-date evidence.  There is a letter at page 18 from the head
    teacher of the fourth Appellant's primary school which is undated.   At
    the time the letter was written the fourth Appellant  was  in  year  2.
    She is described as having lots of friends,  working  hard  and  making
    excellent progress.

25. Included within the Appellants' bundle at page 10 is a letter  from  Mr
    D'Souza, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon dated 12th  May  2017.   This
    describes the fourth Appellant has having swelling  of  the  peripheral
    joints secondary to an inflammatory arthropathy.  There is reference to
    blood tests being arranged but there is no more recent medical evidence
    on this issue.

26. There is a letter from Dr Watson, a consultant paediatrician, dated 7th
    April 2017 which refers to the fourth Appellant having bladder problems
    with the most likely diagnosis  being  overactive  bladder.   There  is
    reference to the Appellant being  referred  to  a  specialist,  but  no
    updated medical evidence on this issue.

27. I must follow the guidance in MA (Pakistan).  The guidance has been set
    out in part earlier in this decision.  The fourth Appellant was born in
    the UK and  has  approximately  eight  years  four  months'  continuous
    residence.  She has never  visited  Nigeria.   I  find  that  her  best
    interests, given her length of residence would be to remain in  the  UK
    if her parents were allowed to remain.  That does not however mean that
    her appeal must  be  allowed.   I  must  consider  any  other  relevant
    considerations.  I have had regard to  the  considerations  in  section
    117B of the 2002 Act, which confirms that the maintenance of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  The  fourth  Appellant
    has established a private life in the UK but has  never  had  leave  to
    remain in this country.  I have had regard to the Respondent's guidance
    published on 22nd February 2018 at pages 74-76, which gives guidance on
    whether it would be reasonable to expect a child with  seven  years  or
    more residence to leave the UK.  At page 75 the guidance states;

         "The longer the child has resided in the UK, and the older the  age
         at which they have done so, the more  the  balance  will  begin  to
         shift towards it being unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
         the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order  to  refuse  a
         case where the outcome will be removal of a child  with  continuous
         UK residence of seven years or more".

28. I find that this is in line with the guidance in  MA  (Pakistan)  which
    makes  reference  to  powerful  reasons  being  required  to  make   it
    reasonable to remove a child with more than seven years' residence.

29. I have taken into account the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC) in which it was found that seven years' residence from  age
    4 is likely to be more significant to a  child  than  the  first  seven
    years of life as very young  children  are  focused  on  their  parents
    rather than their peers and are adaptable.

30. In considering whether it would be reasonable for the fourth  Appellant
    to leave the UK the guidance in MA (Pakistan) is that I must not  focus
    on the position of the child alone but must have regard  to  the  wider
    public interest, including the immigration history of the parents.

31. Therefore, having found that the best interests of the fourth Appellant
    would be to remain in the UK where she  was  born  and  where  she  has
    resided for in excess of eight years, I must consider whether there are
    any powerful reasons which would make reasonable her removal from  this
    country.

32. In considering powerful reasons I take into account the guidance in  MT
    and ET (Nigeria) [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  The President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was considering in that appeal a 14 year old  child  with  ten
    years' residence in the UK.  At paragraph 34  it  was  noted  that  the
    parent had received a community order for using  a  false  document  to
    obtain employment.  The parent was an individual who had entered the UK
    as a visitor, overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was  false,  and
    thereafter pursued various legal means of remaining  in  the  UK.   The
    behaviour was not so bad as to constitute the kind of  powerful  reason
    that would render reasonable the removal of the child to Nigeria.

33. In this case, the parents do not have criminal convictions.  They  have
    abused the immigration laws of  the  UK,  in  the  case  of  the  first
    Appellant by remaining without leave since August 2011, and in the case
    of the second Appellant entering illegally and never having leave.   In
    addition, the second Appellant has worked without permission.

34. However, applying MT and ET, I do not find that the  behaviour  of  the
    parents amounts to powerful reasons for removing from the  UK  a  child
    with in excess of eight years' residence.  I therefore conclude that it
    would not be reasonable to expect the fourth Appellant to leave the UK.

35. It follows from that finding that the first and second Appellants  must
    also succeed with reference to section 117B(6) as they have  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect that child  to  leave  the  UK.   The
    public interest therefore does not require their removal.

36. That leaves the third Appellant who is 4 years of age, and the youngest
    child who is not a party to these  proceedings.   If  the  parents  are
    allowed to stay in the UK together with the fourth Appellant,  it  must
    follow that it would be disproportionate to  expect  the  two  youngest
    children to return to Nigeria without their parents.

37. Therefore the appeals are allowed with reference to section 117B(6) and
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds with reference to Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made because the  third
and fourth Appellants are minors and is made pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         11th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The appeals  have  been  allowed  because  the  fourth
Appellant proves in excess of seven years'  residence.   That  was  not  the
case when the applications for leave to remain  were  initially  refused  by
the Respondent.


Signed                              Date         11th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
