
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11445/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              Tanzeela Rasheed
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on  15
August 2018, and in which it dismissed the claimant's appeal to it.

2.    The claimant is a national of Pakistan and she was born on  1  January
1989. She is married to one Kamran Hussain who is  present  and  settled  in
the United Kingdom and is her sponsor. She entered the UK lawfully,  on  the
basis of her marriage to the sponsor, in 2015.  Leave  was  given  until  25
March 2018.  She applied for further  leave,  again  on  the  basis  of  her
marriage on 14 March 2018 and,  therefore,  before  her  initial  period  of
leave had expired. But the Secretary of State refused  her  application.  On
appeal, the tribunal decided that the  requirements  relating  to  financial
standing and evidence of such financial standing as  contained  in  Appendix
FM and Appendix FM-SE, had not been met. A  particular  sticking  point  was
that, although the claimant asserted that she had income from two  different
sources of employment, she had not, with respect to one of  her  jobs,  been
in work for a period of six months up to the date  of  application  and  was
not, therefore, able to demonstrate by way of evidence that  she  had  been.
The  tribunal  reminded  itself  that  it  was   permitted   under   certain
exceptional circumstances to take a more flexible approach to the extent  it
was permitted to because of the content of paragraph 21A of Appendix FM  but
thought there were no exceptional circumstances permitting it to  do  so  in
this case. So, it  concluded  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
regarding finance were not met. It considered the possible applicability  of
paragraph EX.1 and paragraph 276 ADE (1) but thought the claimant could  not
succeed under either of those provisions. Putting the two together that  was
because there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  claimant  and  her
husband continuing family life together in Pakistan;  because  the  claimant
had spent much of her previous life in Pakistan; because  she  was  familiar
with life in Pakistan and  because  there  would  not  be  very  significant
obstacles to her integration  into  Pakistani  society.  The  tribunal  then
turned its attention to Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (ECHR) outside the rules and said this:

                 "44. There is nothing exceptional  about  the  appellant's
                    circumstances which requires me to  consider  Article  8
                    outside the Rules".


3.    So, the tribunal dismissed the appeal  but  a  successful  application
for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  followed.  Essentially,
although not put quite in this way, the grounds  amounted  to  a  contention
that the tribunal had not considered or had erred in not applying  paragraph
21A of Appendix FM-SE and had not considered,  adequately  or  at  all,  the
case under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules. Permission  was  granted
and the matter was listed for a hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  (before
me) so that it could be considered whether or not the tribunal had erred  in
law and, if so, what should flow from that. Representation  at  the  hearing
was as indicated above and I am grateful to each representative.

4.    I am satisfied that the tribunal did not err in law  with  respect  to
its consideration of the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is  not
right to say, as is contended in the written  grounds,  that  it  failed  to
consider paragraph 21A or failed to correctly apply it.  That  paragraph  is
available to decision-makers in order to provide  a  degree  of  flexibility
and was inserted into the Immigration Rules in consequence of what had  been
said in MM and others [2017] UKSC 10 concerning the rigidity of  certain  of
the rules as to financial  standing.  But  as  Mr  Mills  explained  at  the
hearing before me, and indeed as is evident from  the  terms  in  which  the
paragraph  is  expressed,  there  is  a  threshold  requirement   that   the
flexibility  provisions  contained  therein  will   only   be   applied   in
exceptional circumstances as prescribed  in  GEN.3.1  of  Appendix  FM.  The
tribunal  was  aware  of  that  exceptionality  requirement.   Further,   at
paragraph 34 and 40 of its written reasons it applied it and  concluded,  as
was open to it, that  the  prescribed  exceptional  circumstances  were  not
present. It could have said a little bit more  about  why  it  was  reaching
that view but, in my judgment, in all the circumstances of this  case,  what
it said was adequate. So, it was required to, and indeed did apply the  full
rigour of the Immigration Rules with respect to the financial requirements.

5.    That leaves the question of whether it erred in  not  carrying  out  a
full assessment under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  outside  the  rules.  As  has
already been said, it took the  view  that  there  was  nothing  exceptional
about the claimant's circumstances that required it to  undertake  any  such
consideration. Was it lawfully entitled to take that view?

6.    Mr Mills says it was. He  accepts  that  other  tribunals  might  have
found sufficient material to justify a full consideration but says  that  it
was open to this tribunal not to do so. It was implicit in what it said  and
decided that it had taken the view the claimant could either  return  abroad
and make an application or seek to re-apply once again, whilst in the UK.

7.    Mr Ahmed argues that there was much  material  here  which  meant  the
tribunal was required to at  least  consider  the  appeal  under  Article  8
outside the rules and that the approach it took was too dismissive.

8.    There were, here, a number of circumstances which might be thought  to
be worthy of consideration under Article 8 outside the rules.  The  claimant
has been in the UK since 2015.  She  has  a  subsisting  relationship  which
underpinned her initial grant of leave. On the face of it  there  is  reason
to think that she and her sponsor are and have  been  supporting  themselves
financially and have not been a burden on  the  state.  There  was  evidence
which might have suggested that the two were supporting  themselves  and  if
called upon would be able to provide documentary evidence of it, as  at  the
date of the hearing before  the  tribunal.  Against  that  background  there
might have been  a  case  for  saying  that  the  public  interest  was  not
necessarily a matter  of  significance.  The  tribunal  had  been  urged  to
undertake a full Article 8  assessment  in  a  skeleton  argument  filed  on
behalf of the claimant.

9.    In the circumstances I have concluded, on balance, that  the  tribunal
did err because there was material before it which meant  a  requirement  to
consider the  case  under  Article  8,  incorporating  the  various  factors
identified at section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002, was triggered. So, the tribunal's failure to undertake  an  assessment
in accordance with the well-established principles in  the  case  of  Razgar
amounted to an error of law. I have decided, therefore,  that  its  decision
must be set aside. My having done  that  I  have  concluded  that  the  most
appropriate course of action is remittal.

10.   So, there will be a rehearing of the appeal (which will be a  complete
rehearing) before a differently constituted tribunal  (a  different  Judge).
The tribunal rehearing the appeal will consider all matters  raised  by  the
appeal, both fact and law, entirely afresh. Further, it will not be  limited
to the evidence which  was  before  the  previous  tribunal.  Since  I  have
decided to remit I  am  statutorily  obliged  to  give  directions  for  the
remaking of the decision. However, I need not be  detailed  or  prescriptive
as to that. The directions which I do consider to  be  appropriate  are  set
out below.




Directions for the Rehearing

A.    The tribunal's decision which it sent to  the  parties  on  15  August
2018 has been set aside. The case is remitted for a complete rehearing.

B.    The case will be  reheard  by  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
Tribunal. Nothing shall be preserved from the findings  and  conclusions  of
the previous tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. The case is remitted for rehearing  by  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal.
I make no anonymity direction. None was sought before me.



Signed:                                      Dated: 23 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

