
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11870/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 9 November 2020                  |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 Mangesh Rai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 23 August  1982.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse his application for entry clearance.

   3. The appellant applied for entry clearance on 15 March 2019  to  settle
      in the UK as the adult dependant relative of his father, an  ex-Gurkha
      soldier, who was issued a settlement visa on 3 July 2012 and who  came
      to the UK on 11 October 2012 with his wife,  the  appellant's  mother.
      The respondent refused the application in  a  decision  dated  29  May
      2019.

   4. In refusing the application, the respondent noted that  the  appellant
      was 36 years of age at the date of the application, that  his  parents
      had visited him in Nepal twice since migrating to the UK, in 2017  and
      2019, and that he had lived apart from his sponsor for more  than  two
      years. The respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  was  in  good
      health, educated, that there were no obvious  factors  preventing  him
      from working in Nepal, that he had  siblings  in  Nepal  who  had  not
      applied to settle in the UK and was satisfied that he had close family
      ties in his country for social and emotional support.  The  respondent
      was,  furthermore,  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was   wholly
      financially and/or emotionally dependent on his UK sponsor. For  those
      reasons the respondent considered that the appellant did not meet  the
      requirements of paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the  immigration
      rules and that he did not meet the requirements  of  the  Home  Office
      policy in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section  2A  13.2.  The  respondent
      went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR but concluded that there was
      no established family life between the appellant and his parents,  but
      that  in  any  event  the  decision  to  refuse  the  application  was
      proportionate and did not breach his Article 8 human rights.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton on 2 March 2020. The judge noted
      that the appeal was pursued only on Article 8 grounds, it having  been
      accepted  that  the  policy  did  not   apply   in   the   appellant's
      circumstances. Having heard from the  sponsor,  the  judge  considered
      that his  evidence in relation to various matters was inconsistent and
      implausible, such that he had to conclude that he could not rely  upon
      the sponsor's account of the appellant's circumstances in  Nepal.  The
      judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  shown  that  he  was
      financially dependent upon the sponsor or that their relationship went
      beyond the normal ties  between  a  parent  and  an  adult  child.  He
      concluded that the appellant had not shown  that  he  could  meet  the
      requirements of Annex K or that he had an established family life  for
      Article 8 purposes and he accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on two
      grounds, namely that the judge had failed  to  apply  the  appropriate
      legal principles in the assessment of whether Article 8 was engaged on
      the basis of family life and that  the  judge  had  made  inadequately
      reasoned negative credibility findings in relation  to  the  sponsor's
      evidence.

   7. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal, essentially on  the
      first ground.

   8. The matter then came before me and both parties made submissions.

   9. Ms Nnamani focussed on the first ground and submitted that whilst  the
      judge, at [32], had set out the correct legal principles in  assessing
      whether there was family life between the appellant and his parents at
      the time his parents left Nepal and since that time, as set out in the
      case of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320,
      he had failed to apply those principles. The judge made no finding  on
      family life at the time the appellants' parents left  Nepal.  He  had,
      however,  made  findings  which  were  consistent  with   on   ongoing
      relationship, namely the visits made by the appellants'  parents,  the
      money transfers and the regular communication between them, which were
      sufficient to show that there was an established family life that  had
      been maintained since 2012, in accordance with the principles set  out
      in Rai, Gurung & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  8,  Ghising  (family  life  -
      adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 and Kugathas v Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31. As for the second
      ground, the judge, rather than focussing on the  relevant  issues  and
      positive aspects of the case, was distracted by matters which were not
      relevant, such as the sponsor's  health,  whether  the  appellant  was
      working and the thriving tourist industry in Nepal and other  negative
      aspects. The judge's decision ought therefore to be set aside.

  10. Ms Everett submitted that there was no material error of  law  in  the
      judge's decision. The judge  concluded,  at  [58],  that  he  was  not
      satisfied as to the appellant's circumstances either when the  sponsor
      came to the UK or at the present time and therefore he did address his
      mind to the situation when his parents came to the UK. Although  there
      were mixed findings made by the judge, ultimately he found that  there
      was a lack of evidence to show that there was an ongoing family life.

  11. Ms Nnamani submitted, in response, that the judge had failed, at [58],
      to consider whether the evidence showed real or committed or effective
      support. The judge did not say why the monthly  remittances  were  not
      sufficient to show financial support,  nor  why  the  visits  and  the
      communication did not amount to family life.

Consideration and findings

  12. The case for the appellant is that the  judge  set  out  the  relevant
      principles in Rai for assessing whether family  life  was  established
      for the purposes of Article 8, but  then  diverted  his  attention  to
      other,  less  relevant  matters,  and  did  not  apply  the   relevant
      principles or give weight to the  relevant  issues  and  the  positive
      aspects of the evidence.  However I do not  agree  that  that  is  the
      case.

  13. As accepted, the judge set out the relevant principles at [32]. It  is
      clear that he went on, at [33], to explain what he had to do in  order
      to apply those principles and to make an assessment of whether  family
      life existed at the relevant times. At [34] the judge, quite properly,
      considered that it was reasonable to expect a 37  year  old  man  who,
      even on his own account had lived apart from  his  parents  for  about
      seven years, to have developed a life independent of his  parents.  As
      such, he went on to consider whether  the  appellant  had  provided  a
      plausible explanation as to why that was not the case and he proceeded
      to consider the appellant's circumstances in order to do so.

  14. At [35] to [48] the judge considered  the  appellant's  background  in
      terms of his living circumstances, employment and  education,  all  of
      which were relevant  to  the  question  of  his  dependency  upon  his
      parents. He gave cogent reasons, at  [35]  and  [36],  as  to  why  he
      accorded limited weight to the documentary  evidence  relied  upon  to
      show that the appellant remained unmarried and unemployed and at  [37]
      to [41] he assessed, and made adverse observations about the sponsor's
      evidence  in  that  respect.  At  [42]  to  [46]   the   judge   noted
      inconsistencies in the evidence  about  the  appellant's  address  and
      living circumstances,  together  with  concerns  about  the  sponsor's
      evidence that he paid the appellant's rent. At [47] to [48] the  judge
      considered the sponsor's  medical  issues  and  appears  to  have  had
      concerns, from that evidence, as to the  claim  that  the  family  was
      living in poverty. Clearly the judge had reservations in regard to all
      these matters.

  15. Having considered the evidence of  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
      Nepal, the judge went on to consider the question of communication and
      the financial and emotional dependency between the appellant  and  his
      parents. The appellant's grounds, at [6],  suggest  that  the  judge's
      findings at [49] to [53] in relation to those matters, were sufficient
      to show "real or committed  or  effective  support  over  a  sustained
      period" amounting to family life, in accordance with the principles in
      Rai.  However, I do not find that to be the case as it is  clear  that
      the judge also had reservations about those matters.

  16. Whilst the judge accepted, at [50], that the appellants' parents'  two
      visits to Nepal in  2017  and  2019  were  evidence  of  a  continuing
      relationship, he did not consider that that was evidence in itself  of
      a relationship going beyond the  normal  parent/  adult  child  bonds.
      Whilst the judge accepted, at [51] and [52}, that  the  appellant  had
      received monthly payments from the  sponsor  from  September  2018  to
      January 2020, he did not accept that that was evidence  in  itself  of
      financial dependence and he noted the lack of independent evidence  of
      any financial support between the sponsor's departure  from  Nepal  in
      2012 until September 2018. Whilst the  judge  accepted,  at  [53]  and
      [54], that the appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  regular  contact  by
      telephone, he gave limited weight to the evidence produced as  to  the
      extensive nature of the contact, noting that that level of contact had
      only begun recently and that the evidence overall did  not  show  that
      there was emotional interdependence.  At  [55],  the  judge  found  no
      emotional dependency upon the appellant  in  terms  of  the  sponsor's
      health care, given the length of time they had been separated and  the
      availability of care from other  sources  in  the  UK.  It  is  clear,
      therefore,  that  the  positive  aspects  of  the  case  were  not  as
      significantly weighty as the grounds and submissions suggest.

  17.  Having  undertaken  this  detailed  assessment  of  the   appellant's
      circumstances and the ties between the appellant and his parents,  the
      judge then drew everything together and set  out  his  conclusions  at
      [58]. It is clear that he  found  the  sponsor  to  be  an  unreliable
      witness and he was not satisfied that he  had  been  provided  with  a
      credible account of the appellant's circumstances in Nepal, either  at
      the time the sponsor and his wife left Nepal or at the  current  time.
      The judge accordingly did  not  accept  that  the  required  level  of
      dependency had been demonstrated for the purposes of engaging  Article
      8 on family life grounds. I cannot agree with  the  assertion  in  the
      grounds or the grant of permission that the judge  failed  to  resolve
      the relevant and 'paramount' issues of fact, as it seems to me that he
      undeniably did resolve  those  matters,  with  cogent  reasoning,  and
      applying the correct legal principles.

  18. As I believe was  accepted  by  Ms  Nnamani,  the  second  ground  was
      dependent upon the first ground being made out. For the reasons  given
      above, I find neither ground made out. In my view the judge  undertook
      a full and careful assessment of all  the  evidence,  he  gave  cogent
      reasons for according the evidence the weight that he did and he  made
      properly reasoned findings in line with the  relevant  principles  set
      out in Rai, Ghising, Gurung and Kugathas. Accordingly I find no errors
      of law in the judge's decision. I uphold the decision.



DECISION

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeals stands.

    Anonymity

    I note  that  Judge  Hamilton  made  an  anonymity  order  on  his  own
    initiative, without any request being made. I do not agree  that  there
    is a need for anonymity in this case  and  I  therefore  discharge  the
    order, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  9 November 2020
