
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11561/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th December 2017                        |On 24th  January 2018         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Manila

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               EDWIN TABANGAY
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood
For the Respondent:    No representative (the respondent's sponsor attended
the hearing, aided by written submissions from Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Entry Clearance Officer appeals the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Majid, promulgated on  11th  August  2017,  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of Mr Edwin Tabangay, a national of the Philippines,
    against a decision dated 30th March 2016 refusing him entry  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The respondent, whose date of birth is 13th  January
    1978, sought entry clearance to join his partner in the United Kingdom.
    The entry clearance application was made on 7th December 2015  and  was
    based on Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  refusing  entry
    clearance the Entry Clearance Officer noted that the respondent  sought
    to  join  his  wife,  Marilou  Tabangay,  and  considered  a   marriage
    certificate indicating that they were married  in  the  Philippines  on
    28th April 2008.

2.   According to Home  Office  records  the  respondent  was  issued  entry
    clearance  under  the  Sector-Based  Scheme  in  2006.  The  respondent
    maintains that he left the UK on 19th  August  2007,  just  before  the
    expiry of his leave on 22nd August 2007.  However,  according  to  Home
    Office records (which do not appear  to  have  been  disclosed  to  the
    respondent) he actually left the United Kingdom on  19th  August  2008.
    If this was the case then he would not have been able to get married to
    his wife on 28th April 2008 in the Philippines.

3.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  noted  that  there  had  been  previous
    refusals of further applications for entry clearance on the same basis.
     The Entry Clearance Officer  therefore  checked  Home  Office  records
    which apparently showed that the respondent  had  been  encountered  by
    immigration officers at Heathrow Airport on 19th August 2008. The Entry
    Clearance Officer gave the respondent an opportunity to provide further
    evidence that he had resided in the Philippines from  August  2007  and
    not from August 2008. The respondent provided ten  photographs  of  his
    wedding registration which were not  dated  and,  as  such,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was unable to determine the date on which  they  were
    actually  taken.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  also  considered  the
    respondent's  claim  that  he  lost  his  passport,  which  would  have
    contained the relevant entry  and  exit  stamps.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer noted that a new passport was not issued  until  18th  November
    2008 which was in accordance with the timescale advanced by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer i.e. that the respondent left the UK on  19th  August
    2008.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not therefore satisfied that the
    marriage certificate provided by the respondent was  reliable  and  was
    not satisfied that there had actually been a valid marriage. The  Entry
    Clearance Officer gave brief consideration to Article 8  and  concluded
    that there would be no disproportionate breach.

4.   The respondent strongly maintains that he had left  the  UK  in  August
    2007 and that there had been a  mistake  on  the  Home  Office  records
    suggesting that he left in 2008 rather than 2007.  He had  a  right  of
    appeal and the matter came before Judge Majid on 5th  July  2017.   The
    respondent was represented by Mr Kushner of Counsel.

5.   The judge allowed the appeal but his decision made little reference  to
    the immigration history and no reference was made to  earlier  judicial
    decisions.  The judge talked at  length  of  irrelevant  matters  of  a
    political nature and concluded that  the  respondent  was  telling  the
    truth and that he met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    judge allowed the appeal. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission
    to appeal and  permission  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Holmes.  Judge Holmes stated

         "It is well arguable that the judge has failed to  demonstrate  any
         adequate analysis of the disputed issues and the evidence  relevant
         to them that was place before him and has failed to  give  adequate
         reasons for his decision to  allow  the  appeal.   There  are  also
         comments in the decision which appear to be political and which are
         arguably have no place in a judicial decision."

6.   At the  error  of  law  hearing  I  received  a  respondent's  skeleton
    argument drafted by Mr Kushner.  The respondent's partner  appeared  in
    person and adopted the skeleton argument which contained a request  for
    an adjournment. According to the adjournment  request  Mr  Kushner  was
    unable to attend because he  had  other  travel  commitments.   It  was
    argued that the appeal required an adjournment as there were issues  of
    credibility and law involved and that the Tribunal would be assisted by
    legal submissions. The adjournment request additionally noted that  the
    actual grounds of appeal had never been received.  I gave  the  sponsor
    an opportunity to  make  additional  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    adjournment  request.  I  refused  the  adjournment  request  for   the
    following reasons.

7.   The respondent was aware or should be taken to be aware of the  hearing
    since  16th  November  2017.  The  respondent  had  adequate  time  and
    opportunity to instruct alternative Counsel and to request either  from
    the Tribunal or from the appellant the  full  grounds  of  appeal.  The
    grant of permission in any event identified, in a summary form, all  of
    the material points relied on by the appellant.  I have  also  had  the
    benefit of written submissions from Mr  Kushner,  which  fully  engaged
    with the factors identified in the grant of  permission.  I  took  into
    account Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    and the overriding objective to deal with cases fairly and justly,  and
    I have also considered the principles enunciated in Tribunal  decisions
    relating  to  fairness  and  adjournments  and  in  particular  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). I  am  satisfied  that
    the respondent has not been deprived of  a  fair  hearing  particularly
    since I have had the benefit of written submissions that fully  engaged
    with the grant of permission. I  am  additionally  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was given a full opportunity to make any further submissions in
    respect of the error of law.  For these reasons I declined to grant the
    adjournment.

8.   I heard brief submissions from Ms Isherwood who outlined the manner  in
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  and  I  took  into
    account both the written  submissions  contained  in  the  respondent's
    skeleton argument  and  the  oral  submissions  from  the  respondent's
    sponsor.  I note that there are children involved in  this  matter.   I
    take into account her evidence that the children  are  suffering  as  a
    result of being deprived of being part of a full family unit  and  that
    they  do  not  understand  why  they  cannot  join  their  mother.    I
    additionally take into account  the  submission  made  that  the  judge
    believed the respondent and accepted that they were married.

9.   I am however satisfied that this decision  does  contain  very  serious
    errors  of  law  and  that,  on  any  rational  view   it   is   wholly
    unsustainable.  I will give a brief summary of those legal errors.

10.  The judge fails to identify the actual issues that are in dispute.  The
    judge fails to identify or record the evidence that was  given  at  the
    hearing and fails to engage with or to analyse any of that evidence  in
    a transparent manner. The judge fails to give any or  adequate  reasons
    for accepting the respondent's evidence or for finding him credible and
    for allowing the appeal.  The judge has given the wrong date in respect
    of the appealed decision and wrongly maintains that the appeal decision
    was  not  properly  completed.   The  judge  has  taken  into   account
    irrelevant matters such as the United Kingdom going through an economic
    crisis and has made inappropriate reference to political statements  by
    politicians and appears  to  accord  an  unprecedented  and  irrational
    weight to the concept of discretion available to judges.   There  is  a
    bizarre reference to the principle of arguability and there simply  has
    been no engagement at all with the immigration history and the previous
    judicial decisions.  The  judge's  reasoning  process  is  consequently
    irredeemably damaged.

11.  Having holistic and cumulative regard to these factors  I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the judge's decision cannot stand and  that  the  matter
    will need to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    hearing to consider all the issues before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Majid.

Notice of Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed. The  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision contains material legal errors.
The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  (de
novo) hearing before a judge other than judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Majid.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]                               23 January 2018
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


