
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11405/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2020                    |On 26 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Marziano, legal representative from Westkin
Associates
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's  appeal
    following  my  previous  conclusion  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision dismissing the appeal should be set  aside  by  virtue  of  an
    error of law.  My earlier decision, promulgated on 26 February 2020, is
    appended to this remaking decision.

 2. In summary, I found that the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment  of  the
    unduly  harsh  issue  under  section  117C(5)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"),  as  amended,  had  been
    erroneously predicated upon the law as it  was  understood  before  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53; [2018]  1
    WLR 5273.

 3. Although I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,  I  preserved
    the following conclusions as a starting point for my remaking decision:

         i.   the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
         his partner, R, and a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with the four relevant children;

         ii.  R and the four children are all "qualifying" for the  purposes
         of section 117C(5) NIAA 2002;

         iii. it would be "unduly harsh" for R and the four children  to  go
         and live in Nigeria;

         iv.  the appellant cannot rely on the private life exception  under
         section 117C(4) NIAA 2002;

         v.   the appellant cannot show "very compelling circumstances  over
         and above" those described in the two exceptions.

 4. Neither party has suggested that any of the above matters should now be
    revisited.

 5. The issue in this appeal is therefore a narrow one: would it be  unduly
    harsh on the four children  and/or  R  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
    deported to Nigeria and they remained in the United Kingdom?

The relevant legal framework

 6. The overarching authoritative statement of the law is contained  within
    the well-known passage of Lord Carnwath's judgment in KO (Nigeria),  at
    paragraph 23:

         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

 7. At paragraph 26, there was approval of the Upper Tribunal's guidance as
    to the meaning of "unduly harsh", with reference to paragraph 46 of  MK
    (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "46. By way of self-direction, we are mindful that  'unduly  harsh'
         does not equate with uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or
         merely difficult. Rather, it poses  a  considerably  more  elevated
         threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes  something  severe,  or
         bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis   of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

 8. A large number of judgments of the Court of Appeal followed in the wake
    of KO (Nigeria), many of them dealing with whether, on  the  particular
    facts, it had been open to either the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper
    Tribunal to conclude that it would be unduly harsh on  children  to  be
    separated from a parent.  Then, on 4 September 2020, the  Court  handed
    down its judgment in HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA  Civ  1176.   This  provided
    clarification as to the correct approach to  the  unduly  harsh  issue.
    For the purposes  of  the  present  case,  the  following  passages  of
    Underhill LJ's judgment are relevant:

         "44. In order to establish that the word "unduly" was not  directed
         to the  relative  seriousness  issue  it  was  necessary  for  Lord
         Carnwath to say to what it was in fact directed. That  is  what  he
         does in the first part of the paragraph. The effect of what he says
         is that "unduly" is directed to the degree of  harshness  required:
         some level of  harshness  is  to  be  regarded  as  "acceptable  or
         justifiable"  in  the  context  of  the  public  interest  in   the
         deportation of foreign criminals, and  what  "unduly"  does  is  to
         provide that Exception 2 will only apply where the  harshness  goes
         beyond that level. Lord Carnwath's focus is not primarily on how to
         define the "acceptable" level of harshness.  It  is  true  that  he
         refers  to  a  degree  of  harshness  "going  beyond   what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent", but that cannot be read entirely literally: it  is  hard
         to see how one would define  the  level  of  harshness  that  would
         "necessarily" be suffered by "any" child (indeed  one  can  imagine
         unusual cases where the  deportation  of  a  parent  would  not  be
         "harsh" for the child at all, even where there was  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship). The underlying concept is clearly  of  an
         enhanced degree of harshness  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  in  the  medium
         offender category.

         ...

         51.  The essential point is that the criterion of  undue  harshness
         sets a bar  which  is  "elevated"  and  carries  a  "much  stronger
         emphasis" than mere undesirability: see para. 27 of Lord Carnwath's
         judgment, approving the UT's self-direction in MK  (Sierra  Leone),
         and para. 35. The UT's self-direction uses a  battery  of  synonyms
         and antonyms: although these should not  be  allowed  to  become  a
         substitute for the statutory language, tribunals may find  them  of
         some assistance as a reminder of the elevated nature of  the  test.
         The reason why some degree of harshness is acceptable is that there
         is a strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals
         (including medium offenders): see para. 23. The underlying question
         for tribunals is whether the harshness which the  deportation  will
         cause for the partner and/or child is of  a  sufficiently  elevated
         degree to outweigh that public interest.

         52.  However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of  the
         statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the fact  that
         the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by the test  of
         "very compelling  circumstances"  in  section  117C  (6).  As  Lord
         Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23 of his judgment,
         disapproving IT (Jamaica), if that were so the position  of  medium
         offenders and their families  would  be  no  better  than  that  of
         serious offenders. It follows that the observations in the case-law
         to the effect that it will be rare for the test of "very compelling
         circumstances" to be satisfied have no application in this  context
         (I have already  made  this  point  -  see  para.  34  above).  The
         statutory intention is evidently that the hurdle  representing  the
         unacceptable impact on a partner or child should be  set  somewhere
         between the (low) level applying in the case  of  persons  who  are
         liable  to  ordinary  immigration  removal  (see  Lord   Carnwath's
         reference to section 117B (6) at the start of  para.  23)  and  the
         (very high) level applying to serious offenders.

         53.  Observations of that kind  are,  I  hope,  helpful,  but  they
         cannot identify an objectively measurable standard. It is  inherent
         in the nature of an exercise of the kind required by  section  117C
         (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals  should  in  each  case
         make an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect of the
         deportation of the parent or partner  on  their  child  or  partner
         would be "unduly  harsh"  in  the  context  of  the  strong  public
         interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals;  and  further
         exposition of that phrase will never be of more than limited value.

         ...

         56.  The second point focuses on what are said to be the  risks  of
         treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the degree of
         harshness goes beyond "that which is  ordinarily  expected  by  the
         deportation of a parent". Lord Carnwath does not in fact  use  that
         phrase, but a reference to "nothing out of the ordinary" appears in
         UTJ  Southern's  decision.  I  see  rather  more  force   in   this
         submission. As explained above, the test  under  section  117C  (5)
         does indeed require an appellant to establish a degree of harshness
         going beyond a threshold "acceptable" level. It is not  necessarily
         wrong to describe that as an "ordinary" level of harshness,  and  I
         note that Lord Carnwath did not jib at UTJ Southern's use  of  that
         term. However, I think the Appellants are right to point  out  that
         it may be misleading if used incautiously. There seem to me  to  be
         two  (related)  risks.  First,  "ordinary"  is  capable  of   being
         understood as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in  any
         event rare. That is not the correct approach: see para.  52  above.
         There is no reason in principle why cases of "undue" harshness  may
         not  occur  quite  commonly.  Secondly,  if  tribunals  treat   the
         essential question as being "is this level of harshness out of  the
         ordinary?" they may be tempted to find that Exception  2  does  not
         apply simply on  the  basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some
         commonly-encountered pattern. That would be dangerous. How a  child
         will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend on an almost
         infinitely variable range of circumstances and it is  not  possible
         to identify a baseline of "ordinariness". Simply by way of example,
         the degree of harshness of  the  impact  may  be  affected  by  the
         child's age; by whether the parent  lives  with  them  (NB  that  a
         divorced  or  separated  father  may  still  have  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship with a child who lives with the mother); by
         the degree of the child's emotional dependence on  the  parent;  by
         the financial consequences of his deportation; by the  availability
         of emotional and financial support  from  a  remaining  parent  and
         other family  members;  by  the  practicability  of  maintaining  a
         relationship with the deported parent; and of  course  by  all  the
         individual characteristics of the child.

         57.   I  make  those  points  in  response   to   the   Appellants'
         submissions. But I am anxious to avoid setting off a further  chain
         of  exposition.  Tribunals  considering  the  parent   case   under
         Exception 2 should not err in law if in each  case  they  carefully
         evaluate the likely effect  of  the  parent's  deportation  on  the
         particular child and then decide whether that effect is not  merely
         harsh but unduly harsh applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with the
         guidance at paras. 50-53 above."

 9. Since the hearing in the present appeal, the Court of Appeal has handed
    down a further judgment on the issue  of  deportation  and  the  unduly
    harsh issue.  Having considered AA (Nigeria) [2020] EWCA  Civ  1236,  I
    did not find it necessary to seek further written submissions from  the
    parties.  The judgment adds nothing over and above what is said  in  HA
    (Iraq) and both representatives made  full  submissions  on  that  case
    before me.  The  clarificatory  aspects  of  HA  (Iraq)  are  hopefully
    summarised at paragraph 12 of AA (Nigeria):

         "12. As explained in HA (Iraq) at [44] and [50] to [53], this  does
         not posit some objectively measurable standard of  harshness  which
         is acceptable, but sets a bar which  is  more  elevated  than  mere
         undesirability  but  not  as   high   as   the   "very   compelling
         circumstances" test in s.117C(6). Beyond that,  further  exposition
         of the phrase "unduly harsh" is of limited value. Moreover, as made
         clear at [56]-[57], it is potentially misleading and  dangerous  to
         seek  to  identify  some  "ordinary"  level  of  harshness  as   an
         acceptable level by reference to what may be  commonly  encountered
         circumstances: there is no reason in principle why cases  of  undue
         hardship may not occur quite commonly; and  how  a  child  will  be
         affected by a parent's  deportation  will  depend  upon  an  almost
         infinitely variable range of circumstances. It is not  possible  to
         identify a baseline of "ordinariness"."

10. In the carrying out my assessment of the unduly  harsh  issue,  I  have
    directed myself in line with all of the guidance set out above.

The evidence

11. By way of documentary evidence, I have considered the following:

      i. the respondent's original appeal  bundle,  under  cover  of  letter
         dated 21 August 2019;

     ii.  the  appellant's  first  bundle,  which  is  neither  indexed  nor
         paginated.  It includes a variety  of  documents  relating  to  the
         appellant's health, his immigration history, and the  education  of
         his eldest son;

    iii. the appellant's second bundle, indexed and  paginated  1-47.   This
         includes witness statements for the appellant,  R,  his  mother,  a
         report from an Independent  Social  Worker,  and  medical  evidence
         relating to the appellant's significant mental health conditions;

     iv. an email from Mr M Flanagan, Consultant Nurse and Clinical Lead  at
         i-Access Drug and Alcohol Service, dated 28 September 2020

12. The appellant, R, and his mother, all attended the resumed hearing  and
    gave oral evidence, a full record of which is contained in  the  record
    of proceedings.  I do not propose to set that evidence out here in  any
    detail.  In summary, the appellant provided an account of his  life  in
    the United Kingdom from his arrival at the age of  seven,  through  his
    education, and into his use of drugs, his diagnosis  of  HIV,  criminal
    behaviour, and mental health problems.  He gave details of a medication
    programme which aims to keep him drug-free.  He explained that he plays
    an important role in the lives  of  his  children,  with  a  particular
    emphasis on the two older boys, J and N.  He does not believe that  any
    external support would be a proper substitute for his presence  in  the
    children's lives.  He has concerns about his partner's ability to  cope
    if he were deported.  He told me that he did not believe his sister  or
    brother would be able to provide very much additional help  if  he  was
    not in this country as they have their own lives and responsibilities.

13. R provided a history of their relationship and the  difficulties  faced
    as result of the appellant's drug addiction,  criminality,  and  mental
    health problems.  She has acknowledged the support provided to  her  by
    the appellant's mother over the course of time, particularly whilst  he
    was in prison.  She currently  works  as  a  Teaching  Assistant  in  a
    primary school and has found it a real struggle to continue to do so as
    well as caring for  children  and  dealing  with  the  appellant's  own
    difficulties.  Notwithstanding that, she has emphasised the  importance
    of the appellant's role in the lives of  the  children,  in  particular
    that of their eldest, J.  She has concerns about J's wellbeing  at  the
    moment and believed things  would  get  worse  if  the  appellant  were
    removed.  J has been aware of the appellant's  precarious  position  in
    this country for some time and has displayed anger  and  aggression  at
    school.

14. The appellant's mother confirmed that she has done  all  she  could  to
    provide practical support at appropriate times, particularly whilst the
    appellant was in prison.  She works full-time as a cleaner and a carer,
    whereas she was only  working  on  a  part-time  basis  when  providing
    additional help for the family some time ago.  She confirmed  that  she
    would offer to do all she could in the future.

Submissions

15. Mr Whitwell relied on his skeleton argument, dated 5 October 2020.   He
    acknowledged  that  splitting  up  the  family  unit  may  have   harsh
    consequences for R and the children, but submitted that it would not be
    unduly harsh,  having  regard  to  KO  (Nigeria)  and  HA  (Iraq).   He
    submitted that the possibility of social services providing  input  for
    the family unit could be considered and the fact that there had been no
    such assistance to date was indicative of R's ability to  cope  without
    the appellant.  He noted that R was not  receiving  any  treatment  for
    depression or anxiety at the moment.  There were other  family  members
    in  the  United  Kingdom  who  have  and  would  continue  to   provide
    assistance.  J did not have an Education Health Care Plan, nor  had  he
    been diagnosed with any conditions.  With  reference  to  the  case  of
    Imran (section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh) [2020] UKUT  83  (IAC),
    Mr Whitwell submitted that the evidence in the  present  case  did  not
    disclose anything "more" than simply the importance of the appellant in
    the lives of his children, or their emotional  attachment  to  him,  or
    indeed  the  emotional  harm  that  would  be  likely  to  result  from
    separation.

16. Mr Marziano relied on his skeleton argument.  There was no  dispute  as
    to the appropriate legal framework.  He relied upon the conclusions  of
    the  Independent  Social  Worker,  but  acknowledged   that   emotional
    detriment to the children  that  might  be  expected  as  a  result  of
    separation was not, by itself, sufficient for the appellant to succeed.
     However, he submitted that there  were  additional  features  in  this
    case.  He submitted that the R's evidence had been both impassioned and
    cogent.  This family unit had, he submitted, experienced a good deal of
    difficulty over time.  The appellant had been addicted to drugs and had
    committed crimes as result.  In addition to  this  he  had  significant
    mental health problems and HIV.  R herself had suffered from depression
    and anxiety, although it was accepted that he  she  was  not  currently
    under treatment.  Despite  this,  the  couple  were  bringing  up  four
    children together.  Mr Marziano emphasise the position of  J,  who  was
    aware of his father's difficult position and  was  displaying  worrying
    signs at  school,  as  evidenced  by  letters  from  that  institution.
    Practical help from other family members may  be  available,  but  that
    could not replace the appellant's role in the children's lives.  It was
    submitted that if social services had to  get  involved,  it  would  be
    indicative of the fact that the  position  had  already  become  unduly
    harsh for the children.  In summary, it was  submitted  that  when  the
    situation of this family unit was placed in  its  proper  context,  the
    unduly harsh test was met.

Findings of fact

17. There is little, if any, dispute as to much of the  factual  matrix  in
    this case.  The appellant arrived in United Kingdom at the age of seven
    and has resided here ever since.  He has accumulated 20 convictions  in
    relation to 43 offences.  The  convictions  have  ranged  from  driving
    offences, to burglary, to  possession  of  Class  A  and  B  drugs,  to
    possession of offensive weapons, and affray.   I  find  that  the  last
    convictions occurred on 8  July  2019  and  that  the  last  period  of
    imprisonment was for two weeks in May 2017  I accept that the offending
    took place when he was addicted to various drugs, a  problem  that  the
    appellant has suffered from since the age of 15 or 16.  In 2018 he  was
    sectioned under the Mental Health Act as result of a  suicide  attempt,
    and he has been under the care of mental health  services  ever  since.
    On the basis of the undisputed evidence contained  in  the  appellant's
    second bundle, I find that the appellant has been  diagnosed  with  the
    following conditions:

      i. mental and behavioural disorder due to use of opioids;

     ii. mental and behavioural disorder due to use of cocaine;

    iii. mental and behavioural disorder due to use of cannabinoids.

18. The most recent report on  the  appellant's  mental  health  conditions
    indicates that the situation remains fragile.  There is said  to  be  a
    medium-high risk to self, a medium-high risk to others,  and  a  medium
    risk from others.  R and the children are said to be protective factors
    (with R being described as "extremely supportive"), and it is  reported
    that his mother has provided additional practical support.

19. As a result of the substance  misuse,  the  appellant  has  been  on  a
    medicated treatment programme since August 2019.   I  accept  that  the
    appellant has in fact been drug-free since that time  and  that  he  is
    engaging well with the programme.  A letter from the relevant Substance
    Misuse Specialist, dated  20  February  2020,  contains  the  following
    passage:

         "As  stated,  he  remains  abstinent  from  illicit  drugs  and  is
         improving with regard to his mental health.  However, should  these
         current services not be available to Mr [MA], the likely  prognosis
         would be a sudden relapse back to illicit opiates as  he  would  be
         withdrawing quite heavily and more than  likely  he  would  have  a
         severe downturn in his mental health, possibly leading to  suicidal
         ideation and even suicide attempts."

20. The appellant's current drug-free status and the risks to  his  overall
    mental health as result of being removed from  protective  factors  and
    the current treatment regime is also emphasised in the  email  from  Mr
    Flanagan.  Deportation would, it is said, have a  "devastating  impact"
    on the appellant and the other family members.  I find that  to  be  an
    opinion honestly provided and in keeping with other sources.

21. The evidence shows that the appellant was diagnosed with  HIV  in  2018
    and has been on relevant treatment ever since.

22. I find that the appellant began his relationship with R in 2006.  It is
    quite clear that they have a very strong relationship.  As Mr  Marziano
    fairly put it, "they have been through a lot together."  I find that  R
    has indeed been "extremely supportive" of the appellant notwithstanding
    the stress and anxiety that his offending and  mental  health  problems
    must undoubtedly have caused her.  I say this in  the  context  of  the
    fact that the couple's four children were born between August 2008  and
    April 2016, a period in which the appellant was  accruing  convictions,
    spending some time in prison, and is likely to have been suffering from
    mental health problems as result of his substance misuse.

23. I find that without the protective factors of R and his children, it is
    highly likely that the appellant would,  as  the  documentary  evidence
    suggests,  relapse  quickly  into  a  state   of   drugs   misuse   and
    deteriorating mental health.  I find that R  is  fully  aware  of  this
    possibility: it would be wholly artificial to conclude otherwise.

24. I find that R is not currently  under  treatment  for  specific  mental
    health conditions.  However, I found her to be a  generally  impressive
    witness and I accept that she has been under treatment in the past  for
    depression and anxiety.  The absence of treatment  now  does  not  mean
    that an individual is not suffering from  relevant  symptoms,  or  that
    their mental health would not deteriorate if  certain  trigger  factors
    came to pass.  Here, I accept the combined evidence from R herself, the
    Independent Social Worker, and the appellant's mother,  to  the  effect
    that  she  (R)  had  significantly  struggled,  at   the   very   least
    emotionally, when the appellant  was  last  in  prison,  and  that  the
    current situation was placing a lot of stress on her.  In her words, it
    was "driving me mad".  I find that the  appellant's  deportation  would
    result in a very real deterioration in R's  mental;  wellbeing.  It  is
    likely that she would need to seek treatment for her mental health.

25.  I find that R is currently working as a full-time  Teaching  Assistant
    in a primary school.

26. I find that the children are healthy.

27. The evidence  clearly  establishes  that  the  appellant  has  a  close
    relationship with all of them.  The Independent Social Worker's report,
    upon which I attach significant weight, suggests  that  the  two  older
    children in particular enjoy a very good father/son bond, and that they
    would not only miss him if he were to be deported, but would also worry
    about his wellbeing.

28. I find it to be more  likely  than  not  that  the  appellant  has  the
    strongest connection with his eldest child, J.  The evidence shows that
    in addition to the usual day-to-day interactions, football is a  source
    of particular importance for them both, with the appellant taking J  to
    football at weekends, as well as providing emotional support.

29. Both the appellant and R have given evidence that J  has  struggled  as
    result of the uncertainty surrounding  his  father's  position  in  the
    United Kingdom. R has said that he is not  doing  well  at  school,  is
    angry, and that trust has become a problem for him.  J has said that he
    is afraid of the current situation.  She confirmed  that  he  has  been
    aware of his father's status and these  deportation  proceedings  since
    Year 6.  She described J as being difficult now and posed the  question
    of what would happen to him if the appellant were deported.  The  clear
    implication is that, in her view, things would get worse.  I accept her
    evidence as being reliable.  In my view, she is  very  well  placed  to
    speak about her own son's situation.

30. In addition, what R has said fits in with  evidence  from  J's  primary
    school in the form of two letters, dated  5  April  and  28  June  2019
    (contained in the appellant's first bundle).  The former addresses  the
    impact of the appellant's mental health problems and precarious  status
    in this country on J and his younger brother, N.  The school was of the
    view that the boys required  ongoing  support,  that  N  was  receiving
    counselling funded by  the  school,  and  that  there  was  a  risk  of
    exclusion in respect of them both.  The second letter focuses on J (who
    was then in Year 6).  It records an escalation in his poor behaviour at
    school, resulting in a Fixed Period Exclusion.  It  is  appropriate  to
    quote directly from the letter:

         "As a school, we  continue  to  believe  that  [J's]  behaviour  is
         stemming from the trauma he  continues  to  experience  around  the
         possibility of his father being deported.  [J]  has  understandably
         developed a sense of injustice and has made comments such as,  "You
         must have to be white to stay in  this  country."   Whilst  [J]  is
         surrounded by a loving family and  supported  teachers  at  school,
         this is faced with the reality of losing regular contact  with  his
         father and growing up without a father figure.

         ... Since my last letter, [J] is now receiving  weekly  counselling
         sessions funded by the school, due to his stress and  anger  around
         his family situation. [J] remains in a state of crisis and is  very
         much  at  risk  of  permanent  exclusion,  which  is  exceptionally
         worrying at a time when he is transitioning to secondary school."

31. I find that these passages are an accurate reflection of J's  behaviour
    and his perception of his situation at that time.

32. J is now in Year 8.  It would have been of assistance to have a  letter
    from his current school.  However, taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I
    find that R's evidence is reliable in respect of how matters now stand.
     I find that J continues to be "very  angry"  and  is  fearful  of  the
    family's situation.  An example of this was a recent fight  at  school.
    I accept that he is receiving support from his school, but not  through
    external agencies such as CAMHS.

33. I accept the evidence from the appellant's mother  that  when  he  (the
    appellant) was last in prison, she visited the house regularly to  help
    out.  She recalled, reliably in my view, that J was crying and  missing
    his father at that time.  I take this evidence in the  context  of  R's
    explanation that she had told J and N that their father had  gone  away
    temporarily as a punishment for doing wrong things.

34. On the basis of his mother's  reliable  evidence,  I  find  that  N  is
    receiving 1:1 support in  Year  6  on  the  basis  of  his  behavioural
    difficulties.  As with his older brother, there is no outside input  or
    any diagnosed conditions.

35. I turn to the issue of support from other family members in the  United
    Kingdom.  I  find  that  the  appellant's  mother  did  provide  fairly
    significant practical  support  in  the  past,  particularly  when  the
    appellant was in prison.  There is clearly a good relationship  between
    her and the family unit.  I accept that, as a  single  mother  herself,
    she does not want to see R in the same position  that  she  experienced
    when bringing up the appellant and his siblings.  I find that when  she
    was providing the previous assistance, she was working  part-time,  but
    is now working full-time and that her capacity  to  provide  a  similar
    level of  practical  help  is  more  limited,  although  not  precluded
    altogether.

36. I find that the appellant does have a brother and a sister residing  in
    this country.  Although there was a degree of inconsistency between the
    evidence of the appellant and that of his mother, on balance  I  accept
    that there is not a strong relationship with the brother  and  that  he
    has not either provided or offered to provide practical  assistance  in
    the past or now.  In respect of the appellant's sister, I find that she
    is a single mother of two.  Whilst  I  accept  that  she  may  well  be
    willing to provide some assistance, it is more  likely  than  not  that
    this will, by virtue of her own circumstances, limited in scope.

37. There is a discrepancy between the evidence of the appellant and  R  as
    to the latter's relationship with her mother.  The appellant said  that
    it was "good", whilst R said it was "turbulent".  I have found R to  be
    a credible witness and, taking the evidence as a whole,  I  prefer  her
    evidence on this particular point to that of the appellant.   I  accept
    that the relationship has been difficult  over  the  years.   It  would
    certainly be wrong to say that there was  no  current  relationship  at
    all.  It is the case that there is a much better relationship between R
    and her father.  I find that both  the  parents  work  on  a  full-time
    basis.  I accept that they have helped out financially in the past  and
    would seek to do so in the future if necessary.  I find that  R  has  a
    sister who is married and has two children.  There is  no  evidence  to
    indicate that she has ever been  in  a  position  to  provide  material
    assistance.

38. It is a fact that there has to  date  been  no  involvement  by  social
    services with the family unit.

Conclusions

39. The factual matrix set out above now falls  to  be  placed  within  the
    relevant legal framework.  The question is whether the  impact  of  the
    appellant being taken out of lives  of  his  partner  and/or  the  four
    children would be unduly harsh such as to violate his Article 8  rights
    and therefore be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.
     The focus is on this partner and these children.  The threshold to  be
    met by the  appellant  is  undoubtedly  an  elevated  one,  this  begin
    reflective of the very significant public interest in  the  deportation
    of foreign criminals.

40. I begin by stating my assessment of the children's best interests.   In
    short, these lie overwhelmingly with a  continuation  of  the  children
    within a loving family unit with both of their parents.  the  Appellant
    plays an integral role in the lives of all four  children,  and  has  a
    strong bond with the two older boys and J in particular.  The  evidence
    from the appellant and R,  combined  with  that  from  the  Independent
    Social Worker and the two older children's primary school points in one
    direction only: all four children  would  face  a  significant  adverse
    impact on their overall wellbeing if  their  father  was  removed  from
    their lives.  In light of the undisputed  conclusion  that  the  family
    unit cannot go and  live  in  Nigeria  together,  the  children's  best
    interests could only be served by the appellant remaining in the United
    Kingdom.

41. My best interests assessment forms an integral part of the unduly harsh
    evaluation, but it is not of course a determinative factor.

42. As the eldest, it is perhaps unsurprising that J is the  child  who  is
    most "in the picture" in respect of  his  father's  circumstances.   He
    knows that his father has  suffered,  and  continues  to  suffer,  from
    mental health problems.  He is  also  aware  that  his  father  may  be
    deported.  Whether J is aware of the underlying  reasons  for  this  is
    rather beside the point.  It is J's perception and reaction that is all-
    important.  I have found that J has manifested problematic behaviour at
    school, and it is  likely  that  this  is  connected  with  his  father
    situation.  The way in which J deals with  his  emotions  and  displays
    anger and aggression as a vent for  this  is  specific  to  him:  other
    children may react quite differently to similar circumstances.   It  is
    not contingent upon the existence of any diagnosed condition and it may
    arise out of his strong bond with his father  (deriving,  for  example,
    from the regular football events), or he may react in the same  way  if
    there were no particular elements to that relationship.   Again,  I  am
    concerned with an individualised evaluative assessment of  this  child,
    and comparisons with others would be unhelpful and indeed artificial.

43. It is the case that R, her parents, and the appellant's  mother,  would
    wish to provide practical and emotional support to J  to  the  best  of
    their abilities.  However,  I  have  found  that,  notwithstanding  the
    support given by the appellant's mother last time  his  father  was  in
    prison, J was very  upset  then  despite  the  separation  being  of  a
    temporary nature.  If the appellant were now to be deported, J will  be
    fully aware that the separation is highly likely to be very  long-term.
    It is significant that J has stated to be worried about his father,  an
    emotion which indicates not simply an appreciation of the mental health
    problems and what might be in store in Nigeria, but  also  a  long-term
    concern over and above the sadness of being separated.   The  prospects
    of visits by the family to Nigeria are, I conclude, very  slim  indeed.
    In any event, infrequent and relatively short visits would, in my view,
    have very little ameliorative impact on J.  The  same  applies  to  the
    argument that contact could be maintained on a meaningful basis through
    "modern means of communication".

44. On the practical side of things, it may be the case  that  J  could  be
    taken to his football events and other activities by  R  or  relatives.
    Yet on an emotional level, I conclude that it is  the  absence  of  the
    appellant which constitutes the relevant  consideration  here.   In  my
    assessment, substitutes are unlikely to mitigate the  way  in  which  J
    will feel and react to his father's removal.

45. Mr Whitwell submitted that, if necessary, social services could step in
    and provide assistance to the family unit in the  appellant's  absence.
    Unfortunately, I have not been provided with  any  evidence  about  the
    duties of social services towards  families  in  need  of  support.   I
    appreciate that it is for the appellant to make out his  case,  but  as
    the respondent relying on this point, it would be  useful  for  her  to
    make reference to relevant statutory  provisions  and/or  guidance.   I
    have certainly not been referred to any sort of programme  or  guidance
    in respect of assistance from social services to children whose  parent
    has been deported.

46. In the event, and as a general reference point, I have  had  regard  to
    section 17 of the Children Act 1989.   Sub-section  (1)  provides  that
    there is a general duty upon a local authority to safeguard and promote
    the welfare of children within their area who are in need by  providing
    relevant services appropriate to those children's  needs.   Sub-section
    (10) provides that a child is in need if:

         "(a) he is  unlikely  to  achieve  or  maintain,  or  to  have  the
         opportunity of achieving or maintaining, a reasonable  standard  of
         health or development without the provision for him of services  by
         a local authority under this Part;

         (b)  his health  or  development  is  likely  to  be  significantly
         impaired, or further impaired, without the  provision  for  him  of
         such services

         ..."

47. I appreciate that this is not a comprehensive view of all circumstances
    in which social services may become involved with a particular  family.
    However, it does lend solid support to Mr  Marziano's  submission  that
    the intervention of social services may be an indication  that  matters
    have already progressed to a very poor state of affairs, which in  turn
    supports the argument that the impact on J would,  at  that  stage,  be
    unduly harsh.  On the facts of this particular case, my  assessment  is
    that the immediate significant emotional impact on J arising  from  the
    appellant's deportation is unlikely  to  be  mitigated  by  generalised
    social services input, even if that were put  in  place  prior  to  him
    becoming a child in need.

48. In summary, with the focus on J and not on what  might  be  "ordinarily
    expected" in a separation scenario, my evaluative  assessment  is  that
    there is indeed something "more" in this case (to  use  the  term  from
    Imran, a decision which of course must be read in light of HA  (Iraq)),
    to what the respondent acknowledges would  be  a  harsh  impact.   This
    young boy is currently struggling with the prospect of a separation,  a
    struggle which has manifested itself in anger and  physical  aggression
    at school.  If separation were to materialise, I conclude  that  it  is
    likely  that  J's   behaviour   and   wellbeing   would   significantly
    deteriorate, and what has been manifested already is likely to get much
    worse. His current fear for his father's prospects will be  exacerbated
    and prolonged.  Evaluating matters  on  the  basis  of  his  particular
    characteristics, the impact on J's  life  would  go  beyond  bleakness.
    Forms of emotional and practical support  from  other  family  members,
    whilst perhaps of some utility, not take off the sharp edges  of  that.
    Ultimately, I conclude that the appellant's deportation would be unduly
    harsh on J.

49. I turn now to the position of R, which must be seen in the  context  of
    her  experiences  during  the  course  of  her  relationship  with  the
    appellant, together with her current and prospective circumstances.  It
    is clear that she has persevered with her relationship through troubled
    times brought about by the appellant's offending and mental health.   I
    have found that she has become a protective factor  for  the  appellant
    and she will be aware of this.  Conversely, the appellant has  remained
    committed to their  relationship  and  been  a  good  father  to  their
    children.  The prospect of losing him is highly  likely  to  cause  her
    very significant distress.  She would lose her  partner  and  become  a
    single mother of four overnight.

50. She would, as has occurred in the past, be able to turn to other family
    members for some support.  This would no doubt help.   However,  in  my
    assessment, that would only go so far.

51. On the particular facts of this case, four factors lead me to  conclude
    that the impact on R would not simply be harsh, but would be unduly so.
     First, that the relationship has, as I have indicated above,  involved
    significant difficulties and, to use the phrase employed by Mr Marziano
    in submissions, a degree of "co-dependency"  has  evolved.   Separation
    would obviously rupture this.  Second, and following on from the  first
    matter, it is highly likely that R will hold a  genuine  fear  for  the
    appellant's health if he were deported to Nigeria, as reported  by  the
    Independent Social Worker.  She is well aware  of  his  past  substance
    misuse, his fragile mental health, and his HIV, and has  expressed  her
    fear that there would be a risk to his life in that country.   As  with
    J, this fear is  likely  to  be  an  ongoing  feature.   Third,  it  is
    inevitable that she will be confronted by the distress of her  children
    losing their father and it is likely that this will  in  turn  have  an
    impact on her.  Over and above the general impact of this, R  will  see
    the effects on J. For the reasons set out above, I have concluded  that
    it would be unduly harsh on J of his father were  to  be  deported.  In
    turn, this conclusion would have a very significant impact on R.   Even
    if the elevated threshold were not met in respect of J,  his  suffering
    would, when seen in combination with  the  first  and  second  factors,
    nonetheless constitute an important factor when assessing the impact on
    R. Fourth, R's ability to cope when the appellant was  last  in  prison
    was not, on the evidence, robust and she did  receive  assistance  from
    the appellant's mother.  That was in the context of what she  knew  was
    only a temporary  separation.   Deportation  would  be  another  matter
    altogether. I have found that she is likely to face a deterioration  in
    her mental wellbeing, whether treatment would be required or not.

52. As result of my conclusions on J and R,  the  exception  under  section
    117C(5) is satisfied and the appellant succeeds in his appeal.

Anonymity

53. I maintain the anonymity direction given previously.  I do  so  on  the
    basis not simply of the presence of minor children, but also  the  fact
    that the Appellant suffers from health conditions including HIV.



Notice of Decision

54. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of  law.   That  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

55. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date: 20 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a reduced  fee
award of �40.00 on the basis that whilst the appellant has  succeeded,  much
of my reasoning in this case has been based upon  evidence  post-dating  the
respondent's refusal of the human rights claim.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date:  20 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11405/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2020                           |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Marziano, Counsel, instructed by Westkin
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Graves ("the judge"), promulgated on 24 September 2019,  by  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of
    13 June 2019, refusing his human rights claim, a claim that was made in
    the context of  deportation  proceedings  based  upon  the  Appellant's
    significant criminal history.

 2. Importantly for the purposes of the present appeal, the  Appellant  had
    had a previous appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  in  2018.   By  a
    decision  promulgated  on  22  June  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nightingale dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a previous refusal
    of a human rights claim by the Respondent.  Again, this claim had  been
    made  in  the  context  of  deportation  action.    Judge   Nightingale
    considered  the  Appellant's  case  in  the  context  of  the  relevant
    statutory framework including in  particular  section  117C(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  as  amended  ("the  2002
    Act").  She found that the Appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with  a  partner  and  with  four  children  (although  my
    understanding is that the Appellant has six children in total,  two  of
    whom are not relevant for present purposes and were not relevant in the
    case before Judge Nightingale) and that  it  would  have  been  "unduly
    harsh" for the children to go and  live  in  Nigeria.   In  considering
    section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, the judge was applying the law  as  it
    was then understood to be, prior to the judgment of the  Supreme  Court
    in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273  (a  judgment  handed
    down on 24 October 2018).

 3. Thus, when Judge Nightingale concluded that it  would  not  be  "unduly
    harsh" for the Appellant to be separated from his partner, and  perhaps
    more importantly the relevant children, she was doing so on  the  basis
    that his criminal conduct  was  part  and  parcel  of  that  assessment
    following the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 617.  This much is clear enough in light of  paragraph  58  of
    the judge's decision which I now quote in full:

         "In view of this Appellant's history,  the  type  of  offending  in
         which he has engaged,  his  continued  offending  and  the  risk  I
         consider he presents of further offending in  the  future,  I  find
         that it would not be unduly harsh for his children to remain in the
         United   Kingdom   following   his    deportation    to    Nigeria.
         Notwithstanding the effect of that deportation upon his children, I
         find that weight to be given to the Respondent's lawful aim here is
         such that the exception found in the Immigration Rules and also, at
         Section 117C does not apply."

    Judge Nightingale's decision was the  subject  of  an  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 4. By a decision dated 3 December 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan
    refused permission.  In paragraph 2 of that decision he stated:

         "The crucial issue is whether it was unduly harsh upon the children
         to require  the  Appellant's  removal.   There  was  little  or  no
         evidence to suggest it was unduly harsh.  Paragraphs 55  to  58  of
         the determination set out clear reasons for the judge's  decision."



 5. It is in my judgment clear enough from Judge Jordan's decision that his
    view of the  merits  of  the  purported  challenge  was  assessed  with
    reference to the material part of Judge Nightingale's decision which  I
    have referred to above.   It  is  also  apparent  from  Judge  Jordan's
    decision that the  advent  of  the  judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria),  which
    predated his decision by two months, or so was not raised at any  stage
    and was not considered by him as what is  commonly  referred  to  as  a
    "Robinson obvious" point.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. When Judge Graves came to consider the  Appellant's  subsequent  appeal
    (which had arisen following  the  Respondent's  acceptance  of  further
    representations as a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration
    Rules), she clearly placed significant reliance upon  the  decision  of
    Judge Nightingale (see paragraphs 41 through  to  48).   Of  particular
    significance is what is said in paragraph 48:

         "The Appellant says there is  good  reason  to  depart  from  Judge
         Nightingale's assessment of whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
         the children to be expected to remain here, once  he  is  deported.
         He relies on letters from the children's school, which  raise  very
         real concerns about the impact on the two older boys, knowing their
         father is to be returned to Nigeria.  It was previously found  that
         it would usually be in the best interests of  the  children  to  be
         raised with both parents, but this finding was  outweighed  by  the
         serious and persistent nature of the Appellant's  offending.   That
         finding was specifically upheld by the Upper Tribunal."

 7. In the following paragraph the judge goes on  to  comment  on  evidence
    from the children's school and raises a concern that  that  institution
    appeared to be unaware of certain aspects of the Appellant's behaviour.
     The judge was of the view that if the school had been apprised of this
    a different view might have been taken as to the possible impact of his
    deportation on the children.

 8. In the following paragraph the judge assesses  the  Appellant's  health
    conditions and essentially concludes that these did not represent "very
    compelling circumstances over and above" those described in  either  of
    the two exceptions set out in the 2002 Act or the relevant Rules.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The succinct grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred  in  placing
    significant reliance upon the decision of Judge Nightingale, a decision
    that was in a material respect flawed in light of KO (Nigeria).  It  is
    said that this error infected Judge Graves' assessment of  the  "unduly
    harsh" issue.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on  8
    January 2020.

The hearing

11. At the hearing before me Mr Marziano relied upon the  grounds  and  his
    helpful skeleton argument.  He submitted that  the  judge's  error  was
    material because she had made no  separate  assessment  of  either  the
    children's best interests or the "unduly  harsh"  test  that  could  be
    properly removed from the reliance upon Judge  Nightingale's  decision.
    He acknowledged that there was no challenge to the  judge's  conclusion
    on very compelling circumstances.

12. Mr Avery acknowledged that there was an error by the judge  as  regards
    the "unduly harsh" test, but submitted that this was immaterial on  the
    basis that there simply had not been sufficient  evidence  provided  to
    show that the relevant threshold could possibly have been met.

Decision on error of law

13. I conclude that the judge has erred  in  law  and  that  the  error  is
    material.

14. It is clear that Judge Graves placed  considerable  reliance  upon  the
    decision of Judge Nightingale, including her conclusions on the "unduly
    harsh" issue.  As has been discussed  previously,  Judge  Nightingale's
    assessment on that question  was  flawed  in  light  of  KO  (Nigeria).
    Following  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment,  the  Appellant's  criminal
    conduct was not relevant to the question of whether it would be "unduly
    harsh" for the children to be separated from him.

15. Judge Graves' reference to Judge Nightingale's decision being upheld by
    the Upper Tribunal, whilst factually correct, does not cure the  error.
    Judge Jordan was, for whatever reason, not apprised of the KO (Nigeria)
    point at the time at which he refused permission in December 2018.   It
    cannot properly be said that he was specifically concluding that  Judge
    Nightingale had erred but that error was not arguably material in light
    of the evidence.

16. Judge Graves' error in relying on what Judge Nightingale had previously
    said is material for the following reasons.  First,  I  agree  with  Mr
    Marziano's submission that she has  not  undertaken  a  best  interests
    assessment or indeed an assessment of the "unduly harsh" test which can
    properly be said to be separable from the flawed  reliance  upon  Judge
    Nightingale's assessment.  Second, as I read paragraph 49, there are no
    actual findings of fact (as opposed to concerns about particular  items
    of evidence) and therefore it cannot be said that on the  face  of  the
    decision, and but for the  flawed  reliance  upon  Judge  Nightingale's
    decision, the conclusion on the "unduly harsh" test was inevitable.

17. In light of the above the judge's decision must be set aside.

Disposal

18. This appeal shall be retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  resumed
    hearing to take  place  in  due  course.  The  following  findings  are
    preserved as a starting point for the remaking decision in this appeal:

      i. The Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the
         four relevant children;

     ii. The Appellant's partner and the four children are all  "qualifying"
         for the purposes of sub-sections 117C(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act;

    iii. It would be "unduly harsh" for the four children to go and live  in
         Nigeria;

     iv. The Appellant cannot rely  on  the  private  life  exception  under
         section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act;

      v. The Appellant cannot show "very compelling circumstances  over  and
         above" those described in the two exceptions.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is adjourned and shall be listed for a  resumed  hearing  in  the
Upper Tribunal



Directions to the parties

      1) Any further evidence relied upon by either party shall be filed and
         served no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing;

      2) Oral evidence from the Appellant and his partner will be  permitted
         at the resumed hearing but only if updated witness  statements  are
         provided in accordance with direction 1;

      3) Both parties are to file and serve skeleton arguments no later than
         five days before the resumed hearing.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 24 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

