
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/11017/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 October 2017                          |On 12 December 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before


                               MR JUSTICE DOVE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR BRIAN KINSALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble
For the Respondent:    Mr B Amunwa


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision promulgated by First-Tier Tribunal
    Judge   H Graves on the 24th  January  2017.   The  Judge  granted  the
    appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 against the Appellant's decision to remove the Respondent from
    the United Kingdom.

2.   The essence of the Appellant's case was that  he  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on the 25th November 2002  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    student and had subsequently overstayed.  He had been  granted  various
    forms of leave to remain up until the 9th December 2012; he applied for
    no further leave to remain and became an overstayer at that  time.   On
    the 7th April 2016 the Respondent decided to remove the  Appellant  and
    he appealed against that decision on  the  basis  that  he  had  always
    supported and had  contact  with  his  children.   The  appeal  had  an
    unfortunate  procedural  history  in  terms  of   the   production   of
    documentation.  The essence of the Appellant's evidence in relation  to
    his three children was recorded by the Judge in the following terms:

    "23. In relation to T, and the situation between  2009  and  2010,  the
         appellant said he was having regular supervised contact with T, and
         that he could not provide more financial  support  as  he  was  not
         earning enough at that time.  He said there was  a  CSA  assessment
         but the child's mother decided not to pursue more financial support
         and instead agreed he should pay what he could and  when.   T  then
         moved to the USA in 2010 with his consent.   Mr Carroll argued that
         for contact to be supervised there must have  been  concerns  about
         the child being safe with the appellant and he raised  the  assault
         charge in  relation  to  the  appellant's  other  relationship.   I
         intervened and said there may be a number of  reasons  why  contact
         was supervised and the question should be rephrased.  The appellant
         denied any welfare concerns in relation to his first child and said
         the mother was reluctant to allow contact.  The appellant  said  he
         had telephone and Skype contact with T occasionally, the last  time
         being on his birthday.


    24.  In relation to Ih, the appellant said he  had  'played  a  general
         role' in his life since birth.   He  had  taken  him  to  and  from
         nursery and school and because he was autistic and had a number  of
         developmental and social and communication problems, the  appellant
         accompanied  him  on  all  trips  outside  the  school.   He   also
         participated in his various  assessments.   Ih  had  recently  been
         moved from his mainstream school, [                       ],  to  a
         special school in  [             ]  (or  [          ]  )  called  [
                    ].  The appellant saw him every Saturday and three times
         each week in  the  afternoons  after  school  at  Ih's  house.  The
         appellant said          Ih would be devastated if the appellant was
         removed because of the role he played in  his  life,  although  his
         ability to understand the concept of separation was limited by  his
         learning disabilities.  Ih also has a half sister, S,  who  was  in
         her twenties  but  also  had  learning  disabilities,  was  hearing
         impaired with  speech  and  language  difficulties.   I  asked  the
         appellant what  had  been  done  about  Ih's  unlawful  immigration
         status.  He said he believed an application had been  submitted  at
         some point January to March 2016.


     25. In relation to M, she was living with her mother and the  appellant
         was currently having contact with her on alternate Saturdays.   She
         had also come to stay with the appellant for a  week  recently,  as
         part of a respite arrangement set up by Social  Services,  but  was
         not, in fact, living with the appellant.  She would see Ih as  well
         as with MM, who was now aged five, if they were present on the days
         when she saw the appellant.   She would also be devastated  by  the
         appellant's removal.   She had  behavioural  problems,  which  were
         being addressed by her school, along with  the  support  of  Social
         Services.  In cross-examination it  transpired  that  some  of  the
         appellant's contact with M had been supervised at a contact centre.
          He said he had not been to her school except for  two  visits,  he
         could not remember, but thought they took place in 2013 or 2014 and
         one in 2015.  The appellant clarified his  fortnightly  contact  in
         fact was staying over weekend  contact,  from  seven  thirty  on  a
         Friday night to three thirty on a Sunday  afternoon.   He  said  he
         could not meet M's mother in person  as  she  had  been  given  two
         police cautions for harassment of him.  I asked the appellant  some
         further questions and it transpired that he did  not  have  contact
         with M from 2012 until the recent events in October  2016  when  he
         was involved by Social Services due to concerns about her  welfare.
         He had seen her on two occasions in the preceding four  years.   He
         had also stopped paying CSA contributions for her support.  He said
         he had pleaded for contact but had not in  fact  tried  to  involve
         solicitors of the Family Courts to enforce contact.


     26. In relation to MM, the appellant said that  he  did  not  have  any
         contact with his biological father but regarded the appellant as  a
         father figure, since his birth.  He lived with the appellant and Ms
         M and had a close relationship  with  the  appellant.   His  mother
         provided his financial support.


     27. I asked  the  appellant  about  financial  support  for  his  three
         children.  Initially he said he provided financial support  to  all
         three children.  When asked he could not explain what, how much  or
         when.  It then  transpired  that  he  did  not  provide  them  with
         financial support."



3.   Having received this evidence and in the  light  of  the  documentation
   which was furnished to the Judge she made individual findings in relation
   to the  Appellant's  relationship  with  each  of  the  children  in  the
   following terms



   "33.   In relation to the circumstances of  the  three  children  of  the
       appellant, these are that T, the oldest child, does not live in this
       country, there is no suggestion that he will do so  now  or  in  the
       future and he has, at best, sporadic contact with the  appellant  by
       telephone  that  can  be  continued  from  Trinidad  and  Tobago  if
       necessary.  His  best  interests  therefore  appear  to  be  largely
       unaffected by whether the appellant remains here or returns  to  his
       home country.

   34. The appellant's second  child,  Ih,  does  appear  to  have  regular
       contact with the appellant.  I find it curious  that  despite  there
       being such an apparently supportive and  flexible  arrangement  with
       the child's mother, yet she did  not  come  to  court,  despite  the
       importance  of  the  outcome  of  this  appeal   for   the   child's
       relationship with his father.


   35. I also found it difficult to accept the appellant's evidence at face
       value as to the regularity of that contact.  This is partly  because
       Ms M did not know he was having contact with  Ih  four  times  every
       week as claimed in oral evidence.  This is a considerable amount  of
       contact, for a child who has never lived with him,  lives  with  his
       mother and where the appellant does  not  have  his  own  funds  for
       travel.  The evidence was also  somewhat  vague  about  the  weekend
       contact and appeared to be that he  did,  then  that  did  not  have
       contact every weekend, despite the appellant having said contact was
       weekly.   The  appellant  also  initially  claimed  Ih  had  staying
       overnight contact, but then changed his evidence.   I  do  find  the
       evidence of this  appellant  unreliable  and  I  find  that  he  was
       exaggerating his role and the regularity of his contact.  However, I
       accept that he does have a role  in  Ih's  life,  in  that  this  is
       supported  by  the  assessments  which  comment  on   his   positive
       involvement, the letter from the school confirming he has been asked
       to accompany the child on trips, and the statement from the  child's
       mother, (page 48 of the bundle), which says that the appellant  does
       'regularly' see Ih in the  afternoons  after  school,  that  he  has
       fortnightly, (but not weekly as claimed), contact on  Saturdays  but
       with advance notice contact can be agreed flexibly  on  other  days.
       The statement also says that the appellant has 'a close  bond'  with
       the child and used to regularly do school runs for the child when he
       was at his previous school and the child would be adversely affected
       by his removal.


   36. I further find that Ih is  a  vulnerable  child,  whose  immigration
       status is uncertain or precarious and who suffers from a  number  of
       developmental and social difficulties, as a result of a diagnosis of
       autism.  I find that it would be in Ih's best interests to  continue
       to have contact with his father, to have stability and security  and
       that the appellant does and intends to continue to  take  an  active
       and involved role in his upbringing.


   37. In relation to the appellant's third child, M, he has  confirmed  he
       had no contact with her for the  four  years  before  October  2016,
       apart from two occasions, and contact only started then as a  result
       of the involvement of other agencies.  He does not provide her  with
       financial support and has not done so  for  many  years.   There  is
       documentation before me from  social  services  that  confirms  that
       promoting contact between the appellant and M is planned  by  social
       services as being in the child's best interests, but otherwise there
       is little or no mention of the appellant having any real role in the
       child protection  investigations  or  meetings,  although  it  would
       appear that Social Services had tried to arrange meetings with him.
   38. The emails from Social Services quote the appellant's emails  saying
       he has not been afforded  contact  in  preceding  years  because  of
       obstruction by the child's mother, however, he did not take steps to
       enforce contact through the courts.  Those emails also say that part
       of the child's difficulties with behaviour are as a  result  of  her
       not having any contact  with  the  appellant  (page  55  appellant's
       bundle) but there is also mention of the child's mother saying  that
       previous  contact  with  the  appellant   was   'very   loving   and
       constructive' (page 61).  Accordingly, I find that at  the  time  of
       hearing and in the two months immediately preceding the hearing, the
       appellant has been having contact with his daughter and that contact
       is in the child's best interest,  particularly  as  she  is  clearly
       going through a period of emotional upheaval and would therefore  be
       in need of security and stable relationships of support.


   39. As to the appellant's future intentions about contact with M, it  is
       difficult to make clear findings.  It appears  not  to  be  disputed
       that he did seek contact with the child in the four years before the
       recent events, but did  not  try  to  enforce  contact  through  the
       courts, which it would have been open to him to do.  I also found it
       difficult to accept that appellant's evidence at face value, for the
       reasons given above.  I find, on balance, that  it  is  more  likely
       than not that he intends to continue to pursue contact and a role in
       M's upbringing, at least in the near future."

    The Judge concluded that the Appellant's relationship with MM  did  not
    reach the definition of a parental relationship.

4.   Having considered the Immigration Rules the Judge  was  satisfied  that
    the Respondent was not able to meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules and that therefore his appeal could not be allowed on that basis.
     She went onto consider whether  or  not  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    succeed on the basis of a  consideration  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Judge  found  that  whilst  the
    Appellant did not have a relationship with  his  partner  and  her  son
    which reached the definition of "family life" for the purposes  of  the
    Article 8 assessment, he nevertheless had a family life with his son  I
    and "to a lesser extent" with his daughter M.  The Judge also concluded
    that he had a family life which attracted the engagement of  Article  8
    within  the  UK.   She  then  turned  to  consider  the   question   of
    proportionality and reached the following conclusions.



   "48.   I find it is in the  best  interests  of  both  children  to  have
         contact with both parents.  That is all the more  compelling  as  a
         result of the developmental and other difficulties I has to contend
         with and in light of the comments of  M's  social  worker  who  has
         clearly, in email communications with the appellant,  stressed  the
         importance of contact with the appellant  to  M's  well  being  and
         sense of self esteem and  security.   Ih's  immigration  status  is
         clearly uncertain and Mr Carroll was not in a position to  tell  me
         the outcome of his application.  Clearly, if he were to be returned
         with his mother to Trinidad and Tobago, then  the  appellant  could
         continue contact there, but at present, his  status  is  precarious
         and unclear.  M cannot be required to leave the United  Kingdom  to
         pursue contact with her father.  Not only is she a British  citizen
         but her mother is settled here as  a  British  citizen  and  it  is
         patently clear from the communications and documents in the  bundle
         that she would be most unlikely  to  resettle  in  the  appellant's
         country so that  her  daughter  could  continue  contact  with  the
         appellant.  The child also has a  private  life  in  that  she  has
         settled in school here and clearly has a  relationship  with  other
         family  members,   such   as   grandparents,   according   to   the
         documentation from social services.


     49. In the above circumstances, where the appellant meets the spirit of
         the requirements of the Rules at the date of hearing,  albeit  only
         barely and not at the date of application or decision, and where it
         is clearly in the child's best interests to have contact  with  the
         appellant that must take place in this country, and where there are
         no strong counterveiling considerations,  such  as  criminality,  I
         find  the  balance  in  terms  of  proportionality  must   tip   in
         appellant's favour.  In this  I  consider  the  statutory  factors,
         which  mainly  have  a  neutral  impact  on  this  appeal,  but  in
         particular s.117B(6), which provides as follows:


         'in the case of person who is not liable to deportation, the public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-


          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and
          b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom'

     50. The respondent has also conceded before the Upper Tribunal that  it
         is not reasonable, for the  purposes  of  s.117B(6),  to  expect  a
         British child to relocate abroad, where there is no criminality, to
         maintain the family unit (Sanade (British  children-Dereci)  [2011]
         UKUT 48 (IAC)).

     51. As a British citizen under the age  of  eighteen,  the  appellant's
         daughter is a 'qualifying child'.   The  UK  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
         (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 at paragraph 1, attached particular
         importance to the  British  citizenship  of  United  Kingdom  based
         children.  As Lady Hale observed, "Although nationality  is  not  a
         'trump card' it is of particular importance in assessing  the  best
         interests of any child" (at paragraph 30).    But  the  citizenship
         referred to in ZH is  not  simply  citizenship  of  acquired  legal
         status.  As Lady Hale explained:

         "    they are British, not just through  the  'accident'  of  being
         born here, but by descent from  a  British  parent;  they  have  an
         unqualified right of abode here;"

     52. Lady Hale went on to say:

         "As citizens these children have rights which they will not be able
         to exercise if they move to another country.  They  will  lose  the
         advantages of growing up and being educated in their  own  country,
         their own culture and their own language".

     53. The appellant is not  liable  to  deportation  and  Treebhawon  and
         others (section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC)  is  authority  for
         the contention that where the s.117(6) criteria  are  satisfied,  a
         finding that the public intest does not  require  removal  prevails
         over the matters set out in s.117(1-3).  I have found that  at  the
         date of hearing, the relevant date  for  determining  wider  issues
         under Article 8 outside the Rules, that the appellant has a genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,  and
         so s.117(6) does inform any balancing act as to the public interest
         in the proportionality exercise.


     54. I therefore find, taking all matters into consideration,  that  the
         decision to remove the  appellant  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
         interference with his rights under  Article  8  and  those  of  his
         children.  I am  mindful  when  making  that  assessment  that  the
         factual position may change in the future.  I  am  cautious  in  my
         assessment of the future intentions of this  appellant.   It  is  a
         matter for the respondent what leave to grant and not a matter  for
         this Tribunal.  I am aware that  the  respondent  typically  grants
         leave in the short term in such cases to  allow  her  to  review  a
         family's circumstances, and, for example,  review  whether  contact
         and an appellant's intention  to  take  an  involved  role  in  his
         child's life has continued past the date leave is granted.  It  may
         be for the appellant to establish those circumstances still prevail
         to the respondent's satisfaction  at  a  later  date  if  he  seeks
         further leave."



5.   In the  light  of  these  conclusions  the  Judge  found  that  it  was
   appropriate to allow the appeal under Article 8.

6.   The appeal is advanced on three grounds.  The first ground is that  the
   Judge relied  upon  the  case  of  Treebhawon  in  paragraph  53  of  the
   determination and that this reliance upon that authority gave rise to  an
   error of law in that the decision  in  that  case  was  inconsistent  and
   materially wrong in  the  light  of  the  more  recent  authority  of  MA
   (Pakistan) and others v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  As a  consequence  the
   Judge misdirected herself as to the significance of  section  117B(6)  of
   the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  second  ground
   depends upon an allegation that the Judge failed  to  resolve  the  issue
   between the parties bearing upon  the  credibility  of  the  Respondent's
   relationships with his children.   Further as part of this ground  it  is
   submitted that the Judge failed to give adequate and appropriate  reasons
   for her decisions in particular in paragraph  39  of  the  determination.
   The third and final ground was that the Judge failed to properly approach
   the case on the basis as one centering upon separation of  the  Appellant
   from his children and, rather, focused upon the interests of the children
   and the impact upon them of having the Appellant removed.

7.   In order to evaluate  ground  one  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the
   provisions of section  117B(6)  and  then  the  respective  decisions  of
   Treebhawon and MA (Pakistan).   Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  provides
   as follows:

    'S.117B(6) in the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
    the public interest does not require the person's removal where


        a.    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
           with a qualifying child, and


        b. it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom'


8.   The case cited by the Judge and relied upon  in  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination, Treebhawon is, indeed, as the Judge observed,  authority
    for  the  contention  that  where  the  section  117(6)  criteria   are
    satisfied, "the finding of that the public  interest does  not  require
    removal prevails over the matters set out in section 117B(1-3)".   This
    observation  is  borne  out  by  paragraphs  19,  20  and  21  of   the
    determination in Treebhawon which concludes in paragraph  21  with  the
    following trenchant observation


    "21.  Giving  effect  to  the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
    underlying  Parliamentary   intention   is   that   where   the   three
    aforementioned conditions are satisfied the public interests identified
    in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."


9.   In  the  case  of  MA  the  question  of  the  proper  approach  to  an
   application of section 117B(6) was considered by  the  Court  of  Appeal.
   At paragraph 21 of the judgment of Elias LJ (the  leading  judgment  with
   which the other members of the Court of Appeal agreed) he identifies  the
   central submission of the Secretary of State that section 117B(6) was but
   one of the factors to be taken  into  account  in  making  an  Article  8
   determination, and that the other factors identified in s.117B(1)-(5) all
   had to  be  taken  into  account  and  play  a  part  in  the  Article  8
   determination.  In summary an  argument  was  raised  in  relation  to  a
   suggested comparability between section 117C(5) and section 117B(6).   It
   had been argued in the case of MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 that section 117C(5), which  provides
   that where a foreign  criminal  liable  for  deportation  has  a  genuine
   subsisting relationship with a child and the affect of deportation on the
   child would be unduly harsh, there is an  exception  to  section  117C(3)
   requirement that the foreign criminal should  be  deported.   In  MM  the
   Court of Appeal concluded that that section was not freestanding and  its
   application still required consideration to be given to all of the  other
   public interest questions which might bear upon the issue of  whether  or
   not the foreign criminal  should  be  deported.   Having  considered  the
   competing arguments Elias LJ concluded at paragraph 45 as follows:


    "45. However, the approach I  favour  is  inconsistent  with  the  very
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) where  the  court
    came down firmly in  favour  of  the  approach  urged  upon  us  by  Ms
    Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to depart from it.  In my
    judgment, if the court  should  have  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the
    applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public  interest  when
    applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5), so should it
    when considering the question of reasonableness under section  117B(6).
    I recognise that the provisions in section 117C  are  directed  towards
    the particular considerations which have to be borne  in  mind  in  the
    case of foreign criminals, and it is true that the  court  placed  some
    weight on section 117C(2)  which  states  that  the  more  serious  the
    offence, the greater is the interest in deportation  of  the  prisoner.
    But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).   It  would   not   be
    appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply  because  I   have
    reservations whether it is correct.   Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
    approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the
    Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the
    only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven year  rule
    is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of  leave
    to remain being granted."




10.  It is very clear from what I have  set  out  above  that  the  approach
taken in Treebhawon is inconsistent with the position taken by the Court  of
Appeal in MA.  Whilst it does not appear that Treebhawon was  cited  to  the
Court of Appeal, nor is there any direct comment upon it, it is in  my  view
very clear that not only are the two approaches from these cases to  section
117B(6) inconsistent, but also that the  approach  taken  by  the  Court  of
Appeal must  take  precedence  and  supersede  the  decision  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in the Treebhawon case.  The observation of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Martin that the case of Treebhawon is "no  longer  good  law  following  the
Court of Appeal's decision in MA"when granting permission to appeal  in  the
present case is in my view apt.


11.   It  follows  that  in  my  view  it  is  inescapable  that  the  Judge
misdirected herself in paragraph 53 and she should not have  had  regard  to
the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon.  It is said by  Mr  Amunwa
that in the event that I were to be satisfied that there  was  an  error  of
law and a misdirection in the substance of paragraph  53,  nevertheless  the
decision of the Judge could be saved on the basis that in paragraph  54  she
explains that she has taken all matters into consideration  before  reaching
her decision on proportionality, and also had clearly set  out  the  factors
relevant to the other matters within section 117B such  as  the  Appellant's
immigration history earlier on in  the  determination.   Thus,  he  submits,
even if  there  were  a  misdirection  in  paragraph  53,  nevertheless  the
language of the determination shows that the Judge, in essence, applied  the
correct approach or, alternatively, reached  the  correct  decision  on  the
basis of her findings.  I am unable to accept that  submission.   Given  the
clear misdirection in paragraph 53 of  the  determination  I  am  unable  to
accept that the portmanteau phrase "taking all matters  into  consideration"
corrected and succeeded that misdirection of law.  Whilst  it  is  right  to
observe that the Judge did carefully set out the relevant factors  from  the
Appellant's immigration history in the context of her determination, in  the
light of the misdirection of law it is unclear what part those  matters  may
have played in her resolution of  the  proportionality  issue.   It  follows
that the decision of the Judge must be quashed.  In the event that I was  of
that view, Mr Amunwa confirmed that his submission was that the  appropriate
form of disposal was for the matter to be sent back to another judge of  the
First Tier Tribunal other than Judge H Graves  for  the  appeal  to  be  re-
determined.

12.  In the light of that conclusion it is unnecessary to  dwell  at  length
upon the other two grounds upon which the appeal was advanced.   Suffice  to
say that I am not satisfied that there is any substance  in  either  of  the
Appellant's contentions.  In my view the Judge  reached  carefully  reasoned
conclusions in relation to the relationship which  the  Appellant  had  with
each of his children in paragraphs 33 - 39 of the determination.   She  made
a measured  appraisal  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  resolved  the
relevant factual issues in relation to the strength and  permanence  of  the
nature and quality of the relationships which the Appellant  had  with  each
of his children.  There is no substance therefore in the Appellant's  ground
two.  So far as ground three is concerned, I am again  not  satisfied  there
was any error of law in  the  Judge's  approach.   It  was  plain  that  her
starting point was that the relevant child, M, would not leave the UK.   She
was right to examine the position in terms of the impact upon that child  in
her approach to the Article 8 issues.  The error arose at a later  stage  in
her reasoning as I have set out above.

13.  To conclude I am  satisfied  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  in
relation to ground one for the reasons I have set out  above  and  that  the
decision of Judge H Graves of the 24th January 2017 should  be  quashed  and
the appeal referred back to the First Tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
Chamber) for re-determination by a judge other than Judge H Graves.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and the  decision  of  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  H
Graves is quashed and  the  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First  tier
Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for re-determination  by  a  judge
other than Judge H Graves.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Dove

