
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: HU/11806/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th November 2017                         |On 3rd January 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        Mr Chekuse Ally Mfaume Kawawa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on  13th  July  1976.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance on 29th October 2014 for leave to
    remain on the basis of family and private life.  This  application  was
    granted outside the Immigration Rules until 17th July 2015.   Prior  to
    that it would appear from the Appellant's immigration history  that  he
    had applied initially back in April 2004 for entry clearance, which had
    been granted, and thereafter on 6th November 2004 had applied for leave
    to remain on the basis of UK ancestry but  that  application  had  been
    refused.

 2. On 9th July 2015 the Appellant made  a  human  rights  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his private  life
    with Clara Hammhal.  That application was refused by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 10th November 2015.  The Appellant appealed and the  appeal  came
    before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Grimmett,   sitting   at
    Birmingham, on 5th January 2017.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated
    on 13th January 2017 that appeal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission to appeal was refused by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grant on 20th July 2017.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the
    Upper Tribunal contending that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
    material error of law in finding that the Appellant  was  dishonest  in
    his application by failing to disclose a conditional discharge.

 4. On  13th  September  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  in  granting
    permission to appeal set out lengthy reasons but noted that  the  issue
    arguably was whether in the light of the allegation of  dishonesty  the
    Appellant would have been entitled to  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He considered that if the response  by  the  Appellant  was  in
    accordance with the reported decision the Secretary of State  may  have
    wished to consider whether the reference in the refusal  to  dishonesty
    had arguable merit and if not the impact upon  the  impugned  decision.
    He considered that at the next hearing the Tribunal should consider the
    nature of any legal error and the  materiality  of  same.   He  further
    considered that although the findings in relation to Article 8 ECHR may
    be sustainable in the absence of consideration or reasoning related  to
    the private life element it was appropriate to grant permission on  all
    grounds.

 5. On 28th September 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of  Appeal  under  Rule  24.   That  Rule  24  response  is  important.
    Paragraph 2 states:

         "The Respondent does not, in the light of the  Tribunal's  guidance
         in  Omenma  [2014]  UKUT  00314  (IAC),  oppose   the   Appellant's
         application for permission to appeal and invites  the  Tribunal  to
         determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing to consider  whether
         the Appellant is entitled to a grant of leave as the husband  of  a
         British national."

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Childs, and the Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Duffy.

    Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Duffy does not seek to go behind the Rule 24 statement.   Ms  Childs
    refers  me  to  the  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge,
    particularly at paragraph 21, and submits that that paragraph seems  to
    her to suggest that the application pursuant to Article 8  would/should
    be successful.  I took the view that that issue had not been determined
    and that if the matter was to be reheard that would produce a situation
    of fairness both to the Appellant and to the Secretary  of  State.   Mr
    Duffy concurred with such an approach.

    The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

    Case Law

10. The guiding case  law  is  to  be  found  in  the  decision  of  Omenma
    (Conditional discharge - not a conviction of an  offence)  [2014]  UKUT
    00314 (IAC), which is authority for saying that the effect  of  Section
    14(1) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 is that  a
    person who has received a conditional or absolute  discharge  does  not
    make a false representation if the answer is "no" when asked if he  has
    ever been convicted of an offence.

    Findings on Error of Law

11. It is clear that the above authority is not  an  issue  that  has  been
    addressed properly by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  he  has  made
    findings that misapply that authority.  As such I agree with  both  the
    Secretary of State and the Appellant's representative that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has erred in law and that that error is material.

12. Neither Mr Duffy nor Ms Asanovich asked me to rehear the  matter  today
    albeit that that is raised as an issue in the Rule 24 response.   There
    is  agreement  between  the  legal  representatives  that  the  correct
    approach, particularly bearing in mind that it would take out  a  level
    of appeal if I did not follow it, is for the matter to be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal, having found that there is a material error
    of law and that that error of law means that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal cannot stand.  I agree with that approach and I  set  out
    hereinafter directions for the rehearing of this matter.

    Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

 2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  either
    Nottingham or Birmingham with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 3) That the appeal is to be heard  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Grimmett on the  first  available
    date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.

 4) That there be leave to either party to  file  and  serve  a  bundle  of
    objective and subjective evidence upon which they  intend  to  rely  at
    court and to serve same upon the other's party at least  fourteen  days
    prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That in the event that the Appellant would require an  interpreter  his
    instructed solicitors must notify the Listing Office within seven  days
    of receipt of these Directions.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

No anonymity direction is made.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application was made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
