

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/11532/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 April 2018                     |              On 13 April 2018        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mr AMIN BASHIR GEELE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal, Counsel (instructed by Birnberg Pierce &
Partners,

                                          Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 19  January  2018  against
         the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale who  had
         allowed the appeal of the Appellant on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The
         Appellant had raised a human rights appeal against the decision  to
         deport  him  on  conducive  grounds  because  of   his   persistent
         offending. The decision and reasons  was  promulgated  on  20  June
         2017.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on  19  June  1988.
         The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom with  his  mother  and
         siblings on 9 August 1997, when he was 9 years  of  age.   Although
         refused asylum, the family were granted ELR and the  Appellant  was
         granted  ILR  on  2  February  2005.   The   Appellant's   numerous
         convictions  from  18  May  2004  onwards  are  set  out  by  Judge
         Nightingale at [7] of her decision and need not be  repeated  here.
         The Appellant was sectioned under the  Mental  Health  Act  on  two
         occasions in 2012.  After taking those convictions and  the  public
         interest into account, and finding that the Appellant was indeed  a
         persistent  offender,  the  judge  found  that  there   were   very
         significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into life in
         Somalia.  The exception in paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules
         applied and so the appeal succeeded on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


    3.     Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal  and
         the permission to appeal granted in the Upper Tribunal was in  very
         general terms.  The renewed grounds submit  that  the  judge  erred
         when  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the United Kingdom, because his persistent  offending
         showed otherwise.  This issue appears to be the main point on which
         permission to appeal was granted.




    Submissions


    4.     Mr Tarlow for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and grant.  The judge's finding that  the  Appellant  was  a
         persistent offender undermined her finding that he  was  culturally
         integrated.  The determination should  be  set  aside  and  remade,
         dismissing the original appeal.


    5.     Mr Toal for the Respondent submitted  that  the  onwards  appeal
         should be dismissed, as there was no error of law.  The  judge  had
         engaged fully with the case put forward by the Secretary  of  State
         and had directed herself properly.  The Appellant's  offending  had
         been analysed and the submission that he was not to be regarded  as
         a persistent offender had been rejected.  The decision was balanced
         and cogent reasons for allowing the appeal  had  been  given.   The
         cultural  integration  found  was   supported   by   the   evidence
         identified.  The  judge  had  been  entitled  to  take  the  latest
         evidence of country conditions into account.


    6.     There was nothing Mr Tarlow wished to add by way of reply.




    No error of law finding


    7.     In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
         generous, and failed to reflect depth of analysis and reasoning  in
         which the judge had engaged.  This is not an onwards  appeal  where
         error of law has been  shown,  but  rather  extended  disagreement.
         This was a difficult case, with a  large  volume  of  evidence  and
         several layers of complexity.  It is not the type of  appeal  where
         much sympathy for the Appellant will readily  be  felt  and  it  is
         almost inevitable that opinions as to the right outcome will vary.


    8.      As  Mr  Toal  submitted,  the  judge  had  engaged   with   the
         Respondent's case from  the  very  start  and  had  approached  the
         paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and  section  117C  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 issues  on  the  basis
         that the Appellant was a persistent offender.  It should  be  noted
         that, despite all his convictions, the Appellant  had  seldom  been
         sentenced to imprisonment and even  then  to  no  more  than  eight
         months. Section  117C(6)  was  therefore  inapplicable.  The  judge
         rightly pointed out (see [54] of her decision) "If it  were  to  be
         said that anybody who had committed criminal  offences  is  thereby
         not culturally and socially integrated, the exception  would  never
         apply and would be pointless."


    9.      The  judge  went  on  to  make  findings  as   to   Appellant's
         integration, noting that the Appellant  had  lived  in  the  United
         Kingdom since the age of 9, had been educated here,  spoke  with  a
         London accent and that all of his immediate family were settled  in
         the United  Kingdom.  Those  findings  were  followed  by  a  close
         examination of the  very  serious  obstacles  to  reintegration  in
         Somalia, placing among other matters weight on the Appellant's long
         standing epilepsy which the country background  evidence  indicated
         would result in  suspicion,  fear  and  stigma:  see  [57]  of  the
         decision.  That finding is unassailable.  The care with  which  the
         judge conducted her review of the  evidence  can  be  seen  in  her
         conclusion that the Article 3 ECHR threshold had not been met.


    10.    It is difficult to see what more the judge could  have  done  by
         way  of  analysis  and  reasoning,  which  was  logical  and   well
         structured, and extended over several pages.  Much of the case  put
         forward on the Appellant's behalf  was  rejected,  and  a  balanced
         approach was taken throughout, in which  the  public  interest  was
         constantly considered. The judge then correctly applied the law  to
         those findings.


    11.    The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no substance  and
         that there was no error of law in the decision challenged.


    DECISION


    The appeal is dismissed


    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.


Signed                                  Dated 11 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
