
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11747/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2017                       |On 25 July 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                          Olabode Odunayo Phillips
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Plowright, instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Olabode Odunayo Phillips, date of birth 27.11.15,  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raikes promulgated 13.12.16,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  12.11.15,  to
    refuse his application made 30.7.14.

 3. The appellant had sought reconsideration of  the  decision  of  1.10.14
    refusing  his  application,  with  no  right  of  appeal.   When   that
    reconsideration was refused, he launched Judicial  Review  proceedings,
    which were settled by consent and on the basis that  the  Secretary  of
    State would reconsider the human rights claim, which  resulted  in  the
    RFR decision on 12.11.15.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted permission  to  appeal  on
    24.5.17.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 17.7.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 7. The grounds first submit  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  failing
    adequately to take into account the best interests of  the  appellant's
    younger stepdaughter, a qualifying child, when  concluding  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to continuing  family  life  with  his
    wife in Nigeria.

 8. Second, the grounds argue that the decision fails to properly  consider
    and apply s117(6) of the 2002 Act, in failing to give  adequate  weight
    to the length of time that the child had resided  in  the  UK,  and  in
    failing to take into account the fact that the child had never been  to
    Nigeria, reliance being placed on MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 9. Some factual errors are apparent in the decision, such as  the  judge's
    belief that the youngest child had left the UK for a  short  period  in
    2011, when it was in fact the older, adult, daughter of his wife. There
    is also an inconsistency  between  [1]  and  [5]  as  to  the  date  of
    marriage, which was  in  2012,  not  2010.  The  judge  may  also  have
    incorrectly calculated the length of time the younger daughter has been
    in the UK, since she was born in 2002 and came to the UK when  she  was
    almost 3 years of age. This suggests that she must have entered in 2005
    and not 2007 as the judge stated. It means that  at  the  date  of  the
    application, the child had been in the UK some 9 years, and by the date
    of hearing 11 years, somewhat longer than the judge gave credit for.  I
    am not satisfied that  the  minor  error  in  length  of  residence  is
    material to the outcome of the appeal, as the judge accepted that  both
    daughters had been in the UK over 7 years and  thus  that  the  younger
    child, still a minor, is a qualifying child, 14 years  of  age  at  the
    date of the hearing. I am satisfied that, on reading the decision as  a
    whole, the judge has taken account of the best interests of  the  minor
    child of the  appellant's  wife.  I  also  find  that  the  judge  made
    reference to s117B(6) at [15] and applied the reasonableness test for a
    qualifying child at [54]  with  reference  to  s177B.  The  judge  also
    considered the best interests of the child at [52], [53], and generally
    throughout the decision.

10. At the hearing before me, reliance was placed on the  August  2015  IDI
    Family Migration Policy, but the grounds at [26] appear to accept  that
    the judge  gave  adequate  weight  to  the  guidance.  That  may  be  a
    typographical error, as it runs contrary to Mr Plowright's  submissions
    to me. However, it is not clear that this issue was argued  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In any event, I am satisfied that the  judge  gave
    full and proper consideration to the position  of  both  children  when
    considering the appellant's claim,  an  approach  consistent  with  the
    policy.

11.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  significant  weight  was  given  to  the
    circumstances  of  the  wife  and  children  when  carrying   out   the
    proportionality  balancing  exercise  outside  the  Rules  pursuant  to
    article 8 ECHR. I am not satisfied that application of the  policy  and
    the need for 'strong reasons' for refusing leave would  or  could  have
    made any difference to the outcome of the appeal. The judge noted  that
    both daughters had limited leave to remain in the UK and fully accepted
    their integration in the UK and the extent of family life with them  as
    part of the family unit, but concluded that family life could  continue
    outside the UK, if the mother chose to follow the appellant and to take
    her daughters with her. The judge considered the impact that would have
    on the family but concluded that it would be proportionate,  consistent
    with best interests, and reasonable to expect them to leave the UK,  if
    the mother chose to follow the appellant, but they were not obliged  to
    do so. At [55] the judge concluded that all of these factors in  favour
    of the appellant remaining with his wife and children in  the  UK  were
    outweighed by  the  public  interest  in  the  overall  proportionality
    balancing exercise. As MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 held, it  does
    not follow that  leave  must  be  granted  whenever  the  child's  best
    interests are in favour of remaining, but  the  wider  public  interest
    considerations must be taken into account.

12. In a well-reasoned  decision,  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that on the facts of this case the decision of the Secretary
    of State was proportionate to the family and private life rights of the
    appellant and his family members. The grounds amount  to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the findings of  the  judge  on  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal and an attempt to reargue the case.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

