
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11869/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                                           Decision | |
|& Reasons Promulgated                                                   | |
|On 13 April 2018                                                    On  | |
|17 April 2018                                                           | |
|                                                                        | |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                    The Entry Clearance Officer SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BENICE ONYINYENCHI
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Claimant: Not represented, except by the sponsor Queen Onyinyenchi
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant date of birth 20.2.50 is a citizen of Nigeria.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver  promulgated  26.5.17,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer,
    dated 21.10.15 to refuse her application  for  entry  clearance  for  a
    period of three years in order to care for her granddaughter whilst the
    child's mother, the sponsor attended university.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    29.1.18.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 13.4.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons briefly summarised  below,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was made in error of law such  that
    it should be set aside and remade.

 6. Judge Oliver purported to allow the appeal to the limited  extent  that
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was not in accordance  with
    the law. The judge also purported to direct the Secretary of  State  to
    make a fresh decision dealing with the best interests of the claimant's
    granddaughter pursuant to Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and to submit any further evidence within 6 weeks.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal has no power to allow an appeal  on  the  basis
    that the decision of the Secretary of State or Entry Clearance  Officer
    was not in accordance with the law. The tribunal had to either allow or
    dismiss the appeal. Neither does the First-tier Tribunal have any power
    to 'direct' the Secretary of State or Entry Clearance Officer to make a
    fresh decision.

 8. If Judge Oliver was concerned about the best interests of the child, it
    was open to the judge to determine  those  best  interests  within  the
    appeal. It was entirely unnecessary for the judge to effectively  remit
    the decision to the maker for that purpose.

 9. In the circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be
    set aside and remade, which I do by dismissing the  claimant's  appeal,
    for the reasons summarised below.

10. The application made by  the  claimant  was  one  not  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules. She did not seek settlement in the UK  as  an  adult
    dependent relative but temporary admission for a period of 3 years. The
    purpose of that request was so that she could look after her  seriously
    ill  grandchild,  whilst  her  own  daughter  continued  and  completed
    university studies. It  follows  that  the  application  could  not  be
    considered as an application for a visit visa, which would  be  limited
    to a maximum stay of 6 months. There is no such immigration  status  as
    admission or leave for a  period  of  3  years.  It  follows  that  the
    application could never have succeeded under the Immigration Rules.

11. The only available ground of appeal was on  human  rights  outside  the
    Rules.

12. There is no dispute as to the illness of the grandchild and  that  this
    is serious condition requiring considerable personal care. As described
    to me by the sponsor, the child has asthma, sleep disorder, obstructive
    apnoea, extremely difficulties breathing at  night  due  to  restricted
    airways, as well as a number of other  medical  complaints.  The  child
    often requires significant  medical  intervention.  These  difficulties
    were said to have  caused  or  contributed  to  the  breakdown  of  the
    sponsor's marriage. The father has refused to  take  responsibility  or
    contribute to the child's care needs.

13. As noted by Judge Oliver, the sponsor had concluded that the  best  way
    for her to deal with her situation in the long term was  to  acquire  a
    qualification to  help  provide  for  her  daughter  and  herself.  Her
    undergraduate course is due to end in 2018 and she wants to  go  on  to
    study for a Master's degree. The proposal was  that  her  mother  would
    come from Nigeria to look after the child's needs  whilst  the  sponsor
    continued her studies. By the time she completed her studies she  would
    be able to obtain employment to pay for child care and her mother could
    return to  Nigeria.  In  effect,  the  application  was  to  bring  the
    appellant to the UK as an unpaid child minder.

14. I have considered the child's best interests pursuant to s55.  However,
    I am not satisfied at all that it is in the child's best  interests  to
    be looked after by her grandmother whilst her own  mother  pursues  her
    academic objectives. The child's best interests are surely to be  cared
    for by the sponsor directly rather than a temporary substitute.  It  is
    not in any way necessary to the child's  best  interests  to  have  the
    claimant come to the UK for that sole purpose.

15. I note, contrary to the findings of Judge Oliver, that both  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and the Entry Clearance  Manager  took  into  account
    human rights considerations, which the judge has ignored.  Having  read
    both documents it is difficult to say in what other way they could have
    addressed the best interests of the child and the human rights  aspect.
    It is noted in the refusal decision that the case raises no exceptional
    circumstances consistent with the right to respect for family life.  To
    have a substitute carer come whilst the sponsor attends university is a
    purpose unknown to the Rules and in my view a long way from a situation
    engaging article 8 ECHR. There is in any event no  absolute  article  8
    right, it is qualified and has to  be  proportionate  to  the  need  to
    maintain a fair  and  effective  system  of  immigration  control.  The
    claimant does not currently enjoy any family life with the  sponsor  or
    her grandchild sufficient so that  denial  of  entry  clearance  is  an
    interference which  engages  article  8,  applying  the  R  (Razgar)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHKL  27  stepped
    approach. The remedy for the sponsor is  to  seek  state  support  from
    Social Services, and if necessary, postpone her educational  ambitions.
    Her lofty goals, whilst laudable and  worthwhile,  do  not  demand  the
    grant of entry clearance to the claimant.

16. In all the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the decision
    of the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  entirely  proportionate  and  not
    disproportionate to the article 8 rights of the claimant, the  sponsor,
    and the granddaughter. Whilst one may have  considerable  sympathy  for
    the sponsor's plight, there is no basis  to  consider  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance disproportionate or unduly harsh.

17. In the circumstances, the appeal cannot succeed and must be dismissed.



Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
