
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11968/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS



                                   Between

                              Mr Nadeem Shakir

                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lawrence sent on 6 September 2019 dismissing the appellant's appeal
    against a decision dated 14 May 2018 refusing his human right's claim,
    which was based upon his private life in the UK.  Permission to appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 10 January 2020.

 2. Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent on 27  April
    2020 and, in the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was made
    for the question of whether there was  an  error  of  law  and  if  so,
    whether the decision of the judge should be set aside, to be determined
    on the papers.

 3. The appellant, who is unrepresented, informed the Upper  Tribunal  that
    he was content to rely on the grounds of appeal on which permission  to
    appeal had been granted. He agreed that the appeal was suitable  to  be
    heard on the papers with  no  requirement  for  an  oral  hearing.  The
    respondent did not respond to  directions.  On  23  June  2020  further
    directions were sent to the respondent giving  the  respondent  another
    opportunity to respond to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  to  make  further
    submissions, and indicate a view on the appropriateness of  the  appeal
    being decided on the papers. To date, no submissions have been received
    from the respondent. On this basis, I am satisfied that the  respondent
    has not raised any objection to the appeal being determined  without  a
    hearing.

 4. I am satisfied that the submissions made on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    together with the papers before me are sufficient to enable  me  to  be
    able to take a decision on whether there is an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the judge and if so whether  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside, without hearing oral submissions.

Respondent's Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. On 14 May 2018, the respondent refused the appellant's application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis of ten year's  lawful
    continuous residence in the UK in line with paragraph 276B (ii)(c)  and
    (iii) of the immigration rules on the grounds  of  suitability  because
    there were discrepancies between the amount of earnings he had declared
    to the Home Office in support of his Tier 1 applications and the amount
    of income he had declared to HMRC in  his  tax  returns  for  the  same
    periods. The respondent was satisfied that it would be undesirable  for
    the appellant to stay in the UK in light of his character  and  conduct
    in accordance with paragraph 322(5) of the immigration rules because it
    was said that the appellant had dishonestly misrepresented his earnings
    to HMRC for the purpose of  reducing  his  tax  liability  or  for  the
    purpose of obtaining leave to remain or both.  Further,  the  appellant
    had not remained in the  UK  for  20  years  and  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his integration to  Pakistan.  His  dishonesty
    weighed against him in the Article 8 ECHR proportionality exercise.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge found that there were discrepancies between the  tax  returns
    and the figures provided to the Home Office and that the respondent had
    met the evidential  burden.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    appellant's innocent explanation. He found the appellant's evidence  to
    be  inconsistent  and  implausible  and  unsupported   by   documentary
    evidence. He found that the suitability grounds were made out.  He  did
    not make any findings as to  whether  the  appellant  had  accrued  ten
    year's continuous lawful residence in the UK. He then found that  there
    were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  return  to
    Pakistan and that it would not be unduly harsh for  him  to  return  to
    Pakistan.

    Grounds of appeal

    Ground 1

 7. The judge has misapplied the law by applying the  incorrect  burden  of
    proof. Where the respondent alleges dishonesty, the legal burden is  on
    the respondent.

    Ground 2

 8. The judge failed to take into account relevant evidence.

    Ground 3

 9. There was procedural unfairness in that  the  appellant  was  prevented
    from giving his evidence due to interruptions from the  judge  and  the
    appellant's counsel failed to present his appeal properly.

    Discussion and Analysis

10. At [5] the judge states;

         "The appellant bears the legal burden of proof from start to finish
         and the standard of proof is on the balance of probability".

11. Later in the same paragraph the judge states;

         "I reiterate, the legal burden of  proof  does  not  lie  with  the
         respondent at any stage. That lies with the appellant from start to
         finish".

12. This is a very clear statement by the judge of where he  considers  the
    legal burden of proof  to  lie  which  is  manifestly  an  error  in  a
    situation where the respondent has alleged dishonesty on the part of an
    appellant.

13. The proper approach is set out in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 67 at [42]
    where the Court of Appeal endorses the approach of Martin Spencer J  in
    R (Shahbaz Khan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKUT 00384 (IAC);

         "42. Although Martin Spencer J clearly makes  the  point  that  the
         Secretary of State must carefully consider any case  advanced  that
         the  discrepancy  is  the  result  of  carelessness   rather   than
         dishonesty, there is in our view a danger that his "starting-point"
         mis-states  the  position.  A  discrepancy  between  the   earnings
         declared to HMRC and to the Home Office may justifiably  give  rise
         to a suspicion that it is the result of dishonesty, but it does not
         by itself justify a conclusion to that effect. What it does  is  to
         call for an explanation. If  an  explanation  once  sought  is  not
         forthcoming, or is unconvincing, it may at that point be legitimate
         for the Secretary of State to infer dishonesty; but  even  in  that
         case the position is not that  there  is  a  legal  burden  on  the
         applicant to disprove  dishonesty.  The  Secretary  of  State  must
         simply decide, considering the discrepancy  in  the  light  of  the
         explanation (or lack of it),  whether  he  is  satisfied  that  the
         applicant has been dishonest.

         43. At para. 37 (iii) Martin Spencer J said:

             "In approaching that fact-finding task, the Secretary of State
             should remind herself that, although the standard of proof  is
             the 'balance of probability', a finding that a person has been
             deceitful and dishonest in relation to his  tax  affairs  with
             the consequence that he is denied settlement in  this  country
             is a very serious finding with serious consequences."

         We would respectfully  agree  with  that  passage.  In  particular,
         despite the valiant attempts made by Ms Anderson on behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State before us to argue the contrary, we consider (as
         Martin Spencer J did) that the concept of standard of proof is  not
         inappropriate in the present context. This is because what is being
         asserted by the Secretary of State is that an applicant for ILR has
         been dishonest. That is a  serious  allegation,  carrying  with  it
         serious consequences. Accordingly, we agree with Martin  Spencer  J
         that the Secretary of State must be satisfied that  dishonesty  has
         occurred, the standard of proof being the balance of  probabilities
         but bearing in mind the serious nature of the  allegation  and  the
         serious  consequences  which  follow  from  such   a   finding   of
         dishonesty".

14. Even had the judge come to the conclusion that on the shifting  of  the
    evidential  burden  the  appellant   had   provided   an   unconvincing
    explanation, the legal burden of proof was  not  on  the  appellant  as
    stated by the judge. The judge's statements set out at [5] in  relation
    to the burden of proof are manifestly an error of law which  undermines
    the decision as a whole.

15. This error is a serious one that vitiates the whole decision because it
    is clear that the judge had the incorrect burden of proof in  his  mind
    at all times and this infected his approach to all of the  evidence  to
    the extent that it cannot be said the appellant had a fair hearing.  On
    this basis the decision must be set aside in its entirety.

16. Since I am satisfied that the above ground is made out,  I  do  not  go
    onto consider the grounds relating  to  the  failure  to  consider  the
    evidence and the additional allegation of procedural unfairness.

17. Given the extent of the findings  that  are  required  to  be  made  in
    respect of the tax returns, the oral  evidence  to  be  heard  and  the
    consideration of the appellant's innocent explanation, this  appeal  is
    to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the
    relevant guidance with none of the findings preserved.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit  the  appeal  for  a  fresh  hearing
    before the first-tier tribunal. The appeal will be heard de novo  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.


R J Owens
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens Date: 3 November 2020
