
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11945/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2019                             |On 5th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   Mrs H C
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Aziz (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brookfield, promulgated on 30th July 2018, following a hearing at
    Manchester  on  23rd  July  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China, a female, and  was  born  on  24th
    April 1942.  She is 76 years of age.  She appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent dated 18th May 2018,  refusing  her  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her family  life  with  a  Mr
    [W], his wife, Mrs [C], and their minor son, whom she looks after, ever
    since he was born in 2003.  The decision appealed against is dated 18th
    May 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she left  China  in  1999,
    when she was aged 57 years, but she is a 76 year old lady now, does not
    have the support of her husband who left her over  ten  years  ago  and
    returned back to China because he owed people money there, and  at  the
    same time has a family relationship with Mr [W] and his family, looking
    after their son who is now 15 years of age.  She has nothing to  return
    back to in China.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Brookfield, the Appellant's  representative
    relied only upon paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  Article
    8 of the ECHR.  That being so, the judge observed  that  the  Appellant
    did not have a partner or any children in the UK.  She did not meet the
    requirements for leave to remain in the UK as a  partner  of  a  person
    living and settled in this country or as a parent of a child living  in
    this country.  The judge went on to consider the Appellant's  claim  to
    remain in this country on the basis of her private life.  She  observed
    that the Appellant had not lived in the UK for a period of twenty years
    or more.  She had lived the majority of her life in China, having  come
    to this country at the age of 57 years, so that her formative years had
    been lived in China.  She spoke Cantonese.  She  had  familiarity  with
    the culture and customs of China.  She would enjoy all the benefits  of
    citizenship on return to China.  On the other hand, she had  been  able
    to live and work, and make friends in the UK.   However,  she  did  not
    speak any English.

 5. Relying upon the case of Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013, the  judge  held
    that "mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval, mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the  test
    of very significant obstacles".  As for  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8, she held that Article 8 was not engaged in relation  to  the
    Appellant's family life, although she clearly had  established  private
    life in the UK, and bearing in mind Section 117B of the 2002  Act,  the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control,  meant  that
    she could not succeed.

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that, given  that  the  Appellant  had
    lived in the UK for eighteen years, and that it was accepted  that  the
    Appellant had established a private life in this country, the  decision
    under  Article  8  was  disproportionate,  because  the  Appellant  had
    befriended Mr [W] and his family, and was taking care of their son, who
    was now 14 years of age.  Second, her age was  a  relevant  factor,  in
    that now she was 76 years of age, and she no longer had the support  of
    her husband who had left her over ten years ago, because he owed people
    money in China.  In her witness statement (paragraph 17), the Appellant
    had explained that she did not have an ID card in China, has never  had
    a passport, and would not be able to apply for any social benefit or  a
    pension in China, if she were to be returned.  Finally,  she  had  also
    explained (paragraph 24 of her witness statement)  that  her  home  had
    been destroyed in flooding, and as a 76 year old,  she  would  have  no
    home to return to in China now.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 27th November  2018  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly consider the evidence set out in the grounds of application in
    the assessment of the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. On 18th December 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered,  to  the  effect
    that the judge had considered all the relevant factors, and the claimed
    obstacles  to  reintegration,  and  had  properly  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 8th  March  2019,  Mr  Aziz,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, directed my attention to paragraph 8(iii), and
    argued that the judge's conclusion here that the Appellant had remained
    in China for 57 years of her life, before coming to the UK in 1999, had
    spent the formative years there, was conversant with Cantonese culture,
    and could return there, overlooked the fact that she had  no  passport,
    no ID documents, was elderly, no home left  in  China,  and  could  not
    return there to access social benefits  in  any  way  whatsoever.   Her
    husband had left her to return back to China and she was no  longer  in
    contact with him.

11. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that this was nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  The Appellant has benefited by
    remaining in this country.  The  evidence  showed  that  she  had  been
    accessing medical care in this country (see page 10 of the  Appellant's
    bundle), without any trace of any evidence that she had paid  for  such
    medical treatment.  She was fairly independent.  There was no  evidence
    that she had even tried to get a  Chinese  passport  in  this  country.
    China was one of the most heavily documented countries  in  the  world.
    It was inconceivable  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  get  any  ID
    documents.  She was not fully integrated into British culture.  She did
    not have a family life in this country.  She was in good  health.   The
    decision of the judge could not be faulted.

12. In reply, Mr Aziz drew my attention to the supplementary bundle,  dated
    4th March 2019 (of eighteen pages), which showed that the Appellant was
    not even registered with a GP in this country, so  that  any  treatment
    that she would have had, would have been privately paid for.

13. I note that the supplementary bundle also contains  additional  medical
    reports from Dr R C  Patterson  (dated  12th  February  2019),  and  an
    earlier report (dated 15th August  2018).   The  bundle  also  contains
    photographs at the end (pages 11 to 18) of the Appellant with  the  boy
    of whom she has care,  and  has  had  care  ever  since  he  was  born,
    throughout his adolescent years.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  My reasons are  as  follows.
    First, this is a case where  the  Appellant  has  no  passport,  no  ID
    documents, and no home left in China to return to.  That condition,  in
    which the Appellant finds herself, has to be evaluated in  the  context
    of the Court of Appeal decision in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, where it
    was explained that the concept of "integration"  is  one  which  "is  a
    broad one" because "it is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
    job or sustain life while living in the other country".

15. Instead, the term 'integration' is one which

         "calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual would be enough of an insider in terms of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there" (paragraph 4).

16. The determination does not demonstrate enough by way  of  reasons  that
    the Appellant would have "a capacity to participate" in life in  China,
    given the absence of the  essential  documentation,  which  she  should
    have, but does not have.  At present, it does  appear  that  she  would
    face "very significant obstacles" given the facts as presently stated.




17.  Second, the judge has failed to engage with the impact of the  removal
    of the Appellant on the family that she is living with, Mr [W], and  in
    particular his son, who gave evidence  at  the  hearing,  and  who  the
    Appellant has been looking after for  the  last  fourteen  years,  ever
    since he was born: see Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39.   The  question  of
    disproportionately or otherwise has to be seen  in  the  context  which
    reflected other family members who are to be  potentially  regarded  as
    victims.  In this case, the judge has held that the Appellant enjoys no
    family life with Mr [W] and his family.  That question  may  in  itself
    require revisiting.  But in any event, the impact upon the private life
    of the remaining family as a whole, by the Appellant's  removal,  is  a
    matter which does engage the question  as  to  whether  they  are  also
    potentially to be regarded as victims, in the light of Beoku-Betts.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of  law.   I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other  than
    Judge Brookfield, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice
    Directions.

19. An anonymity Order is made.

20. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
