
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11751/2017
                                                               HU/11755/2017
                                                               HU/11758/2017
                                                               HU/11759/2017
                                                           and HU/11762/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 19th September 2018             |On 19th October 2018               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                (1) JOHN [P]
                               (2) LONNEY [P]
                                  (3) [F P]
                                  (4) [S P]
                                  (5) [J P]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:  Crown and Law, Solicitors
For the respondent: Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The 1st and 2nd appellants married on 3 March 2007 and came to the
       United Kingdom on 10 August 2007. They subsequently had 3 children,
       all born in the United Kingdom: [FP], born on 12 February 2009, [SP],
       born on 9 February 2013, and [JP], born on 5 May 2015. All are
       nationals of Malawi.

    2. The original appeal was against the respondent's decision refusing
       applications for leave to remain. Their appeals were heard by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Cope at North Shields on 5 February 2018. In a
       decision promulgated on 6 March 2018 the appeals were dismissed.

    3. Permission to appeal that decision has been granted on the basis the
       judge materially erred in law in failing to take as his starting
       point that leave should be granted where there was a qualifying child
       unless there are strong reasons to the contrary.

The Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellant's representative referred to the decision of MT and ET
       (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088
       (IAC). The decision makes the point that a very young child would
       have difficulty in establishing that her article 8 private and family
       life has a material element outside the need to live with her
       parents. The position however changes over time with the result that
       assessment of the child's best interests must adopt a correspondingly
       wider focus, examining the child's position in the wider world of
       which school is usually an important part. In the instant case the
       eldest child, [FP], is now aged 9. I was also referred to the
       respondent's own guidance and the reference to a need for a strong
       reason to justify removal such as the parent seeking to circumvent
       immigration control.

    5. The presenting officer accepted that [FP] had been here a significant
       period of time. 1st Tier judge referred to the decision of MA
       Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705 but the presenting officer accepted that
       there was no engagement with the test of reasonableness set out. He
       said that he could not find in the decision whether judge had
       acknowledged there were powerful reasons why the child should be
       removed notwithstanding their best interests lay in remaining.

    6. Both representatives were in agreement that if an error of law was
       found it would be possible for me to remake the decision was heard
       hearing further evidence.

Consideration

    7. The judge had referred to the Devaseelan principal in relation to an
       unsuccessful appeal heard in October 2014. That appeal included
       consideration of a protection claim by the appellant's parents.

    8. At paragraph 35 the judge said that the current case was essentially
       the same as that previously put forward save for the discrete issue
       as to the increased length of time the 3rd appellant has been living
       here. Clearly therefore the judge did appreciate the unique position
       of the 3rd appellant.

    9. The judge accepted the existence of family and private life. The
       focus in the appeal was upon those rights. The judge accepted the 3rd
       and 4th appellants were being educated and that the family had
       community and church links. The judge also found that if one of the
       appellants was to succeed then to maintain their family life all must
       succeed. The judge referred to the principal in Beoku-Betts [2008]
       UKHL 39 that the family unit as a whole had to be considered as well
       as its individual members. The judge referred to the need to balance
       the appellants interests with those of society and the economic well-
       being of the country.

   10. At paragraph 55 the judge correctly starts by considering separately
       the best interests of the children. The judge refers to their best
       interests being a primary consideration.

   11. The starting point was that their best interests lay in the family
       unit being maintained, whether that be here or in Malawi. At
       paragraph 58 the judge distinguished the 3rd appellant from her
       younger siblings, with the latter being almost completely dependent
       on their parents. This follows the logic of MT and ET (child's best
       interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

   12. Regarding the 1st two appellants the judge did not see any very
       significant obstacles to their reintegration into Malawi. At
       paragraph 78 the judge went on to consider in the context of
       paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv) the position of the 3rd appellant. The judge
       noted she had never been to Malawi and that she was doing well
       academically and in terms of social activities and friendships. The
       judge then refers to MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705. Lord Justice
       Elias was concerned with part VA of the 2002 Act which contains the
       same wording as that in paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) and concluded that
       regard had to be had to the wider public interest including the
       immigration history of the child's parents.

   13. The judge recorded that the 1st and 2nd appellants had no leave to
       remain since March or April 2015.There was also a period of
       unlawfulness between July 2011 until an application for protection
       was made on 9 September 2013. The judge then went on to consider the
       position of the 3rd appellant, including her acquisition of some
       knowledge of her Malawian cultural heritage. At paragraph 94 the
       judge concludes that weighing all the factors as a whole. Whilst
       acknowledging she is well settled here the judge concluded it had not
       been shown it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave.

   14. The judge then went on to consider the public interest considerations
       in section 117B of the 2002 Act. The judge acknowledges that the 3rd
       child is a qualifying child but nevertheless again concluded it would
       be reasonable to expect her to leave. The earlier reference in
       paragraph 112 to neither the 3rd or 4th appellants being in the
       United Kingdom for over 7 years appears to be a mistake, with the
       judge presumably intending to write the 4th and 5th appellant.

Conclusions.

   15. It is clear that this is a carefully prepared decision in which the
       judge has set out the factual background and made appropriate
       findings of fact. There is also a detailed consideration of legal
       principles. The challenge is based upon the position of the 3rd
       appellant.

   16. It is clear from reading the decision that the judge appreciated her
       position had to be specifically considered because she passed the 7
       year benchmark. The judge concluded that she, along with the rest of
       her family, could return to Malawi. The decision does indicate that
       the judge did weigh up relevant factors. However, the argument is
       that whilst the judge referred to the need for powerful reasons to
       justify the removal of a child those reasons are not adequately set
       out.

   17. Para 13 of MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705 points out para 276ADE(iv)
       and section 117B(6) are similarly framed: both require seven years'
       residence and in both a critical question is whether it would be
       unreasonable for the child to be expected to leave the UK. The seven
       years' residence is not calculated in precisely the same way but on
       the facts of the present appeal the eldest child is covered by both.



   18. Reference was made to the Secretary of State's published guidance in
       August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate Instructions
       entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10
       Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated that once the seven
       years' residence requirement is satisfied, there needs to be "strong
       reasons" for refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). There is now the guidance
       of February 2018 which postdates the decision this appeal.

   19. Para 46 of the judgement states:

         "After such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links in the UK such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when the children are very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on their families,
         but the disruption becomes more serious as they get older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK with
         his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

   20. At para 49 the court said:

         "... the fact that the child has been in the UK for seven years
         would need to be given significant weight in the proportionality
         exercise for two related reasons: first, because of its relevance
         to determining the nature and strength of the child's best
         interests; and second, because it establishes as a starting point
         that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to
         the contrary."

   21. As stated, the decision has been most carefully prepared and there is
       reference to the times when her parents were here without leave.
       However, there is no indication from the decision that their
       behaviour otherwise was so reprehensible that the public interest
       favoured removal of the whole family. It is on this rather narrow
       point I find the judge materially erred in law in what otherwise is a
       sound decision. I find it was necessary for the judge to have set out
       precisely what were the clear cogent reasons that would justify the
       removal of the 3rd appellant in light of the 7 year provision.

Remaking the decision.

   22. The relevant facts are already set out and both parties before me are
       in agreement if I find an error of law I can remake the decision
       based on that existing information. On the facts I find that it would
       not be reasonable to require the eldest child to leave the UK. In the
       absence of evidence that the behaviour of the 1st 2 appellants has
       been such as to require in the interests of public policy the
       family's removal or other strong considerations it is my conclusion
       that the appeals succeed based upon the position of the 3rd
       appellant.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope materially errs in law and
is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeal of all the
appellants on the basis of article 8.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
