

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:
                                                           HU/11178/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2021                            |On 3 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                  Toran [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  further  to  my  directions  of  5
January 2021.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 2 May 1998.  He  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 2 May 2007 with  his  family,  aged  nine  years.  The
family entered on a six month visit visa and the appellant's father  claimed
asylum on 14 June 2007 with the rest of the  family  as  dependents  on  his
claim. The asylum claim was refused and a removal decision was  made  on  15
January 2010. An appeal against that decision was dismissed  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal and the family became appeal rights exhausted on 17  September
2010. The appellant's father made various further submissions as well as  an
Article 8 claim, all of which were refused.

On 2 April 2015 the appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain  on
family and private life grounds, in his own right, which was refused  on  22
June 2015. He appealed against that decision and his appeal was  allowed  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Porter on 24 November 2016,  following  a  hearing
on 20 September 2016. The respondent was not represented  at  that  hearing.
The judge  made  his  decision  without  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the
appellant had been convicted on 22 November 2016 for possession with  intent
to supply Class A and B drugs, namely heroin, crack  cocaine  and  cannabis.
The appellant was sentenced, on 25 November 2016, to 39 months  in  a  young
offender institution on two counts, and one month on the  third  count,  all
to run concurrently.

On 10 December 2016 the appellant was served with a Notice  of  Decision  to
Deport, notifying him that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  applied
and  inviting  representations.   The   appellant's   representatives   made
representations in response, on 4 January 2017, on Article 8 grounds.

In light of the previous allowed appeal, the appellant was granted leave  to
remain  until  30  April  2021  on  private  life  grounds  under  paragraph
276ADE(1). His parents and brothers were granted leave separately  until  14
February 2021.

However, on 18 June 2019 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  the
appellant's human rights claim of 4 January 2017, following the  signing  of
a Deportation Order on 11 June 2019. In the decision of 18  June  2019,  the
respondent noted that the family  life  exception  to  deportation  did  not
apply, as no family life was claimed in the  UK,  and  considered  that  the
appellant did not meet the private life exception in paragraph  399A  as  he
had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life  and  it  was
not accepted that he was socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK  or
that there were very significant obstacles to his integration  in  Pakistan.
The respondent did not accept that there were very compelling  circumstances
outweighing the public interest in deportation.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Khan on 24  October  2019  and  was  allowed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 21 November 2019.

Following the grant of permission to the respondent to appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal, the matter was listed for an error of  law  hearing  on  24  March
2020. However, in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
of Covid-19, the hearing was vacated and, in the absence  of  any  objection
by the appellant's representatives, the error of law  issue  was  determined
without a hearing, under rule 34, as follows:

         "12. Written submissions have been received from  Mr  T  Melvin  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State, from which  it  is  evident  that
         there is no objection to a decision being made on the error of  law
         matter without a hearing. There  has  been  no  response  from  the
         appellant. I note that the appellant's representatives emailed  the
         Upper Tribunal on 16 March 2020 advising that they were  unable  to
         take  matters  forward  as  they  did  not  have   their   client's
         instructions. That was addressed by the President in his  Note  and
         Directions sent out on 8 April 2020, whereby he stated at [7]  that
         the representatives, Marks & Marks Solicitors, had not come off the
         record and were therefore properly served with the directions,  and
         that they were able to leave a voicemail for the appellant to  seek
         instructions with regard to the  directions.  Nothing  further  has
         been received from those solicitors and there is no indication that
         they have come off the record. In the circumstances, and given  the
         direction given by the President at [3], I  see  no  reason  why  I
         cannot proceed to determine this matter under rule  34.  I  do  not
         consider that any issues of unfairness  arise  from  my  doing  so,
         given the clear indication  in  the  directions.  Furthermore,  the
         errors made by the judge are clear and I do not consider  that  the
         appellant would be able to defend the decision even if he  were  to
         make submissions.


         13. As the respondent's submissions properly  identify,  the  judge
         did not have regard to  the  correct  version  of  the  immigration
         rules, in particular paragraph 399A  (see  [9]  and  [43])  and  he
         failed to make any clear or proper findings on  the  exceptions  to
         deportation under the immigration rules and  section  117C  of  the
         2002 Act. Having found at [38] that  the  appellant  had  only  had
         lawful residence in the UK from 24 November 2016, he could not have
         found that the requirements of paragraph 399A were met. As such, he
         was required to consider whether there  were  any  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above the family and private life exceptions
         in paragraph 399 and 399A, which he plainly failed to do.  Instead,
         the judge simply considered whether the appellant's deportation was
         disproportionate, and in so doing he applied incorrect criteria. He
         gave particular weight to the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Porter in his previous decision of 24 November  2016  allowing  the
         appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds, having no  regard  to  the
         fact that that appeal  had  been  allowed  solely  under  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules, without  any  knowledge  of
         the  appellant's  criminal  offending  and   convictions   and   in
         circumstances where deportation was not an issue.


         14. In  the  circumstances,  the  judge's  decision  is  materially
         flawed, being based upon an incorrect consideration of the relevant
         immigration rules, the  application  of  incorrect  and  irrelevant
         criteria  and  without  any  identification  of   very   compelling
         circumstances  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
         Accordingly, I set aside Judge Khan's decision.


         15. However, I do not  agree  with  Mr  Melvin  that  it  would  be
         appropriate to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
         basic factual  circumstances,  as  found  by  the  Judge,  are  not
         challenged. The challenge is to  the  judge's  application  of  the
         relevant  immigration  rules  and   criteria   to   those   factual
         circumstances. Accordingly,  the  appropriate  course  is  for  the
         matter to be retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision to  be
         re-made. The matter will therefore be listed for a resumed  hearing
         on that basis.

The case was then listed for a  face-to-face  hearing  on  6  January  2021.
However, following further  directions  sent  to  the  parties  and  further
developments in the case, the  hearing  was  adjourned  with  the  following
directions made:


                           "NOTICE AND DIRECTIONS


      1. This case is listed for a resumed, face-to-face hearing tomorrow, 6
         January 2020. However, further to the appellant's solicitor's email
         of today's  date  with  the  suggestion  of  an  adjournment  to  a
         different date for a remote hearing, and given the current  changed
         circumstances relating to coronavirus, I consider it appropriate to
         adjourn the hearing.


      2.  In light of the request previously  made  by  the  respondent,  as
         referred to at [15] of my decision dated 19 May 2020, and given the
         delay  that  has  occurred  owing  to  coronavirus,   the   further
         developments in this case and the need for  further  oral  evidence
         and findings of  fact,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would  now  be
         appropriate for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard afresh before a different judge.


      3. It is therefore  proposed  that  a  short  decision  will  be  made
         disposing of the matter in the Upper  Tribunal  and  remitting  the
         case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing.  Any
         objection to this proposal is to be made in writing  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, copied to the other party, no later than 5pm on Wednesday
         13 January 2021.  In the absence of any reasonable objection or any
         response to the proposal, a decision will be made in such terms."

There has been  no  response  and  no  objection  to  the  proposal  in  the
directions from either party and, as such, having  set  aside  Judge  Khan's
decision, I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo,
with no findings preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge aside from Judge Khan.









Signed:  S. Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 20 January
2021
