
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11938/2016
                                                               HU/11944/2016
                                                               HU/11945/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2017                               |On 21 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MRS M A
                                   MR D A
                                   MR Q A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  To  avoid  confusion  I  will  refer  to  the
    appellant as the Entry Clearance Officer and to the respondents to this
    appeal as the claimants.

 3. The claimants are mother and sons and they are Pakistani nationals born
    respectively on [ ] 1946, [ ] 2000 and [ ] 2005.  They applied to  come
    to the United Kingdom for fifteen days for a family  visit.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused  entry  clearance  on  16  March  2016.   The
    claimants appealed against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 18 December 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    R Caswell allowed the claimants' appeals.

 5. The claimants applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to make a  fee  award.   That  application  was
    considered and on 22  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    refused permission to appeal.

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  On 14  June  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro granted the Entry Clearance Officer permission  to
    appeal.  However, it appears that the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    file a notice of appeal in January 2017 with regard to this case.

 7. Following correspondence between the administrative staff of the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Home Office, the matter  came  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jordan who, in a decision of 30 June 2017, refused to extend time
    and refused to grant permission to appeal.  Judge Jordan considered the
    email correspondence between the Upper  Tribunal  administrative  staff
    and the Home Office.  It would appear that an application was processed
    on 24 January 2017.  However,  as  Judge  Jordan  sets  out  no  actual
    application on these appeals were received by the Upper Tribunal on  24
    January.  At paragraph 5 of  Judge  Jordan's  reasons  he  set  out  "I
    construe this as meaning that no application was made in HU/11939,-44,-
    45/2016 on 24 January 2017 although another application was made in  an
    unrelated case".  Judge Jordan went on to consider whether  or  not  to
    extend time for an appeal.  Judge Jordan considered whether time  ought
    to be extended in this  case  but  decided  to  refuse  the  respondent
    permission to appeal.

 8. The matter had already been listed for a hearing on 28  July  2017  and
    Judge Jordan indicated that that hearing should go ahead in the context
    of a much  more  limited  scope  resulting  from  his  refusal  of  the
    respondent's application for permission to  appeal.   The  only  matter
    therefore that appeared to be in contention with  whether  or  not  the
    claimants  can  appeal  against  an  order  for  costs.   Judge  Jordan
    indicated that he could not find any grant of permission to  appeal  to
    the claimants.

 9. Having reviewed the file  and  as  set  out  above  it  is  clear  that
    permission to appeal against the refusal  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to award a fee was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell.
    I do not have on file any application or renewed application to  appeal
    against that decision to the Upper Tribunal.  Therefore I consider that
    there are no outstanding matters.  However, if it is  to  be  construed
    that (giving the most favourable  interpretation)  the  claimants  have
    renewed an application for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to make a fee award)  I  refuse  permission  to
    appeal.  It is clear that the judge considered whether or not to  award
    a fee and has given an entirely valid reason for refusing  to  award  a
    fee.

10. As permission to appeal has  not  been  granted  to  either  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer or the  claimants  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.







Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 21 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

