
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11266/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               ABDOULAYE DOSSO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, instructed by Kamberley Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are  in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I  have  recorded.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast born  on  7  June  1975.
    He appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Young,
    promulgated on 6 November  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The following factual matters are accepted. The Appellant  entered  the
    UK using a false identity card  on  30  November  1999.  The  Appellant
    claimed asylum in the  name  of  Mussenge  Massamba  Eric  born  on  12
    December 1980 in the Democratic Republic of  Congo  [DRC].  His  asylum
    claim in that identity was refused. He thereafter married a French lady
    named Jessica and, using the name Dosso, he made an application  for  a
    residence card. This was refused on the basis that the marriage was one
    of convenience and his appeal was dismissed in August 2010.

3.   The Appellant gave evidence at the appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Young that he had not made a claim for  asylum  in  the  name  of
    Abdoulaye Dosso on the basis that he would be at risk of persecution on
    return to the DRC because he was gay. The judge rejected his claim that
    he would be at risk because of his sexuality and found that his account
    could not be relied on because he had used two different identities  to
    pursue different applications in the UK.  There was no challenge in the
    grounds of appeal to the judge's findings at [51] to [59].

4.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the judge failed  to
    take into account that the  Appellant  first  claimed  asylum  when  he
    entered the UK in December  1999  and  therefore  he  had  sufficiently
    demonstrated his presence since that date. It was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant would have spent twenty years in the UK within a month of the
    hearing. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on  the
    following grounds:

         "The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant  who  appeared
         before it was the same individual who entered the United Kingdom on
         3 November 1999 (paragraph  55)  and  by  the  date  on  which  the
         decision was written (3 November 2019) and promulgated (6  November
         2019), the Appellant had on this finding been in the United Kingdom
         for twenty years. Although not  at  the  date  of  application,  in
         substance, it is arguable that he met the requirement in  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules of long residence such that
         his appeal on human rights  grounds  should  be  allowed  for  that
         reason alone.


         The other grounds of appeal are unlikely to be material in light of
         the above, particularly as they go to  the  issue  of  whether  the
         Appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration
         either in the DRC or in the Ivory Coast and as it does  not  appear
         that the Appellant has claimed asylum  or  pursued  his  appeal  on
         grounds of sexuality. However, I  do  not  restrict  the  grant  of
         permission to exclude these grounds."


5.    Judge  Jackson  gave  directions  for  further  submissions  including
    whether the error of law decision could  be  made  on  the  papers.  In
    response to those directions, the Appellant  made  further  submissions
    dated 17 July 2020 which were relied on by Ms Shaw.  It  was  submitted
    the Appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules. In the alternative,  the
    judge made an error of law  in  the  Article  8  exercise  outside  the
    Immigration Rules in focusing on the absence of  evidence  of  extended
    family ties and the  quality  of  such  relationships  which  were  not
    required given the Appellant's 20  years'  residence  in  the  UK.  The
    matters relied on by the judge were irrelevant to whether a person  has
    a private life. It was submitted that private life is a  broad  concept
    incapable of exhaustive definition. The judge ignored  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's private life such as working in  the  UK  and  his  lengthy
    residence. Further, the judge failed to apply the criteria  in  Razgar.
    It was submitted, if an error of law was found, the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Oral submissions

6.   Ms Shaw submitted it was accepted the Appellant arrived in  the  UK  on
    30 November 1999. The judge's reference at [55] of the  decision  to  3
    November 1999 was obviously an error. She submitted  the  judge  should
    have had in mind the Appellant's length of residence in carrying out an
    Article 8 assessment and the judge had not done so. This was not a  new
    matter because it was considered at paragraphs 12 to 17 of the  refusal
    letter. There was substantial evidence of  long  residence  before  the
    Respondent. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  written  on  3
    November 2019 which is  the  same  day  of  the  month  given  for  the
    Appellant's entry to the UK in 1999, therefore the  judge  should  have
    had in mind the lengthy residence. There was a material  error  of  law
    and the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   Mr Melvin submitted a copy of the Appellant's CID record  which  showed
    he arrived in the UK at 22.44 on 30 November 1999.  He  relied  on  his
    Rule 24 response dated 30  October  2020  in  which  he  submitted  the
    judge's decision was based on the evidence before him at  the  date  of
    hearing, 30  September  2019,  some  four  to  five  weeks  before  the
    Appellant would have completed 20  years'  residence  in  the  UK.  The
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The
    refusal notice did not accept there was any evidence prior to 2003. The
    application form which the Appellant completed stated he entered  on  1
    December 1999. There was no material error of law in  failing  to  give
    weight to the finding that the Appellant arrived on 3 November 1999.

8.   Mr Melvin submitted it was clear from the  judge's  findings  that  the
    Appellant was totally without credibility and had sought to deceive the
    Respondent and Tribunal at various stages of his stay here. The judge's
    findings were sustainable and there was no  error  of  law.  Should  an
    error of law be found this would be a new  matter  and  the  Respondent
    refused consent for it to be  heard  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Appellant
    should provide  evidence  to  show  how  he  can  meet  the  continuous
    residence test.

9.   Mr Melvin submitted the Appellant had not met the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules at the date of application or the  date  of  hearing.
    The judge had struggled with the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  double
    identity and lack of credibility. There  was  a  lack  of  evidence  of
    family life.  The  judge  was  entitled  on  the  facts  to  reach  the
    conclusions he did.  The Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules
    and there was nothing outside the Immigration Rules to warrant a  grant
    of leave. There was no evidence outside the  numerous  applications  to
    show 20 years' continuous residence.

10.  In response to questions from me, Ms Shaw confirmed that there  was  no
    challenge to the judge's findings at [51] to [59].  I confirmed that at
    [60] the judge stated: "In any event, as is pointed out in  the  letter
    of  refusal,  the  Appellant  would  fall  foul  of   the   suitability
    requirements in S-LTR.2.2 and 4.2 of  Appendix  FM  given  the  use  of
    false/assumed names and the marriage being found to be a sham." Ms Shaw
    did not seek to challenge that finding and relied on the submissions of
    17 July 2020.

11.  Ms Shaw submitted  there  had  been  inadequate  consideration  of  the
    lengthy period of  residence  in  the  UK  in  the  judge's  Article  8
    assessment.  The  Appellant  had  sought  to  put   evidence   of   his
    relationship with his siblings before the judge but a  request  for  an
    adjournment to allow witnesses to attend had been refused. I noted that
    it was not apparent from the decision that an adjournment  request  had
    been made at the hearing and there was no challenge to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision on that basis. It was  not  argued  in  the  grounds.
    Notwithstanding, Ms Shaw submitted there was an  inadequate  Article  8
    assessment given the Appellant's lengthy residence and the  substantial
    evidence  of  employment  in  the  UK.  She  accepted  that   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) was not met.

Conclusion and Reasons

12.  The judge made the following findings at [61] to [63]:

         "61. For the matter to be considered outside the Immigration  Rules
             there would require to be substantial and weighty reasons.  It
             is said in this case that the weighty  reasons  would  be  the
             length of time that the Appellant has been in the country  and
             the private life which he will have established.  No  evidence
             was given from the Appellant's siblings.  No  statements  were
             available. I could not consider  that  he  had  established  a
             family life with his siblings beyond normal emotional ties. So
             far as private life is concerned, I have no information  about
             his brothers and sisters and what they do, how often  he  sees
             them,  whether  they  are  leading  independent  lives   quite
             separate from him.


         62.  I have no doubt that he  will  have  other  acquaintances  but
             there is a paucity of information as to the  private  life  of
             the Appellant. In any event in any application  under  Article
             8, section 117B of the 2002 Act  requires  to  be  taken  into
             account. In that respect it is stated that little weight is to
             be given to private  life  established  when  an  individual's
             immigration status is precarious. That is the case here.


         63.  So far as the length of time in the country is concerned  that
             is substantial.  However, Article 8 is not a measure that  can
             be used as an excuse for a 'near  miss'  to  comply  with  the
             Rules.  Given the lack of information  about  private  life  I
             consider that despite the length of time  that  the  Appellant
             has been in the country the appeal should not be allowed".


13.  It is accepted, on the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules. It is apparent  from
    reading [61] to [63] that the judge took into account  the  Appellant's
    length  of  residence,  which  he  described  as  substantial,  in  his
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules. The  argument  that  he  has
    failed to attach sufficient weight to this aspect is not made out.

14.   On  the  facts  of  this  case,  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy   the
    Immigration Rules.  It  is  accepted  he  does  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii).  It  has  never  been  suggested  that  there  are  any
    insurmountable obstacles to return to the Ivory Coast and there was  no
    challenge to  the  judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    proposed country of return. Given that the Appellant cannot satisfy the
    Immigration  Rules  substantial  weight  is  attached  to  the   public
    interest, which the judge recognised in  his  balancing  exercise.  The
    judge found there was very little evidence of the  Appellant's  private
    life before him. In any event, given the application of  section  117B,
    little weight should be attached  to  that  private  life  because  the
    Appellant has remained in the UK illegally for many years.

15.  The failure to set out  the  five  step  approach  in  Razgar  was  not
    material. The judge accepted the  Appellant  had  a  private  life  and
    accepted his lengthy residence. On the evidence before the judge, steps
    1 to 4 of Razgar, are satisfied.  The  judge  considered  all  relevant
    matters in the proportionality assessment.

16.  I find there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality. At the date of the application  and  at  the  date  of
    hearing, the Appellant did not have 20 years' residence. The  grant  of
    permission was made on the basis the Appellant arrived in the UK  on  3
    November 1999. It is accepted the  Appellant  arrived  on  30  November
    1999. Therefore, the Appellant did not have 20 years' residence in  the
    UK at the time the decision was made or promulgated.

17.  At the date of this hearing before me,  the  Appellant  has  20  years'
    residence in the UK. It is open to the Appellant to make an application
    to the Respondent submitting sufficient evidence to show that residence
    has been continuous.

18.  Accordingly, I find there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision,
    promulgated on 6 November 2019, dismissing the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

