

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11351/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2019                                   |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                RANJIT KAKANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a 36 year old citizen of India.  He has  appealed
          against  a  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   ('FTT')   Judge
          Chamberlain sent on 31 January 2019, in  which  his  human  rights
          appeal on Article 8 grounds was dismissed.

Background facts

       2. The appellant arrived  in  the  UK  as  a  student  in  2005.   He
          remained in that capacity until he was granted leave to remain  as
          a Tier 1 General Migrant on 4 March 2010, for  three  years.   His
          application for further leave was refused on 30 October 2013,  but
          his appeal against that  decision  was  unsuccessful.   He  became
          appeal-rights exhausted on 21 July 2014.  He made various  further
          applications to remain after this.  It  is  not  necessary  to  go
          into the detail of these because they did not result in the  grant
          of any leave.


       3. On 4 May 2017 the appellant made an application to remain  in  the
          UK, based upon his private life  and  his  family  life  with  his
          partner.  She is not a British citizen but is said to be  lawfully
          in the  UK  as  a  student,  and  is  completing  her  PhD.   This
          application was refused by the respondent, for  reasons  contained
          in a decision dated  8  May  2018.   In  summary,  the  respondent
          concluded that there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
          life in India, the requirements of 276ADE are not  met  and  there
          would  be  no  breach  of  Articles  8  and   3   of   the   ECHR.
          Significantly, the respondent noted that there was  evidence  from
          Dr Idris that the appellant is unfit to travel  but  that  he  did
          not address  the  fact  that  the  respondent  can  put  in  place
          appropriate safeguards during travel and provide a suitable after-
          care package for his arrival  in  India.   The  respondent  states
          this in the decision:


                 "However, Dr Idris does not state that you would  be  unfit
                 to travel with appropriate safeguards being  put  in  place
                 prior to your flight."


       4. The  grounds  of  appeal  against  this  decision  rely  upon  the
          following:


              i) There are exceptional circumstances to support a breach  of
                 Article 8 including the  following:  the  appellant  has  a
                 serious  health  condition;  he  pays  privately  for   his
                 healthcare; his condition developed whilst he was  detained
                 in the UK; he does not have  family  or  other  support  in
                 India and his health would deteriorate; he would  lose  all
                 meaningful contact with his partner who will remain in  the
                 UK.


             ii) Dr Idris has not had  an  opportunity  to  comment  on  the
                 possible appropriate safeguards that could be put in  place
                 for the appellant's flight from the UK to India.

       5. At the hearing before the FTT on 15  January  2019  the  appellant
          was represented by his solicitor, Mr Khan.  The appellant did  not
          attend the hearing but his partner  attended  and  gave  evidence.
          In a comprehensive decision,  the  FTT  dismissed  the  appeal  on
          human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant  appealed  against   this
          decision, and FTT Judge O'Keefe granted permission to appeal.

Grounds of appeal and hearing

       6. The grounds of appeal  are  two-fold  and  can  be  summarised  as
          follows:


              1) The FTT failed to take into account medical  evidence  said
                 to be relevant to the core of the  appellant's  claim  i.e.
                 medical evidence that established that  the  appellant  did
                 not have "health complaints (chest related)  prior  to  his
                 immigration detention".


              2) The FTT failed to take into account the more recent  letter
                 from Dr Idris dated 10  October  2018  ('the  October  2018
                 letter').


       7. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Bradshaw  confirmed  that  at  all
          material times before the  FTT  and  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
          reliance was placed solely on Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  and  not
          Article 3.  Mr Bradshaw submitted a GP's letter and a letter  from
          Dr Idris dated 1 April 2019, but  accepted  these  would  only  be
          relevant if I found that the FTT decision  contains  an  error  of
          law.

       8. After hearing from Mr Bradshaw in full I indicated that I did  not
          need to hear from Ms Young.  I address Mr  Bradshaw's  submissions
          in more detail below.


Error of law discussion

Ground one - medical evidence regarding detention

       9. It is very difficult to see how the  appellant's  claim  that  the
          chest problems from which he now suffers  were  brought  on  as  a
          result of the respondent's actions in detaining  him  at  Dungavel
          Immigration Removal Centre, could on any legitimate view  be  said
          to be  "the  core"  of  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim.   The
          appellant describes his detention as occurring between 21  October
          2016 and 18 November 2016.  This is a time when the appellant  had
          no leave to remain in the UK.  The  appellant  complains  that  he
          developed a respiratory infection due to unhygienic conditions  in
          detention and then there was delay in taking  him  from  detention
          to hospital for treatment.  The FTT's jurisdiction was limited  to
          determining whether the appellant's removal would  breach  Article
          8 - see Charles  (human  rights  appeal:  scope)  [2018]  UKUT  89
          (IAC).  Mr  Bradshaw  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  did  not
          contend that the respondent had caused him harm and  this  in  and
          of itself  constituted  a  breach  of  Article  8.   He  therefore
          accepted  that  it  was  difficult  to  see  how   the   FTT   had
          jurisdiction  to  determine  the  issue  of   causation   of   the
          appellant's health complaints.  Whilst  a  clear  finding  that  a
          health condition was caused by the respondent's actions  might  be
          a relevant  background  matter,  it  would  not  add  anything  of
          substance to the Article  8  claim  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The
          Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited to the determination  of  human
          rights - see Charles (supra).  That would turn on the strength  of
          the appellant's private and family life in the UK.   It  does  not
          extend  to  determining  the  cause  of  the  appellant's   health
          condition.

      10. In case I am wrong on the issue  of  jurisdiction,  I  invited  Mr
          Bradshaw to demonstrate how in any event ground one  is  made  out
          on its facts.  I indicated that I was particularly  interested  in
          what  aspect  of  the  medical  evidence  available  to  the   FTT
          supported the proposition that the appellant's chest  pains  began
          in detention and what evidence was relied upon to  establish  that
          detention itself caused the chest  pains.   Mr  Bradshaw  accepted
          that this evidence was very  limited  indeed  and  could  only  be
          found in an entry in the GP's notes.  I am satisfied that the  FTT
          carefully  considered  all  the  evidence  relied  upon   by   the
          appellant and was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
          appellant's health complaints were not caused by his detention  in
          the UK - see [19] to [30] of  the  FTT's  decision.   As  the  FTT
          notes at [21], the detention record for 24 October 2016 refers  to
          sharp chest pains occurring most days over the  past  15-20  days.
          The FTT also pointed out at  [22]  and  [23]  that  the  detention
          records indicate that  the  chest  pains  began  well  before  the
          appellant's detention commenced on 21 October 2016.


      11. The grounds of appeal refer to the FTT's conclusion at  [27],  but
          entirely ignore the findings at [21] to [26],  including  Mr  Khan
          not drawing any of the relevant documents to the attention of  the
          FTT and there being no cogent evidence to support the  claim  that
          the chest complaints began during detention.  The  GP's  entry  of
          30 November 2019 (page 25 of the supplementary bundle) is  unclear
          and comes nowhere close  to  establishing  the  claim  that  chest
          pains began in detention for the  first  time  or  that  detention
          caused the chest pains.

      12. Ground one is  totally  without  merit  and  does  not  contain  a
          material error of law.

Ground two - the October 2018 letter

      13. Ground two makes no meaningful effort to explain why  the  October
          2018  letter  provided  any  material  or  significant   evidence,
          different from Dr Idris's  earlier  conclusion  in  his  May  2018
          letter that the  appellant  is  unfit  to  travel.   The  FTT  was
          clearly aware of the May 2018 letter, which  is  to  be  found  at
          page 30 of the bundle. The FTT refers  to  this  letter  at  [37].
          This summarises the appellant's  health  conditions  and  confirms
          that his "oxygen saturation indicates he is unfit to travel".   Dr
          Idris recommends a test in the lung  function  department  if  his
          condition deteriorates.  The October 2018  letter  summarises  the
          appellant's   health   condition   and   refers    to    "symptoms
          deteriorating and regular panic attacks".  This also  states  that
          "it is not suitable for him to travel or fly until further  notice
          as his oxygen saturations are low".


      14. Mr Bradshaw drew my attention to two matters  in  support  of  his
          submission that the failure to refer to the  October  2018  letter
          made a material  difference  to  the  outcome:  the  October  2018
          letter refers to evidence of panic  attacks  and  was  capable  of
          providing a different view on the appellant's credibility.


      15. I invited Mr Bradshaw to explain how the FTT can be said  to  have
          erred in law by not referring to the October 2018 letter, when  it
          was not relied  upon  by  his  own  legal  representative  at  the
          hearing - see [53] of the FTT's decision.  Mr  Bradshaw  indicated
          that the FTT was obliged to consider  this  material  of  its  own
          volition as  it  formed  a  significant  part  of  the  procedural
          history before the FTT, i.e. it was filed and served  pursuant  to
          directions for updated medical evidence.  I do  not  accept  this.
          The FTT's finding that there was  no  evidence  of  regular  panic
          attacks appears to be a mistake of  fact.   This  is  because  the
          October 2018 letter refers to evidence of  regular  panic  attacks
          (albeit this appears  to  be  based  upon  self-reporting).   This
          mistake of fact is not capable of constituting an error of law  in
          accordance with the guidance in E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.   The
          appellant's solicitor failed to refer to the October 2018  letter,
          when he was specifically asked where  the  evidence  was  to  show
          that the appellant could not  travel.   The  appellant's  advisors
          are responsible for the mistake.  Judge  O'Keefe  noted  that  the
          FTT was not referred to the October  2018  letter.   There  is  no
          evidence from the solicitors to indicate otherwise.

      16. In any event, the failure to consider the October 2018  letter  is
          not a material error because the conclusion  on  Article  8  would
          have inevitably been the same.  Even when the October 2018  letter
          is taken at its highest,  it  does  no  more  than  set  out  that
          symptoms have deteriorated (and included panic  attacks)  and  the
          appellant remains unfit to travel or fly.  By the time of the  FTT
          hearing some three months later on 15 January 2019, there  was  no
          up to date evidence regarding the appellant's symptoms or  fitness
          to fly.  Fitness to fly  and  associated  medical  conditions  and
          treatment are fluid matters.

      17. In addition, the October 2018 letter did not address the  possible
          safeguards that could be put in place to ensure  that  the  flight
          to India was safe for the appellant.   This  is  an  issue  raised
          expressly by the respondent in the decision letter, yet there  was
          no  meaningful  attempt  to  address   it   by   the   appellant's
          solicitors.  Mr Bradshaw submitted that the onus remained  on  the
          respondent to identify what safeguards might be put in place.    I
          do not accept this.  A Tribunal is entitled  to  assume  that  the
          respondent will not remove a person  by  aeroplane  unless  it  is
          safe to do so and that where a medical condition requires  special
          arrangements to be made, they will be made.   The  burden  remains
          upon the appellant to establish his claim.  The evidence  from  Dr
          Idris came nowhere close  to  establishing  that  the  appellant's
          removal would breach Article 8.  Dr Idris  has  not  engaged  with
          any  possible  safeguards  to  prevent  a  deterioration  in   the
          appellant's    condition    or    identified    the    outstanding
          investigations to be  completed.   It  is  of  some  concern  that
          having identified that further tests (including  a  lung  function
          test) are necessary in the May letter, it is unclear  which  tests
          have been carried out by the time of the October 2018 letter,  but
          the recommendation that he  completes  a  lung  function  test  is
          merely repeated.


      18. The high watermark of the appellant's Article 8 claim rested  upon
          his claim that his wife (who was in the UK as a student)  was  his
          carer, and the care that she provided was irreplaceable.  The  FTT
          was entitled to reject that claim  for  the  reasons  provided  at
          [34] to [41].  I acknowledge that the FTT  stated  there  was  "no
          evidence" to corroborate the appellant's claim  that  he  suffered
          from panic attacks at [41].   It remains the case that  there  was
          no clear or cogent evidence of this.  As far as panic attacks  are
          concerned, the October 2018 letter does no more  than  repeat  the
          symptoms described by the appellant.


      19. The failure to address the October 2018 letter is not an error  of
          law on the part of the FTT,  because  the  appellant's  own  legal
          representative failed to refer to it.  If I am wrong  about  this,
          I am satisfied that  the  error  of  law  is  not  material.   The
          finding that there would be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
          appellant's integration to  India  and  no  breach  of  Article  8
          remained inevitable even when the October  2018  letter  is  taken
          into account.

Decision

      20. The FTT's decision did not involve the making of an error  of  law
          and I do not set it aside.




Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 May 2019
