
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11240/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 May 2019                  |On 14 May 2019                  |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant, a Sudanese national, applied for entry clearance  as
         the spouse of one who had been recognised as a refugee, pursuant to
         the refugee family reunion provisions set out in paragraph 352A  of
         the Immigration Rules. That application was  refused  on  17  April
         2018 on the basis the Respondent was not  satisfied  the  Appellant
         and sponsor were married prior to his departure from Sudan.
      2. The Appellant's Article 8 appeal against that decision was heard on
         4 February 2019, and it was dismissed by First Tier Tribunal  Judge
         Arullendran in a decision promulgated on 8 February 2019.
      3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  decision  of  19
         March 2019 of First tier Tribunal  Judge  Garratt  because  it  was
         considered arguable that the Judge's approach to the content of the
         sponsor's screening interview, and to  whether  the  Appellant  had
         "family life" with the sponsor, was flawed.
      4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The hearing
      5. The sponsor attended the hearing and confirmed that  the  Appellant
         was no longer legally represented, but wished to proceed  with  the
         appeal. He relied upon the grounds  that  had  been  professionally
         drafted.


    The Appellant's challenge
      6. The central  issue  of  fact  before  the  Judge  was  whether  the
         Appellant and the sponsor had married on 5 June 2009  in  Sudan  as
         they claimed in the course of this appeal, or whether  the  sponsor
         was unmarried when he first arrived in the UK, as he  was  recorded
         as having declared himself to be  when  subject  to  his  screening
         interview. In addressing herself to that issue the Judge considered
         the evidence before her concerning when, and in what circumstances,
         the screening interview was conducted. She also looked at the other
         available evidence that was said to be relevant  to  the  existence
         and formation of the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the
         sponsor, in the form of photographs, a marriage  certificate,  and,
         the sponsor's travel to Egypt. It is clear  when  the  decision  is
         read as a whole that the Judge  did  not  fall  into  the  trap  of
         treating the record of the screening interview as determinative  of
         what was said on that occasion.
      7. The Judge considered she was required to resolve a  dispute  as  to
         whether this interview was conducted immediately after the  sponsor
         was removed from the underside of a lorry having spent two or  more
         days in hiding there without food or  water.  She  concluded,  that
         even if he had travelled in that way to the UK, there had upon  his
         own admission to her been a three day gap between arrival  and  the
         screening interview.  Thus  the  interview  was  not  conducted  in
         circumstances which might explain  a  basic  mistake  over  marital
         status [30]. That finding was well open to her on the evidence, and
         was adequately reasoned. Although paragraph 4 of the professionally
         drafted grounds asserts that no such claim was made by the  sponsor
         in evidence, but the author's notes of the hearing  have  not  been
         produced with the grounds as they suggest will occur, and  nor  has
         the author offered evidence in the form of a witness  statement  to
         confirm their accuracy. Nothing turns on this however, since it  is
         plain that the sponsor's case before me is that he arrived  on  the
         21st and was interviewed on the 24th - as the Judge  concluded  was
         the position. Thus, as she identified, he was not interviewed  when
         in an exhausted hungry and dehydrated condition.
      8. The Judge also noted the sponsor's ability to recall detail, and to
         converse with the interpreter provided, so as to accurately provide
         the names and years of birth  of  each  of  his  parents  and  five
         siblings [31]. Thus she rejected his claim to have been  unable  to
         understand the interpreter. The grounds offer no challenge to  this
         finding.
      9. The Judge also noted the absence of evidence  to  explain  how  the
         Appellant had been able to obtain the issue to her  of  a  marriage
         certificate in 2016, in relation to a ceremony  that  was  said  to
         have taken place in 2009, and concluded that she could place little
         weight upon its existence and content. She also noted  the  wedding
         photographs, and concluded, for the reasons given, that  they  were
         taken in 2017 when the sponsor told her he had visited Egypt. Again
         the grounds offer no challenge to these findings.
     10. In these circumstances the guidance to be found in JA (Afghanistan)
         v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450 offers the Appellant little  assistance.
         The Tribunal is not obliged to place no weight upon the record of a
         screening interview, as the grounds appear to assert. The  guidance
         is to the effect that a careful consideration is  required  of  the
         weight that can be given to the recorded  answer  to  any  specific
         question; that is in my judgement precisely what occurred  in  this
         case. The grounds disclose no arguable error of law in the  Judge's
         approach to the assessment of  the  weight  to  be  given  to  this
         evidence.
     11. The second limb to the grounds is  the  complaint  that  the  Judge
         should not have made the finding that the Appellant and sponsor  do
         not enjoy "family  life"  together.  The  grounds  do  not  however
         identify any error of law that infect this finding  -  they  merely
         complain that in the face of it the Appellant  will  find  it  very
         difficult to succeed in any future  application  made  pursuant  to
         Appendix FM.
     12. In any event, the Judge made findings in the  alternative,  on  the
         hypothesis that "family life" did exist at the date of the hearing,
         albeit it had been created after the sponsor's departure from Sudan
         [38-39].  She  concluded  that  the  balance  lay  firmly  in   the
         Respondent's favour, and the grounds offer no challenge to that.
     13. In the circumstances the grounds disclose no material error of  law
         in the Judge's  approach  to  the  separate  questions  of  whether
         Article 8(1) was engaged by the decision under appeal,  and  if  it
         was, where the balance of proportionality lay under  Article  8(2).
         The Appellant was only able  to  avoid  the  need  to  satisfy  the
         requirements set out in Appendix  FM  (which  include  the  minimum
         income threshold and other requirements), if  she  could  establish
         that the sponsor was her spouse prior to his departure from  Sudan.
         If he was not, then she offered no reason why she should be  placed
         in a better position that the spouse/partner of a British  citizen.
         Thus she offered no reason why she should not be expected  to  make
         an application for  entry  clearance  in  due  course,  paying  the
         requisite fee, that demonstrated she satisfied  the  provisions  of
         the Immigration Rules that  applied  to  her.  There  were  on  the
         evidence placed before the Judge no special circumstances  relating
         to either herself or the sponsor that would have meant  the  public
         interest in obliging her to do so was lessened or absent.
     14. In the circumstances, and as set out above, I am satisfied that the
         Judge did not  fall  into  any  material  error  of  law  when  she
         dismissed the Article 8 appeal, notwithstanding the terms in  which
         permission to appeal was granted. In my judgement the grounds  fail
         to disclose any material error of law in the approach taken by  the
         Judge to the public interest that requires her decision to  be  set
         aside and remade.




    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 8
    February 2019 contained no material error of law  in  the  decision  to
    dismiss  the  Appellant's  human  rights  appeal  which  requires  that
    decision to be set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or  the  sponsor.
    This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being
    brought for contempt of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 10 May 2019

