
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Numbers: HU/11843/2019    |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |HU/11846/2019                    |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 February 2021               |              On 15 February 2021|
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                PUSHPA KARKI
                               RAJENDRA SHAHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms  Bantleman  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Haque  &
Hausmann
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Nepalese nationals who were born on  25  April  1987
    and 2 October 1983 respectively.  They are married.  Their  three  year
    old daughter is named as their dependant.


 2. The appellants appeal against a decision which was issued by Judge  P-J
    S White ("the judge") on  6  January  2020,  dismissing  their  appeals
    against  the  respondent's  refusal  of  their  human  rights   claims.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum.

Background

 3. The appellants entered the United Kingdom on 20 April 2011.  The  first
    appellant held entry clearance as a student, the second appellant  held
    entry clearance as her dependant.  They were granted further  leave  to
    remain in the same capacities on two occasions.  Their leave was due to
    come to an end on 15 June 2016,  but  the  appellants  made  a  further
    application before that date  for  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds.  The nature of the application was  varied  twice  thereafter.
    When it came to be considered by the respondent, it was said to  be  an
    application for Indefinite Leave to Remain on compassionate grounds.

 4. The respondent refused that application as it was  for  a  purpose  not
    covered by the Immigration Rules (paragraph 322(1) refers) and  because
    the appellants did not meet the substantive requirements of the  Rules,
    whether under paragraph  276B  (long  residence)  or  paragraph  276ADE
    (private  life).   The  respondent  did  not  consider  there   to   be
    exceptional circumstances which warranted a grant of  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules with reference to Article 8 ECHR.  She suggested that
    they should claim asylum if they maintained that they were at risk from
    a loan shark in Nepal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellants appealed against the refusal.  Their appeal was  due  to
    be heard on 9 December 2019.  Applications to adjourn the hearing  were
    made on 4 and  6  December  2019.   It  was  said  in  the  first  such
    application that the first appellant was unable to attend  because  she
    had an ectopic pregnancy and because she was suffering from severe back
    pain.  Those applications were refused.  When the judge  came  to  hear
    the appeals, neither appellant appeared and they were not  represented.
    The judge said this about the situation:


         [6] On 4th December 2019 the Tribunal received  a  written  request
         for an adjournment of the hearing. This was on the basis  that  the
         first  appellant  was  pregnant  and  going  through  a  number  of
         complications for which she  had  needed  medical  attention.   The
         bundle had been lodged and the medical evidence in it  revealed  an
         attendance at the Urgent Care Service on 28th November  with  wrist
         and back pain, and a history of chronic  back  pain  recently.   It
         also noted the pregnancy.   The  application  was  refused  on  5th
         December on the basis that there was no medical evidence  that  she
         was unfit to attend.  On 6th December the application was  renewed,
         with a statement from the first appellant that she was not  fit  to
         attend as a result of severe back pain.  She said the hospital  had
         advised complete bed rest but did not produce the letter.  She said
         that her GP was on  holiday  and  therefore  could  not  provide  a
         letter.  That renewed application was refused  on  the  basis  that
         there was still  no  credible  medical  evidence  of  unfitness  to
         attend.


         [7] The renewed application also said that if the adjournment  were
         refused the appellants would wish the appeal to be decided  on  the
         papers available.  It was therefore unsurprising that on the day of
         the hearing there  was  no  attendance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
         appellants.  It was plain that they were aware of the  hearing  and
         absence and unrepresented by their own  choice.   I  was  satisfied
         that it was appropriate to proceed.  The matter having been already
         listed for an oral hearing, I asked [counsel for the respondent] if
         he wished to make any  submissions,  but  he  confined  himself  to
         reliance on the reasons for refusal letter.  I have  taken  account
         of everything I heard and read and shall refer to the evidence  and
         submissions so far as necessary to explain my findings and reasons.

 6. The judge then made findings which I can summarise fairly shortly.   He
    was satisfied that the refusal under paragraph 322(1)  was  correct  in
    law: [8].  There was no claim under Appendix FM, nor could  there  have
    been.  The judge was not satisfied that there would be very significant
    obstacles  to  the  appellants'  reintegration  to  Nepal.   The  judge
    considered the claim that the appellants were in fear of a  loan  shark
    as part of his assessment of that claim under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Rules.  He noted that it had not been made in  its  proper  form
    [12]; that there was an almost complete absence of detail to  it  [13];
    and that the appellants had chosen not to attend to give evidence about
    this risk, which was said to include a threat  to  the  life  of  their
    daughter: [14].  The judge noted that even if the first  appellant  was
    unfit to attend (which had not been shown), there was no  reason  given
    for the second appellant not attending the hearing  to  speak  to  that
    risk.  There was nothing about the subject in  the  second  appellant's
    statement and that there was an inconsistency in the statements:  [15].
     The letter from the first appellant's mother was not corroborative  of
    the account and there was no other supportive evidence: [16]-[17].  The
    judge was not satisfied to the lower standard that there was  any  such
    threat: [18].


 7. Addressing what he described as the balance of the claim at  [19]-[24],
    the judge did not consider  the  remaining  matters  described  in  the
    evidence to establish a claim under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The  judge
    considered the claim that it would  be  too  hot  for  the  appellants'
    daughter in Nepal to be bare assertion, as  was  the  claim  that  they
    would be too old to  secure  employment.   There  was  no  evidence  to
    support the claim that the reconstruction in Nepal after the earthquake
    had been inadequate and, in any event,  no  weight  could  properly  be
    attached to the document which purported to confirm  earthquake  damage
    to the family home.  Taking all matters  into  account,  including  the
    first appellant's medical conditions, the judge did not accept that the
    threshold in paraph 276ADE(1)(vi) had been crossed.

 8. As for Article 8 ECHR, the judge reminded himself that it was necessary
    to consider that claim outwith the Immigration Rules.   He  noted  that
    the appellants had entered in 2011 and that they  had  a  young  child:
    [25].  He had regard, as a primary consideration, to the best interests
    of the appellants' daughter, and concluded that  they  were  served  by
    remaining with her parents: [26].  The public interest  outweighed  the
    private life claim which the appellants relied upon: [27].   The  judge
    was satisfied that the interference by the decisions was  proportionate
    and the appeal was dismissed on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  accordingly:
    [28].




The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  The grounds of appeal which
    were presented to the FtT, as settled by  the  appellant's  solicitors,
    complained  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  proceeding  without   the
    appellants and that he had failed to consider  the  totality  of  their
    claim under Article 8 ECHR.  Permission to appeal was  refused  by  FtT
    Judge Boyes.


10. Grounds of appeal settled by Ms Bantleman of counsel were presented  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The first ground was the same, albeit that it  was
    fleshed out and Judge Boyes was criticised, correctly,  for  suggesting
    that the test was whether  the  judge's  decision  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's absence could only be challenged on appeal if he had  acted
    in bad faith.  The second ground was that the judge had  erred  in  his
    self-direction regarding the burden of proof, in that he had  suggested
    that the burden rested on the appellants, whereas the burden as regards
    proportionality lay upon the respondent.

11. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted  permission  with  some  hesitation,
    noting  that  the  medical  evidence  in  support  of  the  adjournment
    application was rather  unsatisfactory.   On  the  facts,  however,  he
    considered it arguable that the judge's  decision  to  proceed  in  the
    absence of  the  appellants  was  unfair.   He  considered  ground  two
    unmeritorious, but he granted permission on both grounds.

Submissions

12. In her admirably concise submissions, Ms Bantleman confirmed  that  the
    adjournment applications which had been made on 4 and 6  December  2019
    had been supported by a discharge summary from  Greenwich  Urgent  Care
    Team and nothing further.  She reminded me that  there  was  additional
    medical evidence in the appellants'  bundle,  however.   She  submitted
    that the Upper Tribunal should consider, on the basis of  the  evidence
    before the FtT, whether the judge's decision to proceed in the  absence
    of the appellants was fair.  The position, she submitted,  was  simple:
    the appellants had been denied  the  right  to  a  fair  hearing  by  a
    procedurally unfair decision.  The judge had failed to consider whether
    the appeal could be justly determined in the absence of the  appellants
    and he had failed to consider the over-riding  objective.   There  were
    points taken against the appellants which the appellants had not had an
    opportunity to address.


13. Ms Bantleman accepted that the medical evidence from Greenwich UCC  was
    'not ideal', in that it did not state  that  the  first  appellant  was
    unfit to attend the hearing.  Even if the judge was not satisfied  that
    the appellants were unable to attend, however,  he  should  still  have
    considered whether the appeal  could  be  justly  determined  in  their
    absence.  Given that the judge had concerns about  their  evidence  and
    that they had no opportunity to address those concerns, he was required
    to adjourn the hearing to give them that  opportunity.   That  was  the
    case whether or not the first appellant and her  solicitors  had  asked
    for the appeal to be heard in their absence.

14. I did not need to call on  Mr  Clarke  to  respond  to  Ms  Bantleman's
    submissions.  I indicated  that  the  appeal  would  be  dismissed  for
    reasons which would follow in writing.

Analysis

15. By the time these linked appeals were called on before the judge  on  9
    December 2019, two adjournment applications had  been  refused  on  the
    papers.  The first was refused by Designated Judge Shaerf, on the basis
    that there was no medical evidence that the first appellant was  unable
    to attend the hearing.


16. The application was presented again, this time with a letter  from  the
    first appellant in which she stated that she had severe back  pain  and
    early pregnancy complications.  She had attended hospital on  a  number
    of occasions.  She stated that she had been advised by the hospital  to
    take complete bed rest and that she was unable to provide a letter from
    her GP, who was on holiday.  She asked the Tribunal to 'hold my hearing
    ... on our submitted documents (paper hearing) as I am not well and fit
    to attend the tribunal'.

17. The appellants' solicitors renewed application  was  in  the  following
    terms:


         We write with reference to the above named  in  relation  to  their
         appeal hearing scheduled on 9 December 2019.


         Please find the statement of  the  appellant  in  support  of  this
         renewed application for adjournment; please note that there  is  no
         further medical evidence available.  We would be  grateful  if  the
         learned duty judge grants adjournment in the interests  of  justice
         and fairness.


         If the application is refused, we would respectfully  ask  to  deal
         with the matter on a paper basis.


         We look forward to hearing from you shortly.  Meanwhile, should you
         require any further assistance, please do not hesitate  to  contact
         us.

18. That application was refused by Designated Judge Peart, who noted  that
    there was still no credible medical evidence that the  first  appellant
    was unable to attend.


19. I am bound to  observe  that  the  Designated  Judges'  decisions  were
    necessarily correct on  the  evidence  presented  to  them.   The  only
    medical evidence was a discharge summary from an Accident and Emergency
    department in Greenwich, which recorded that the  first  appellant  had
    presented there with backpain and had been diagnosed  with  an  ectopic
    pregnancy[1] and sciatica.  She had been prescribed co-dydramol,  given
    'advice on fluid intake and rest'  and  advised  to  attend  the  early
    pregnancy unit.  There was no suggestion that she was unable to  attend
    court or any other appointment.  In any  event,  there  was  never  any
    suggestion that the second appellant was unable to attend court for any
    reason.  It was perfectly fair, in all of these circumstances, for  the
    Designated Judges to refuse the applications for the reasons that  they
    gave.

20. I make those observations by way of background because (as Ms Bantleman
    recognises), this appeal is against the decision which was  reached  by
    the judge following a hearing on 9 December  2019.   At  that  hearing,
    there was no application to adjourn.  There was no attendance by or  on
    behalf of the appellants.  The  first  appellant  and  the  appellants'
    solicitors had invited the  Tribunal  to  proceed  on  the  papers  and
    counsel for the respondent  was  content  to  rely  on  the  letter  of
    refusal.

21. The first question which arises, therefore, is whether it was fair  for
    the judge not to adjourn the appeal of his own volition.  I ask  myself
    the question in that way because  a  decision  which  was  procedurally
    unfair is erroneous in law and must be set aside: Serafin v  Malkiewicz
    [2020] UKSC 23; [2020] 1 WLR 2455.  There is  no  requirement,  as  was
    suggested by the judge who refused permission in the FtT, to  show  bad
    faith on the part of the judge below, and whether a  particular  course
    was fair or not is a question of law.  Ms  Bantleman's  submissions  in
    these respects are correct.

22. It was certainly fair for the judge to proceed to determine the  appeal
    in the absence of the appellants.  He had been asked to do so  by  both
    parties and the medical evidence  -  from  Greenwich  UCC  and  in  the
    appellants'  bundle  -  continued  not  to  establish  that  the  first
    appellant was unable to attend the  hearing.   There  was  no  evidence
    which began to establish (or even to claim) any reason that the  second
    appellant was unable to attend the hearing.  In her grounds  of  appeal
    and her clear oral submissions, Ms  Bantleman  states  on  instructions
    that the second appellant was required to stay at home  to  look  after
    their young daughter but that was not said  to  the  FtT  and  was  not
    supported by any evidence.  The only  realistic  conclusion  -  on  the
    evidence presented to the judge - was that the appellants  had  decided
    not to attend the hearing, or to instruct their solicitors  to  do  so.
    It was entirely fair, in those circumstances,  for  the  judge  not  to
    adjourn the hearing of his own volition and to proceed (under  rule  28
    of the FtT's Procedure Rules) to hear the  appeal  in  the  appellants'
    absence.  The judge's [7] shows clearly that he had that rule in  mind;
    that he considered the appellants to have absented  themselves  through
    choice; and that he considered it 'appropriate  to  proceed'.   Nothing
    more was required, in my judgment, and I reject the submission that the
    judge was required on the facts of this case to set out the over-riding
    objective in his written decision.  He plainly had the  relevant  facts
    and the relevant considerations in mind.

23. There was no reason to think  that  the  appeal  could  not  be  justly
    determined in the appellants' absence.  Indeed,  that  was  the  course
    which the judge had been invited to take by the first appellant and the
    representatives.  I reject the submission, made by Ms Bantleman at [25]
    of her grounds of appeal, that fairness 'demanded' that the  appeal  be
    adjourned so that the appellants could attend.  The first appellant had
    asserted that she was unable to attend.  There was no adequate evidence
    in support of that assertion.  The second appellant  had  not  asserted
    that he was unable to attend.  Fairness did not demand that the hearing
    be adjourned in these circumstances, and  the  appellants  -  who  were
    legally represented throughout -  would  have  appreciated  that  their
    failure to attend would have denied them the opportunity to  advance  a
    positive case and to respond to concerns in the mind of the judge.  The
    judge was plainly entitled to have concerns about the evidence, and  to
    hold against the appellants their failure  to  attend  the  hearing  in
    order to answer those concerns.   That was not the result of an  unfair
    procedure; it was the result of a choice which the appellants had  made
    with the benefit of legal advice.

24. In all the circumstances, I consider the proper  resolution  of  ground
    one to be clear.  The judge's decision not to adjourn  the  proceedings
    of his own volition and to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of
    the appellants was fair.


25. By her second ground, Ms Bantleman criticises the self-direction  which
    appears at [4] of the judge's decision: "The burden of proof that  they
    satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules, or that the decision
    breaches their human rights, rests on the appellants."  It is submitted
    on behalf of the  appellants  that  the  burden  of  proof  as  regards
    proportionality, under Article 8(2), is on the respondent, and that the
    judge was wrong to direct himself as he did.  Ms Bantleman did not seek
    to develop this ground in her oral submissions.  She was correct not to
    do so, for the following reasons.

26. I accept the criticism of the self-direction but it  cannot  avail  the
    appellants.  I do not find the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeals
    Tribunal in AY (Article 8 - Family life - Proportionality) Ivory  Coast
    [2004] UKIAT 00205, which Judge Blum cited  when  granting  permission,
    particularly helpful.  Much water has passed  under  the  bridge  since
    then and it is absolutely clear  that  it  is  for  the  respondent  to
    establish that an interference with an  individual's  human  rights  is
    lawful and proportionate: AB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1302.  It
    is equally clear, however, that the burden  of  proof  as  regards  the
    engagement of Article 8 ECHR is upon an applicant.  The  judge's  self-
    direction therefore applied too broad a brush to the incidence  of  the
    burden of proof as regards Article 8 ECHR.

27. It is nevertheless necessary to stand back and to read the decision  as
    a whole.  As I have recorded  above,  the  judge  determined  that  the
    appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules  before  proceeding  to
    consider the application of Article 8 ECHR.  He summarised  dicta  from
    leading cases at the start of [25] and he  accepted  -  using  language
    which was taken directly from  Razgar  [2004]  2  AC  268  -  that  the
    decision to refuse the  appellants'  human  rights  claim  engaged  the
    article.  The question he then asked was whether the  interference  was
    proportionate.  The judge considered  that  question  at  some  length,
    directing himself perfectly properly at [26] and [27], as  regards  the
    best interests of the appellants' child and the various facets  of  the
    public interest as reflected in s117B of the 2002  Act.   At  [28],  he
    concluded that the private life of the appellants was not so strong  as
    to  outweigh  the  public  interest.   He  was   satisfied   that   the
    interference was proportionate.

28. Given the structure of this assessment and  the  manner  in  which  the
    judge expressed his conclusions, I am entirely satisfied that the self-
    direction at [4] was merely infelicitous.  The judge's  conclusions  on
    proportionality reflected a careful weighing of  the  relevant  factors
    and the substance of that assessment demonstrates beyond doubt that the
    judge understood his task correctly.  It is obviously to be recalled in
    this context that the FtT(IAC)  is  an  expert  Tribunal,  tasked  with
    administering a complex area of law in challenging  circumstances.   It
    is to be assumed that the FtT will understand the law and will  get  it
    right unless the decision under appeal demonstrates clearly  that  that
    is not so.  Reading the decision under appeal with those dicta in mind,
    it cannot be said that the judge misunderstood his task; the  substance
    of the decision shows the contrary to be the case.

29. I add this.  I do not have before me a full account of the  appellants'
    immigration history.  I note that the  ten-year  anniversary  of  their
    entry to the United Kingdom is in April.  Nothing I have said  in  this
    decision should be taken  to  find  (or  even  to  assume)  that  their
    residence up to this point  has  been  continuously  lawful.   When  an
    application for ILR on  grounds  of  long  residence  is  made,  as  it
    inevitably will be, it will be for the  appellants  to  establish  that
    their residence in the UK has been continuously lawful.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law.  The appellants' appeals are dismissed and the decision of  the  FtT
shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                       Date 01 February 2021





















-----------------------
[1] It appears likely that this was a misdiagnosis.  The appellants'  second
child was born in June 2020 after a pregnancy  which  was  described  by  Ms
Bantleman, on instructions, as difficult.

