
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11960/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2019                             |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            ms Sarah Jane Pearson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, counsel, instructed by Western
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision dated 26 April 2016 to  refuse  leave
    to remain following an application made in January 2016.  The basis  of
    that application was summarised by the Respondent  as  being  that  the
    Appellant was fearful  of  a  return  to  South  Africa  because  of  a
    relationship with  an  abusive  partner,  which  was  claimed  to  have
    resulted in her suffering from PTSD and  a  major  depressive  disorder
    leading to suicidal ideation.

2.   Her  appeal  against  that  adverse  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain (the Judge) who on 12 July  2018  dismissed  the
    appeal.

3.   Permission to appeal was given in the Upper  Tribunal  on  16  November
    2018 as was expressed by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

         "The grounds take issue with the Judge's credibility  findings  and
         argue that adequate reasons were not provided.  It is  argued  that
         the medical evidence was not properly considered and the impact  of
         the Appellant's removal upon her mother was not assessed.


         Arguably the Judge's brief findings  do  not  properly  assess  the
         Appellant's circumstances and evidence adduced."

4.   Mr Bellara who appeared before the Judge confined  his  submissions  to
    two principal arguments.  First that the Judge had  failed  to  address
    and provide credibility  findings,  for  the  evidence,  given  by  the
    Appellant's mother, which was that the Appellant was entirely dependent
    upon her.  Secondly, he criticised  the  Judge's  failure  to  properly
    address the medical evidence.

5.   I have to say at the outset that the Judge's reasoning is so  brief  in
    parts to be difficult to be sure  what  he  was  relying  upon  in  his
    decision [D].  His decision appears to contain  formatted  parts  which
    repeat 'the totality of the evidence was considered'.  Whether  or  not
    the totality of the evidence was considered the  fact  is  that  it  is
    difficult to see if that is the correct summation  of  the  assessment,
    how some of the conclusions should be so opaque  and  difficult  to  be
    sure about.

6.   Be that as it may, it did seem to me having heard  the  arguments  that
    this was a case where adequate and sufficient  reasons  have  not  been
    given.  I do not second  guess  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  on  the
    evidence that may be advanced.  Before me it is fair to  say  that  the
    evidence was thin in some respects.  I could not  say  with  confidence
    that any other Tribunal would have reached  a  different  decision  but
    this is a case where the absence  of  clear,  adequate  and  sufficient
    reasons  renders  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  unreliable   and
    established an error of law.

7.   For example, the Judge noted the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant's
    mother in [D15 to 17] but  failed,  for  example,  to  say  whether  he
    accepted that evidence; not just the  written  evidence  but  the  oral
    evidence which was subject to some cross-examination.   Ultimately  his
    concluding remarks are nearly impenetrable [D25] when he says:-

         "However, I am prepared to proceed  on  the  basis  that  there  is
         family life between the Appellant and a mother  and  as  stated,  I
         accept there is some form of private life that  the  Appellant  has
         established".

    Whether that amounted to accepting the generality of the evidence given
    by the Appellant and her mother I do not know and cannot tell.  I  find
    that is a good example of the problems of such brevity in reasoning.


8.   It was also unclear whether the Judge was  even  applying  the  correct
    approach to the evidence in assessing the Article 8, ECHR  claim:  That
    was not a point raised in the grounds of appeal.  On the  face  of  it,
    his assertion of the law, as he understood it to  be,  appeared  to  be
    somewhat wayward in the light of the decisions  in  Hesham  Ali  [2016]
    UKSC 60 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  It seemed to me that the Judge was
    perhaps presented with less than helpful evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    current mental health issues, not insofar as they are relied  upon  for
    the purposes of an Article 3 ECHR  claim,  but  on  the  basis  of  the
    impacts of separation of the Appellant from her mother,  of  separation
    upon her mother and their concerns for the wellbeing of the  Appellant.



9.   I do not necessarily think that a different outcome may arise but  that
    will be a matter for another Judge looking  at  the  evidence  properly
    prepared dealing with the Article 8 ECHR claim.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The matter will have  to  be
remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

    (1)  Relist for a further hearing at Hatton Cross not before First-tier
         Tribunal Judges Hussain and Grimmett.


    (2)  Time estimate two hours, no interpreter required.


    (3)  Any further evidence in support of the human rights based claim to
         be served not later than ten  working  days  before  the  date  the
         matter is relisted.


    (4)  No findings of fact to stand.


    (5)  Issues:-


         Article 8 ECHR and human rights based  claim  to  remain  based  on
         family/private life rights.


    (6)  Any further directions to be dealt with by way of a CMRH or PTR at
         Hatton Cross.


    (7)  No anonymity order was made nor was one sought.


Signed                                  Date 18 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
