
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11709/2017
                                                               HU/11713/2017
                                                               HU/11716/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 5 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                 ALI [A] (1)
                               NAVJOT [R] (2)
                                  [A A] (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

The first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and the second appellant is a
citizen of India. They married on 26 March 2012. The first appellant came
to the UK in 2007 in order to study and his last grant of leave expired in
December 2012. The background of the second appellant is similar. In
November 2012 the first appellant claimed asylum but his application was
rejected and he became appeal rights exhausted in July 2013. The third
appellant was born in the UK on [~] 2013. The appellants submitted an
application on article 8 grounds in August 2016. This led to the decision
under appeal, dated 20 September 2017.

The respondent accepted the family relationship but considered the family
could be returned to Pakistan. There were no very significant obstacles to
integration in Pakistan. Nor were there exceptional circumstances to
warrant a grant of leave outside the rules. The appellants appealed. The
grounds argued there were factual errors in the respondent's decision and
the third appellant's best interests had not been considered. The grounds
stated that it was possible the third appellant was stateless.

The appeal was heard by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Chohan at
Birmingham on 2 May 2018. In a decision promulgated on 15 May 2018, he
dismissed the appeals. He found it was in the best interests of the third
appellant to remain with his parents. He found it was likely the third
appellant was Pakistani by descent. He found there was no evidence to
establish that the second appellant would not be admitted to Pakistan with
her husband. Relying on the decision of the judge dismissing the first
appellant's asylum appeal, he found there was not a real risk of appellants
facing persecution as a mixed-faith couple. There were no very significant
obstacles to integration.

The appellant sought permission to appeal, arguing the judge had erred by
failing to consider paragraph EX.1 of the rules and by failing to consider
whether there were unjustifiably harsh consequences so as to render the
decision disproportionate.  Permission was refused by the First-tier
Tribunal, which pointed out that there was no basis for contending that
paragraph EX.1 applied to the appellants. The application was renewed on
similar grounds and permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal. It was
arguable the judge had erred by not taking into account background evidence
when considering whether removal would result in unjustifiably harsh
consequences.

The respondent has not submitted a rule 24 response. Ms Solanki submitted a
note prior to the hearing accepting that EX.1 does not apply to the
appellants and indicating the appeals would be argued on the basis of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules and outside the rules.

I heard submissions from the representatives on the issue of whether the
judge's decision contains a material error of law. I shall only set these
out as is necessary to explain my decision.

Ms Solanki took me to the relevant paragraphs of the judge's decision. She
argued it was clear that the difficulties caused by discrimination against
mixed faith couples had been argued and that the judge appeared to have
conflated the risk of persecution, which had been rejected in an earlier
appeal, with the test of very significant obstacles. He had not engaged
adequately with the issues. However, she acknowledged that background
evidence on interfaith marriages had not been provided to the judge.

Ms Everett argued the judge's decision does not contain an error of law.

Having considered the submissions made I have concluded that the judge's
decision does not contain an error of law and should be upheld. My reasons
are as follows.

Ms Solanki was right to distance herself from the argument put forward
initially which was done without having had sight of all the papers.
Paragraph EX.1 of the rules applies where the applicant has a genuine and
subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British
Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
partner continuing outside the UK. None of the appellants have leave.

As Ms Solanki recognised in her note, the only route to success for the
appellants would be under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules or outside
the rules.

It is important to keep in mind how the case was put to the judge. I have
seen the skeleton argument of Mr Pipe, who appeared as counsel for the
appellants in the First-tier Tribunal. This shows that the appellants
argued the third appellant was stateless because his birth had not been
registered by the Indian authorities, that it was in the best interests of
the third appellant to allow the family to remain in the UK and that the
decision was disproportionate to the appellants' right to enjoy family and
private life.

It does not appear that Mr Pipe pursued his argument about the third
appellant being stateless because the presenting officer clarified that it
was proposed to remove the family to Pakistan and evidence was handed up
from the Government of Pakistan's Directorate General of Immigration &
Passports showing that children of Pakistanis born outside Pakistan were
citizens by descent. The judge went on to make findings on the best
interests of the third appellant which have not been the subject of
challenge.  The judge was satisfied the family would be able to enter
Pakistan.

Paragraph 12 of the decision makes clear that it was argued that the
appellants would face discrimination in Pakistan due to their interfaith
marriage. The first appellant claimed he might face imprisonment. The judge
then drew on findings made by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mace, whose
decision dismissing the first appellant's asylum appeal was dated 14 April
2013. Judge Mace was not satisfied the first appellant had shown any risk
to his life or wellbeing. She accepted society may disapprove but she was
not satisfied it had been shown they would be subjected to mistreatment
amounting to persecution or serious harm.

It is correct to point out that Judge Mace was asking herself a different
question. Of course, it is not necessary to show a real risk of persecution
in order to show there are very significant obstacles to integration. If
the judge had conflated the two tests, he would have made a material error.

However, a correct reading of his decision shows he was careful to avoid
doing so. In paragraph 13 he explained that he was not considering an
article 3 claim. The relevance of Judge Mace's findings was that they were
made on the lower standard of proof.

At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the first and second appellants
adopted witness statements. The first appellant stated that his wife would
not be accepted in Pakistan because she refused to change her religion.
That has not been disputed. The first appellant claimed they would not be
able to enter Pakistan and his wife and son would not be granted status
there. As noted, the judge rejected those claims. In her statement, the
second appellant make similar points. The judge also had two letters from
friends of the first appellant giving their opinions that the family might
be killed in Pakistan. Crucially, there was no background evidence before
the judge about discrimination against interfaith couple. Ms Solanki showed
me the CPIN Pakistan: Interfaith marriage, January 2016, and the CIG
Pakistan: Women fearing gender-based harm/violence, February 2016, but the
judge could not be expected to have taken these into account without being
provided with copies.

Given the extremely limited nature of the evidence put forward and, given
the background of Judge Mace's findings on the topic, I do not consider the
judge erred by misdirecting himself in law or by failing to consider the
evidence adequately. He was entitled to find as he did.

It is also relevant to note that Judge Mace made findings which were not
set out in the judge's decision but which he must have had regard to. She
did not accept that the first appellant's family's reaction had been
"extreme" (paragraph 76), the first appellant's evidence about what he
feared in Pakistan was "vague and evasive" (paragraph 79), the appellant
had initially said he could settle in Pakistan, India or the UK, which
Judge Mace found inconsistent with his fear of harm from the community in
general (paragraph 85), and, the background evidence showed difficulties
for parties to interfaith marriages but the evidence focused on the
position of females (paragraph 90). She also dealt with article 8 outside
the rules. She concluded that, whilst there would be some difficulties, it
was reasonable to expect the second appellant to follow her husband to
Pakistan and the decision to remove him was proportionate.

Whilst further time had passed there was little which could have entitled
the judge to depart from those findings on article 8. The birth of the
third appellant was adequately considered. The judge was entitled to find
family life could continue in Pakistan.

As for private life, the judge set out the relevant factors in paragraph 14
of his decision. He plainly had the public interest factors set out in
section 117B of the 2002 Act in mind. He reached a decision he was
perfectly entitled to reach on the evidence.

For these reasons, the decision of Judge Chohan dismissing the appeal on
article 8 grounds shall stand and the appellants' appeal against his
decision is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make
a material error of law and his decision dismissing the appeals shall
stand.


Signed                                  Date 4 April 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
