
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11281/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 July 2019                      |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                               IMTIAZ MAQBOOL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Lincoln's
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Hughes ('the judge'), promulgated on 3 April 2019,  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his
         application for entry clearance.

      2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  On  8  March  2018,  he
         appealed against the decision of the respondent to refuse him entry
         clearance for the purpose of permanent settlement with his  brother
         (the sponsor) as an adult dependent relative, on the  grounds  that
         the decision was not in accordance with  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998: it being incompatible with the appellant's  rights
         under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

      3. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
         indicated:

             "It is arguable that the judge, when considering  the  medical
             and other evidence, failed to take into account the  issue  of
             whether there was a person in Pakistan that could provide  the
             care, in particular given  the  evidence  that  the  appellant
             could not deal with strangers (and had always been  cared  for
             by family members of  whom  none  were  left  there)  and  the
             medical evidence that the care he receives  from  his  brother
             currently  in  Pakistan  could  not  be  replicated  within  a
             specialist care facility  for  those  reasons.  That  is  also
             arguably relevant  to  whether  there  exists  a  family  life
             between the appellant and the sponsor and  the  weight  to  be
             given to family life."

      4. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

The Home Office's position

      5. Relevant to the outcome of this onward appeal was a concession made
         by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the outset of the hearing.



      6. Mr Jarvis indicated that having reviewed the First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision, he was satisfied that the judge had made a material error
         at paragraph 29 of the decision, in that the  judge  was  wrong  to
         note that the appellant only  required  simple,  attentive  regular
         care. That, he maintained, had not been the evidence.

      7. Reflecting paragraph 6 of the grounds  of  appeal,  the  presenting
         officer referred to the need for the appellant to be cared  for  by
         his brother, the sponsor, or those he was close  to,  having  never
         been cared for  by  any  other  person  except  very  close  family
         members.

      8. Mr Jarvis maintained the judge had mischaracterised the  nature  of
         the evidence and further, he had seen today for the first time  new
         medical evidence from two doctors (which he indicated he would  not
         object to being admitted as evidence) and on  the  basis  of  those
         letters,  together  with  the  other  evidence,  would  invite  the
         tribunal to set aside the decision and allow the appeal.

      9. For the reasons given below, that is the course I am  proposing  to
         take, but I think it right that I say something about  this  appeal
         more generally before re-deciding the substantive matter.

Factual background

     10. The appellant is a 53-year-old man with Down syndrome  and  autism.
         There is evidence to suggest that the appellant has a mental age of
         only six, and that his life expectancy is  relatively  short,  with
         evidence that those with Down syndrome typically die when they  are
         under 60 years of age, (if living in the UK).

     11. The appellant lived with and  was  cared  for  by  his  parents  in
         Pakistan until their deaths and thereafter he was cared for by  his
         sister, until she died.

     12. It was at that point that it fell upon the sponsor  to  look  after
         his brother, the appellant. As  a  result,  the  sponsor  moved  to
         Pakistan from the UK in August 2017 and has subsequently  been  his
         brother's principal carer. It is  maintained  there  are  no  other
         family members living in Pakistan.

     13. The judge accepted that the appellant could not live alone, that he
         was profoundly deaf and could not communicate verbally.

     14. I do not understand any of the above facts to be  disputed,  and  I
         find accordingly. The conclusion I draw is that  the  situation  is
         undoubtedly very difficult.

     15. The judge found the sponsor and his  son  were  credible  witnesses
         with  a  genuine  concern  for  the  appellant's  welfare.  He  was
         satisfied that the appellant  met  the  financial  requirements  of
         Appendix  FM,  and  that  he  could   be   adequately   maintained,
         accommodated and cared for in the UK  without  recourse  to  public
         funds.

     16. The judge was also satisfied that the appellant required  long-term
         personal care to perform  everyday  tasks,  accepting  the  medical
         evidence and evidence of the sponsor and his son in that regard.

     17. The sponsor had wanted to return to the UK because  this  is  where
         his family is. His wife is said to be in poor health.

     18.  I  adopt  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in  this  regard,
         including the positive credibility findings made by the judge.

Discussion

     19. I hesitate to go into further detail, in the light of the Secretary
         of State's concession, but it is important for me to  record  that,
         at least on one view, the judge's determination is a  comprehensive
         and well-constructed explanation for why this appeal failed.  I  am
         allowing this appeal primarily as a result  of  the  Home  Office's
         concession.

     20. In terms of the law, the appellant needed to meet  the  eligibility
         requirements for entry clearance as an adult dependent,  namely  E-
         ECDR 2.5:

             'The applicant... must be unable, even with the practical  and
             financial help at the sponsor, to obtain the required level of
             care in the country where they are living, because -

               a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
                  who can reasonably provide it; or

               b) it is not affordable.'

     21. The judge found, in what may  be  described  as  the  nub  of  this
         appeal, that:

             "The appellant does not require specialist  medical  attention
             facilities, but I am satisfied that he  requires  social  care
             and support with many of the activities of daily living. I  am
             not satisfied on the available evidence that such social  care
             is not available in Pakistan. The high point of  the  evidence
             before me is that of Dr Mughul, namely:

                  '[the appellant] cannot be  rehabilitated  to  the  extent
                  that may enable him to be looked after within the  setting
                  of the very limited specialist care  facilities  based  in
                  Pakistan. Unfortunately, he will have to remain  dependent
                  on his brother, like a little child who has  never  learnt
                  the basics of daily needs - basic natural routine such  as
                  washing himself, dressing or bowel control...'.

             I find  this  evidence  to  be  internally  inconsistent;  the
             appellant does not require  specialist  care  facilities,  but
             rather simple attentive regular care. The sponsor was asked in
             cross-examination  whether  he  had  made  contact  with   any
             organisation that could provide help,  to  which  he  replied,
             'they said he was too old'. This evidence was unsupported, and
             I note that Dr Mughul's evidence above made  no  reference  to
             age being an issue.

             I acknowledge that the optimum care would  be  from  a  family
             member, but there is no reason why one or  more  persons  from
             outside the family could not provide this  care,  gaining  the
             appellant's  trust  and  confidence  through  regularity   and
             continuity of care. This  would  meet  the  sponsor's  genuine
             concern that 'the appellant is only happy with people familiar
             to him'. I am satisfied that this  would  meet  the  'required
             level of care'. The appellant  has  not  demonstrated  on  the
             balance  of   probabilities,   and   on   cogent   independent
             evidence...that such care is not available in Pakistan or that
             it is not affordable."

     22. It appears to me that these were findings the judge was entitled to
         make for the reasons given. It appears the judge took the view that
         following a sufficient introduction and period of  familiarisation,
         a carer in Pakistan (who was  not  a  family  member),  would  have
         become known to the appellant and could have acted then as his home
         carer. I do not consider this to be speculation, but  a  legitimate
         observation to make bearing in mind the  evidence  and  the  burden
         placed upon the appellant.  Such an option may have avoided  moving
         the appellant from his home and country  of  origin  where  he  has
         lived all of his life. This may also have met Dr Ghafoor's concerns
         that he needed to be looked after by someone he knows and trusts.

     23. I raise this issue because I think it important to note two points:
         firstly, however difficult the circumstances of  the  case,  it  is
         necessary for a judge to stand back from the more  emotive  aspects
         of the evidence and consider the case in a detached manner. It  may
         be that another judge might have come to a different conclusion  on
         the evidence,  but  providing  that  the  judge's  conclusions  and
         reasons are sustainable, the Upper Tribunal should normally be slow
         to interfere.

     24. Secondly, the right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  only  on  a
         point of law arising from  the  decision  made  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. If there is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision, the decision should stand (per UT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1095).  The  Upper
         Tribunal is not entitled to remake a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, simply because it does  not  agree  with  that  decision.
         Equally, the Upper Tribunal should not rush to find a  misdirection
         simply because it might have reached a different conclusion on  the
         facts.

     25. On one view therefore, the judge  has  made  adequate  findings  of
         fact, given adequate reasons, and adequately applied the law.

Further evidence

     26. I bear in mind the judge did not have the further evidence provided
         to the Upper Tribunal at the hearing before me. I can  only  assume
         that this further evidence was requested  in  part  to  answer  the
         judge's findings in this regard.

     27. As it is, the letter from Dr Khan, dated 5 July 2019, confirms that
         the appellant has always been cared for by close relatives and that
         the required level of care cannot be provided  other  than  by  his
         present carer in Pakistan. He adds: 'I know of no  institutions  in
         Pakistan which are equipped to provide the level of  care  required
         without adversely damaging his physical and mental health'.

     28. This does not entirely assist with the point  that  the  judge  was
         making, which was if managed correctly, a carer in the  home  would
         following an introductory period, no longer be a stranger.

     29. The further letter from Dr Shahzad, dated 8  July  2019,  seeks  to
         make  clear  that  the  care  required  for  the  appellant  cannot
         effectively be undertaken (because  of  his  family  circumstances)
         other than by his elder brother. He states that to  force  care  by
         others upon him would be an act of cruelty. He further states  that
         the required care is neither  available  nor  can  be  provided  in
         Pakistan. He does not provide  an  explanation  in  answer  to  the
         judge's point that through regular and  continuous  contact  a  new
         relationship could have been formed with a carer  from  outside  of
         the immediate family.

My decision

     30. Having explained my hesitancy, Mr Jarvis pointed out that I was not
         required as a matter of law to  follow  the  Secretary  of  State's
         view. He is of course correct in that regard.

     31. However, in circumstances where not only has the Secretary of State
         conceded the appeal on the basis of an error of law, but  has  also
         road-mapped the outcome, by inviting me to set aside  the  decision
         and allow the appeal, it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  take  a
         different course, not least because if Judge Hughes  had  known  at
         the time that the Secretary of State was prepared to  make  such  a
         concession, undoubtedly he  would  have  allowed  this  appeal  and
         therefore the matter would never have reached this Upper Tribunal.

     32. Understandably, Ms Iqbal on behalf of the appellant had  little  to
         add to the grounds of appeal, in the  light  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's concession.

     33. Essentially by consent therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal and admit the further evidence provided by  the
         appellant, namely a letter from Dr Imran Asghar Khan, dated 5  July
         2019 and a letter from Dr Ahmad Shahzad, dated 8 July 2019.

     34. I allow this appeal on the basis of  the  concession  by  the  Home
         Office that on balance a person from outside the family  could  not
         provide the appellant with the required level of care. There was no
         evidence of someone outside of the family ever  having  gained  his
         trust or having cared for the appellant beforehand.

     35. It follows that I accept the concession made  by  the  Home  Office
         that even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor, the
         appellant is unable  to  obtain  the  required  level  of  care  in
         Pakistan because it is not available (per  the  supporting  medical
         evidence) and no person in that country can provide it.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in  Hatton  Cross  on  30
January 2019 under reference HU/11281/2018 is set aside.

AND

The appeal is allowed.

No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and I saw no reason to depart from the general  rule  in
this case.


Signed   [pic]    Date 5 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams
