
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11305/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    I B a
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  24  January  1981.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's application for settlement, as the
    spouse of a settled person, on the basis that the appellant had  failed
    to disclose a drug trafficking conviction (in Finland) in 2004 and that
    the respondent was not satisfied  the  appellant  met  the  maintenance
    requirements, had been residing in the UK for at least twenty years, or
    that there were very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria.

 2. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 5 October  2017  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Baldwin.

 3. The appellant appeals, with permission from the Upper Tribunal, on  the
    following grounds:

      a) The conclusion in relation to proportionality and  unreasonableness
         not open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge;

      b) Misdirection in law in  respect  of  the  discretionary  nature  of
         paragraphs S-LTR.2.1. and 2.2. of Appendix FM;

      c) Misdirection of law in respect of Section 117B of the 2002 Act;

      d) Unlawful best interests assessment;

      e) Failure to take  into  account  relevant  evidence/misstatement  of
         evidence in relation to whether the appellant and  his  wife  could
         obtain a mortgage.

Error of Law Discussion

    Ground 1

 1. Ms Brown relied on both the grounds before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    the Upper Tribunal.  Ms Fijiwala confirmed that in the  refusal  letter
    the respondent  had  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  qualifying
    relationship under EX.1. and  therefore  met  the  requirements  of  R-
    LTRP.1.1.(d)(iii) in relation  to  the  decision  under  the  ten  year
    partner route.  However, ultimately the application under the ten  year
    partner route was dismissed as it was not accepted that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of paragraphs S-LTR2.2. of Appendix FM  which  are
    as follows:

          "Section S-LTR: Suitability-leave to remain

         ...

         S-LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of
                  suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2. to 2.4. apply.



         S-LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

                  (a)  false information, representations or documents  have
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application); or

                  (b)  there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                      in relation to the application".

 2. Ms Brown argued that the judge erred in stating, as  he  did  at  [25],
    that it would neither be disproportionate or unreasonable to expect the
    appellant to return to Nigeria without specific reference to R-LTRP  or
    EX.1. of Appendix FM, when in effect the respondent had  accepted  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life with the appellant's
    partner outside the UK.  As I indicated at the hearing the  finding  at
    [25] related to the judge's findings outside of the  Immigration  Rules
    and indeed the judge set out at [13] and following, the relevant law in
    relation to Article 8 under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside
    the Rules.

 3. At [14] the Tribunal confirmed  that  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules
    included S-LTR.2.2.(b).  The Tribunal found at [23] that the  appellant
    did dishonestly make a false assertion in his application and  that  it
    related to a serious conviction.  In addition the Tribunal referred  to
    this issue throughout  the  decision,  including  at  [25],  where  the
    Tribunal found that the case for returning the appellant was strong and
    the judge took into consideration that the appellant:

         "... may still not have learned that making untrue assertions in an
         Immigration  Application  or  any  other  formal  document  is  not
         acceptable just because it  might  help  family  members  and  that
         making false assertions can have very far-reaching consequences."

 4. This related to the fact that the appellant  had  gone  on  to  make  a
    further false assertion in  registering  his  daughter's  birth  on  16
    February 2017 (as set out  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  [23])  in
    asserting that  he  was  a  "trader-importer  and  exporter"  which  he
    admitted was false.  The Tribunal  further  noted,  at  [25]  that  the
    conviction and sentence were clearly suggestive of a  serious  type  of
    offending and both remain undisturbed, although the  judge  also  noted
    that the conviction was now eleven years old (in  the  context  of  the
    Tribunal's consideration of Article 8).  None of those findings of fact
    were specifically challenged.  The Tribunal went  on  to  conclude,  at
    [26], that the  respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in
    relation  to  the  assertions  concerning  the  appellant's  false  and
    dishonest assertion and "that the reasons given by  the  respondent  do
    justify the refusal".

 5.  I  am  satisfied  therefore  that  the  challenge  in  ground   1   is
    misconceived.  The First-tier Tribunal was fully aware of the issues in
    dispute and gave adequate reasons for the decisions reached in relation
    to those issues.  The Tribunal was satisfied that the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules fell to be dismissed on suitability grounds and  that
    secondly the appellant's appeal did not succeed under Article 8 outside
    of the Immigration Rules.  No error of law is disclosed in ground 1.

    Ground 2

 6. This is not unrelated to ground 1 and concerns the alleged misdirection
    in relation to the discretionary nature of  paragraphs  S-LTR.2.1.  and
    2.2. as set out above, in that such applications will only "normally be
    refused" on grounds of suitability.  Muhandiramge  (section  S-LTR.1.7)
    [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC) confirmed that with  regard  to  S-LTR.2.2.  of
    Appendix FM there is a discretion as to whether the application  should
    be refused.

 7.  As  already  noted  the  Tribunal  directed  itself,  at  [14],  which
    Immigration Rules were  relevant.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  closely
    reasoned decision indicates the correct  test  was  applied.   This  is
    highlighted by the wording of the  Tribunal's  conclusion  and  in  the
    notice of decision at [26] where first of all the  Tribunal  found  (at
    [21] to [23]) that the respondent had discharged the burden of proof in
    relation  to  the  assertion  concerning  the  appellant's  false   and
    dishonest assertion (and such is not disputed).  The Tribunal  went  on
    to conclude that "the reasons given by the respondent  do  justify  the
    refusal".  It is evident therefore that the Tribunal had  in  mind  the
    discretionary nature of the refusal and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was satisfied that, including taking into account the  nature  of
    the conviction and all of the appellant's conduct including his further
    false assertion  in  relation  to  his  daughter's  birth  certificate,
    together with the positive factors in  his  favour,  that  it  remained
    appropriate that the discretion was properly exercised  to  refuse  the
    application.

 8. In doing so the Tribunal took into consideration all  of  the  evidence
    including the evidence in support of the appellant including  from  his
    wife,  a vicar, a councillor and his mother-in-law who all think highly
    of him.  There was no error in that  approach  and  no  material  error
    disclosed in ground 2.

    Grounds 3 and 4

 9. It was argued by Ms Brown that  the  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  and
    failed to give effect to the ruling in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R  (on  the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  &
    Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 which is the  authority  for  the  proposition
    that where there is a qualifying child this will be a "factor  of  some
    weight leaning in favour of leave to remain being  granted"  (paragraph
    [45] of MA).  It was submitted that there was insufficient evidence  to
    show that the best interests of the children  were  outweighed  by  the
    appellant's thirteen year old conviction and him falsely  entering  his
    occupation on the child's birth certificate.

10. Ms Brown relied on the evidence that was before the Tribunal. including
    from a Labour councillor, from the appellant's mother-in-law  and  from
    the vicar in support of the application for leave to remain.   Although
    Ms Brown submitted that these were not properly taken into  account  in
    the context that they were considered by the First-tier Tribunal, I  do
    not accept that submission, including as the judge's  consideration  of
    that evidence, at [23], discloses that he had in mind all the  relevant
    evidence including the evidence  that  was  fully  in  support  of  the
    appellant remaining in the UK.

11. Grounds 3 and 4 are interlinked and Ms Brown relied on the  appellant's
    witness statement and that of his wife before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to  their  concern  about  the  effect  on  their  children
    including that the appellant's wife stated that it would "devastate our
    family completely".

12. The Tribunal set out the evidence, summarised at [9]  to  [12]  of  the
    Decision and Reasons, including the  written  and  oral  evidence,  and
    indeed recorded at [11] that the appellant's  wife  "told  me  somewhat
    tearfully that it  would  tear  the  family  and  everything  they  had
    achieved apart".  The Tribunal was fully aware of all the  factors  and
    reached the reasoned conclusion, at  [24],  that  the  children's  best
    interests would probably lie in the appellant being allowed  to  remain
    in the UK.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge quite properly  went
    on to direct himself that these best interests are not a "Trump  Card".
    There is no error, for the reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal  gave,  in
    finding that "the case for requiring him to return is strong" and  this
    was a case where it was envisaged that the children would remain in the
    UK. Ms Fijiwala relied on the respondent's guidance in relation to  the
    effect of the appellant's removal on the child with  reference  to  the
    child's best interests

13. Ms Brown relied on pages 76 and 77  of  the  respondent's  guidance  in
    relation to where the child is a British citizen and that it would  not
    be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.  Accordingly  where  this
    means that the child would have to leave the UK because in practice the
    child will not, or is likely not to continue to live  in  the  UK  with
    another parent, EX.1.(a) is likely to apply.  The guidance goes  on  to
    state that:-

         "In particular circumstances it may be  appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave  where  the  conduct  gives  rise  to  public  interest
         considerations of such weight as to justify  their  removal,  where
         the British citizen child could  remain  in  the  UK  with  another
         parent or alternative carer who is a British citizen or settled  in
         the UK or who has  or  is  being  granted  leave  to  remain.   The
         circumstances of this position include  those  in  which  to  grant
         leave could undermine our immigration  controls,  for  example  the
         applicant has committed significant or persistent criminal offences
         falling below the thresholds for deportation set out  in  paragraph
         398 of the  Immigration  Rules  or  has  a  very  poor  immigration
         history,  having   repeatedly   and   deliberately   breached   the
         Immigration Rules".

14. It was Ms Brown's submission that the  appellant's  behaviour  did  not
    fall within the given examples given the age of his Finnish  conviction
    and the relatively minor nature of his  additional  false  declaration.
    However, the First-tier  Tribunal  reached  well-reasoned  conclusions.
    The Tribunal took into consideration that the appellant had  failed  to
    disclose a serious conviction of drug trafficking in 2006, where he was
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment.  In setting  out  the  types  of
    behaviour which might exclude a grant  of  leave  in  the  respondent's
    guidance the examples given are not exhaustive and it was open  to  the
    Tribunal to conclude, for the reasons  it  did,  that  the  appellant's
    behaviour outweighed the best interests of the children and that it was
    not disputed that the children  would  remain  in  the  UK  with  their
    mother.

    Ground 5

15.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any  alleged  error  in  the   Tribunal's
    interpretation of whether or not  the  appellant  and  his  wife  would
    obtain a mortgage was a material error.  The Tribunal  considered  this
    issue in the context of the best interest assessment,  which  conclude,
    in the appellant's favour, that it was in the children's best interests
    for the appellant to remain.  Therefore it is difficult to see how  any
    claimed misinterpretation would have made a material difference to that
    or the Tribunal's ultimate conclusions.



16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

