
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11447/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2020                   |On 14 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               mr NAEEM SHARIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Magna solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 16  January  1980.   He
    arrived in the UK in 2006 with entry clearance as a  student  until  31
    May 2008.  He made an in time application for further  entry  clearance
    until 31 March 2009 and then obtained further leave until  28  February
    2011 on the same basis.  The Appellant applied for and  was  granted  a
    further student visa until 30 April 2014, but his leave  was  curtailed
    to expire on 6 September 2013.

 2. The Appellant sought and obtained further leave on 30 August 2013 until
    6 July 2015, but this too was subsequently  curtailed  until  20  April
    2014.  The Appellant made an in time application for further  leave  on
    14 April 2014  and  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS.   That
    application was refused without the right of appeal on 3 July 2014  and
    he was thereafter dealt with an as an overstayer.

 3. In September 2014 the Appellant made  an  application  for  asylum.  On
    25 March 2015, he sought leave to remain on family  and  private  life
    grounds, but this application was  refused  and  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded.  Subsequent applications made on the basis of his Article  8
    private life in the UK were  made  in  November  2015  and  refused  in
    September 2016 and on 7 September 2016, refused on 7 February 2017.

 4. On 5 September 2017, the Appellant made a  further  application,  which
    was refused on 26 February 2018 without the right of  appeal,  but  the
    Respondent  subsequently  agreed  to  accept  further  submissions  and
    refused this application with the right of appeal on 19 June 2019.   In
    that  decision  the  Respondent  relied  on  an  assertion   that   the
    Appellant's TOEIC ETS test had been fraudulently obtained as there  was
    significant evidence to  show  that  he  had  utilised  a  proxy.   The
    application was refused both with regard  to  paragraph  276  and  long
    residence under the Immigration  Rules,  and  outside  the  Rules  with
    regard to Article 8.

 5. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clemes for hearing on 15  August  2019
    in Newport.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 29  August  2019,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal,  having  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and finding at [16] that the generic evidence in  the  appeal
    sufficed to discharge the initial evidential burden on the  Respondent,
    at [17] the Judge held as follows:

         "17.     I did not find the Appellant a credible witness.  He  gave
             me an unclear journey of the place and time that he claims  to
             have taken the test.   His  description  of  the  journey  was
             muddled involving him changing the starting point  and  detail
             of the transport used when he went across London to  the  test
             centre.  He chose a test centre in Barking because it was near
             his place of full-time study he says.  Barking is in  the  far
             east of London when the Appellant was living in the  far  west
             (Greenford).  I am satisfied that he chose that centre as  it
             was renown (sic) for permitting or  ignoring  fraud  that  was
             taking  place  there.   The  Appellant  is  a  man   of   some
             intelligence I am satisfied yet he was unable  to  glean  that
             three quarters of the tests being taken  were  being  done  so
             fraudulently.  He told me quite clearly that he took his tests
             in 2009 and this evidential anomaly was only cured when he was
             re-examined.  I conclude that either his English  is  so  poor
             that he cannot distinguish 2009 from 2012 or that he is simply
             unable to remember a date because he did not attend.   I  find
             that the latter is more likely  to  be  the  position  as  the
             Appellant gave evidence without an  interpreter  and  answered
             questions competently at the hearing.

         18.  The Appellant also relies on the fact which was not  contested
             by the Respondent that  he  undertook  interviews  with  other
             agents of the Respondent in Pakistan and in the UK after which
             his  English  language  competence  was  not  queried.   I  am
             satisfied that this is at best a neutral  point.   He  had  no
             option but to attend these interviews in person.   They  would
             not have been concluded with the same rigour as  an  objective
             English language test would have presented  or  have  been  as
             multifaceted.  He  also  relies  on  the  fact  that  he  took
             different courses in  the  medium  of  English.   He  provides
             little in support of this contention.  The documents which  he
             has supplied are unhelpful relating that he committed academic
             misconduct at one college  (Edge  Hill)  together  with  other
             evidence of enrolment and course details which  are  so  vague
             and arcane as to  attract  little  or  no  weight.   There  is
             nothing from any educational establishment whether a public or
             private college which addresses his  English  capabilities  in
             support of this  part  of  his  appeal.   The  fact  that  the
             Appellant successfully gave evidence is relevant but I find is
             outweighed by the more persuasive evidence that shows that  it
             is more likely than not that he used deception.  Taking all of
             the evidence into account I am satisfied and find  as  a  fact
             that he was not present at the time that he says that he  took
             his English language tests and  that  the  conclusion  of  the
             Respondent that deception was used is correct".

 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  sought  in  respect  of
    this decision on a number of  bases:  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide reasons as to why he found the Appellant's evidence as  to  the
    timing and place of the test to be an unclear account.   He  failed  to
    explain what aspect of the  Appellant's  evidence  was  muddled  and/or
    involved inconsistencies, has failed to  state  clearly  with  specific
    reference to the evidence, the reason  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    evidence or to provide examples of the  basis  for  not  accepting  his
    evidence on this issue; erred in drawing an inference from  the  length
    of the journey, in this case from the Appellant's home in circumstances
    where the Appellant gave clear evidence he had chosen the  test  centre
    due to its proximity to his previous college; erred in finding that had
    the Appellant attended his test in person, he would have been aware  of
    any imposters because this was based on speculation and lacking in  any
    evidential basis; erred in holding against  the  Appellant  an  obvious
    mistake as to the date of his test, given that the Appellant was  asked
    to clarify the date in re-examination and did so  without  any  prompts
    and this was a simple  mistake  and  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    seriously flawed for lack of reasons and/or being  backed  by  evidence
    and were based on a  mistaken  understanding  of  the  evidence  and/or
    speculation.

 7. The judge further erred in failing to  explain  which  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's certificates were found to be vague and arcane and for what
    reason.

 8. The judge acted procedurally unfairly in attaching  no  weight  to  the
    Appellant's qualifications when no concerns were  raised  nor  was  the
    Appellant afforded an opportunity to address this  during  the  hearing
    and the Appellant gave oral evidence before the judge without  the  use
    of the  interpreter  and  in  fluent  English.   Whilst  this  was  not
    determinative it should have been accorded some weight.

 9. It was asserted that following the case of Khan and Others [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1684 in light of any  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  used
    deception this would place him in the same position as  he  would  have
    been prior to July 2014  as  a  consequence  of  which  he  would  have
    lawfully completed ten years' long residence by 7 October 2016 or would
    have acquired a private life which merits a reasoned balancing exercise
    as to the proportionality or otherwise of removal.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane in a decision dated 16 December 2019 in the following terms

         "The grounds disclosed an arguable error or errors of law  but  for
         which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.   Having
         found that the Respondent discharged the initial evidential  burden
         the judge went on to consider whether the Appellant had provided an
         innocent explanation at paragraphs 17 and 18 of his decision.   The
         judge arguably failed to advance any or  any  adequate  reasons  in
         finding that the Appellant had not advanced an innocent explanation
         and the judge's findings  were  arguably  to  be  characterised  as
         speculative.  The application for permission is granted."

    Hearing

11.  The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for hearing  when  Mr  Sharma
    appeared on behalf of the Appellant.  He formally adopted  the  grounds
    of appeal and submitted that they raised two points.  Firstly, that the
    judge had erred in misapplying the standard of  proof  and  failing  to
    properly apply the Shen (Paper Appeals: Proving Dishonesty) [2014] UKUT
    236 (IAC) plausibility test also applied in  the  judgment  in  SM  and
    Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  (IAC)  and
    secondly in relation to the same  dishonesty  finding,  that  this  was
    improperly or inadequately reasoned with respect to [17]  and  [18]  of
    the judge's decision.

12.  Mr Sharma submitted that at [16] the judge had found  that  the  burden
    of proof had moved on to the Appellant,  which  was  not  quite  right,
    given that it was not for the Appellant  to  prove  his  innocence  but
    rather whether he could provide an innocent explanation.   Consequently
    the judge erred in misapplying the Shen test, i.e. that  the  issue  is
    not whether he has given evidence that can be believed but whether such
    evidence is capable of being believed.  Mr Sharma submitted  there  was
    nothing particularly implausible about  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    therefore was capable of belief.

13.   At  [17]  the  judge  criticised  the  Appellant  in  respect  of  his
    description of his journey to the test centre, which had been chosen by
    the Appellant because it was  close  to  his  Tier  4  test  centre  in
    Barking.  Mr Sharma then submitted, based on his instructions, that the
    Appellant had been to the test centre on eight  occasions,  twice  from
    college and six occasions from home and that four  occasions  were  for
    his pre-assessment course or gear up lessons at the college.   However,
    upon checking the judge's Record of Proceedings it was clear that  this
    did not reflect Mr Sharma's instructions as to  the  number  of  visits
    made to the college and to the test centre.  Mr Sharma  then  submitted
    that the judge's Record of Proceedings which I read to the parties does
    not record the Appellant's evidence as to his journey to and from  home
    and the test centre as being confused.  Mr Sharma submitted that  there
    was nothing implausible about the  Appellant  choosing  a  test  centre
    because it was near his place of full-time  study  nor  did  the  judge
    explain why this was not capable of belief.  Mr Sharma submitted it was
    unclear on what basis the judge found that three quarters of the  tests
    taken were fraudulent and this did not follow on from the findings that
    had been made.  In respect of the fact  that  during  cross-examination
    the Appellant stated he had undertaken the test in 2009 and then in re-
    examination stated it was in 2012,  Appellant  corrected  himself  when
    prompted.  The judge found that there were only  two  reasons  for  his
    answers, either his English was so poor or he simply did not attend the
    test, but Mr Sharma submitted there could be  other  explanations.   He
    submitted the  Appellant  was  clearly  an  intelligent  man  and  that
    documents had been submitted showing that he has satisfied a number  of
    English language tests, including whilst in detention.

14.  At [18] the judge found the Appellant's documents in  this  respect  to
    be "vague and arcane".  Mr Sharma went through that evidence at page 96
    onwards of bundle B.  There  is  a  postgraduate  diploma  in  business
    management awarded in January 2010, see also page 97.  At page 107  the
    Appellant was awarded an advanced diploma in IT by the  London  College
    of Business and IT.  At page 108 to 111 are ESOL stage 3  certificates,
    including listening and speaking, taken whilst  the  Appellant  was  in
    detention and in respect  of  which  he  obtained  a  distinction.   In
    relation to the reference to academic misconduct, Mr  Sharma  submitted
    that this was an unfair characterisation of the evidence in relation to
    Edge Hill University.  At page 102 of the Appellant's  bundle  are  the
    Appellant's test results where it is clear that he scored zero for  his
    dissertation.   Page  103  is  a  form  setting  out  the   Appellant's
    mitigating circumstances, which are that  he  contracted  dengue  fever
    when he returned to Pakistan for a visit and so was  unable  to  submit
    his dissertation as a consequence of which he failed  the  course.   It
    was not clear whether he subsequently submitted his dissertation.   The
    Appellant then had to find an alternative Sponsor in order to  continue
    his education.  Mr Sharma submitted that whilst the judge at [18] found
    as a fact that the Appellant  was  not  present  at  the  time  he  was
    supposed to have taken his English  language  test  he  failed  to  ask
    himself the correct question.  He submitted that  the  judge  erred  in
    finding the burden was  upon  the  Appellant  and  that  the  reasoning
    provided by the judge was not sufficient to substantiate his findings.

15.  In her submissions, Ms Everett asked that the decision be upheld.   She
    submitted the Appellant could have discharged the burden by providing a
    plausible explanation.  The judge  would  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    explanation.  There was no evidence before the judge as to  the  number
    of times that the  Appellant  had  visited  the  test  centre  and  she
    submitted that essentially the points being made were nothing more than
    a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.  Ms Everett submitted
    that no cogent  reasons  had  been  provided  to  disturb  the  judge's
    findings of fact.  The judge did not find the documentary  evidence  to
    be helpful on the basis that they do  not  purport  to  show  what  the
    Appellant is relying on them for.  She submitted there was no error  of
    law that had been raised, reasons have been provided, these were cogent
    and not perverse and there was nothing to show that the  outcome  would
    be any different.

16.  There was then a brief discussion of the  impact  of  the  judgment  in
    Khan [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC) before Mr Justice Martin Spencer and which
    refers at [25] to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ivey  v  Genting
    Casino Limited [2017] UKSC 67 at 74 where it was said

         "When dishonesty is in  question  the  fact-finding  Tribunal  must
         first ascertain subjectively the actual state of  the  individual's
         knowledge or belief as to the acts ... when once his  actual  state
         of mind as to knowledge or belief as to facts  is  established  the
         question whether his conduct was  honest  or  dishonest  is  to  be
         determined by the fact-finder by applying the  objective  standards
         of ordinary decent people".

17.  Ms Everett submitted that that ratio did  not  entirely  encompass  the
    Appellant's situation because he was aware of the  allegations  against
    him as opposed to a "tax evasion case where there is the possibility of
    honest mistake".  The question was whether he used a proxy or not.  The
    judge found that he did and gave sufficient reasons for  that  finding.
    Mr Sharma agreed  with  that  interpretation  but  sought  to  rely  on
    paragraph 37(vi) of Khan, which provides as follows:

         "There will be legitimate questions for the Secretary of  State  to
         consider in reaching her decision in  these  cases  including  that
         these are by no means exclusive:

         (1)  whether the explanation for the error  by  the  accountant  is
         plausible

         (2)  whether the documentation which can be assumed  to  exist  for
             example  correspondence  between   the   applicant   and   his
             accountant at the time of the tax return has been disclosed or
             there is a plausible explanation for why it is missing;

         (3)  why the applicant did not realise that an error had been  made
             because his liability to pay tax was less than he should  have
             expected; and

         (4)  whether at any stage the Appellant  has  taken  the  steps  to
             remedy the situation and if so when those steps were taken and
             the explanation for any significant delay".

18.  Mr Sharma submitted that this was not much of  a  modification  of  the
    judgment in Shen.  The judge had failed  to  ask  himself  the  correct
    question and at least one of the reasons given was in conflict with the
    evidence recorded.

19.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

20.  I have concluded that there was no material  error  in  the  manner  in
    which the Judge applied the standard of proof, finding at [16] that the
    generic evidence sufficed to discharge the initial evidential burden on
    the Respondent, which "moved the burden onto the Appellant". Whilst  Mr
    Sharma took objection  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  directed
    himself, asserting that he should have directed that  it  was  for  the
    Appellant to provide an innocent explanation, I do not  find  that  the
    difference in phrasing made any material difference to the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

21.  However, I have concluded that there are  material  errors  of  law  at
    [17] and [18] of the decision, in the reasons provided by the Judge for
    rejecting the Appellant's credibility. I accept Mr Sharma's  submission
    that it is not at all apparent from the Judge's record  of  proceedings
    why he found the Appellant's account of his journey and transport  from
    his home in Greenford to the test centre in Barking to  be  muddled  or
    unclear.  Thus  I  find  this  reason  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    credibility is unsustainable. Whilst it was open to the Judge to reject
    the Appellant's explanation as  to  why  he  chose  a  test  centre  in
    Barking, because it was near his place of study, I find that the  Judge
    has not provided sustainable reasons for finding that he was  satisfied
    that the Appellant chose that centre as it was renowned for  permitting
    or ignoring fraud that was taking place there. The reason  provided  by
    the Judge was that he was satisfied that the Appellant  was  a  man  of
    some intelligence but was "unable to glean that three quarters  of  the
    tests being taken were being done so fraudulently." However, the  Judge
    failed to state the evidential  basis  of  this  finding  nor  how  the
    Appellant would have known this.

22.  Whilst I find that it was open to the Judge  to  place  weight  on  the
    Appellant's initial incorrect answer that he took  the  tests  in  2009
    rather than 2012, I find he fell into error in placing no weight on the
    fact that the Appellant corrected himself unprompted  when  re-examined
    on  this  point.  I  find  the  Judge  further  erred  in   essentially
    disregarding quite a substantial body of evidence as to the Appellant's
    English language ability. Having considered the documents  in  question
    [14. above refers] I find they are neither vague  nor  arcane  and  the
    ESOL Part 3 certificates in particular are deserving  of  consideration
    as being material evidence as to the Appellant's English  capabilities,
    contrary to the Judge's finding at [18].

23.   In  light  of  my  conclusion  that  the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in law, I set the decision and reasons aside.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  the  First  tier
Tribunal for a hearing  de  novo  before  a  Judge  other  than  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Clemes.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 5 February 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
