
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/11457/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 November 2017                        | On 21 November 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                            mr Syed Nazmul Islam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Collins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who entered the United Kingdom
    on  15 February  2009  with  leave  as  a  student.   That  leave  was
    subsequently extended but ultimately a  further  application  dated  24
    July 2013 was refused.  He appealed and thereafter made application for
    asylum which was subsequently withdrawn.  He was served with notice  as
    an overstayer but on 27 August 2015 he  submitted  another  application
    for leave to remain based on his marriage to a British  citizen.   This
    application was also refused and the appellant appealed.

 2. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  N
    M K Lawrence, in a decision promulgated on 20 February 2017,  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Saffer who in a decision dated 4 September 2017
    gave his reasons for so doing.  They are:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision
             of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  promulgated  on  20
             February 2017 whereby  the  appeal  against  the  decision  to
             refuse to grant leave to remain was dismissed.

         2.   I am satisfied that the application is in time as it was filed
             on 3 March 2017.

         3.   As it was recorded [5] that the respondent accepted  that  the
             suitability and eligibility requirements  of  the  Rules  were
             met, it is arguable that the judge may have  materially  erred
             in going on to consider EX1 which is an exception that enables
             consideration of certain matters where the eligibility grounds
             are not met.  All grounds may be argued."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the outset both representatives urged me to accept  that  the  judge
    had materially erred by failing to consider Section  117B(6)  which  is
    found in part 5A of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act.
    I share their analysis.  The judge has materially erred as they submit.



 6. I was handed up the authorities of MA (Pakistan) and Others, R (on  the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  and
    Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and SF and others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).   Also,  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration of August 2015.

 7. Having found  a  material  error  of  law  I  proceeded  to  listen  to
    submissions from both representatives as to how this appeal  should  be
    disposed of given the findings of fact made  by  the  judge  which  are
    unchallenged.

 8. Mr Collins argued that the Immigration Directorate  Instruction  Family
    Migration of August 2015 remains in force and that there is no  dispute
    that there is a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  between
    the appellant and child.  This is a case where  criminality  is  not  a
    factor nor is any serious breach of Immigration Rules.  It is also  not
    disputed that the appellant's wife was born in London.   The  authority
    of SF gives effect to the "IDIs".  They are not, contrary to Mr Kotas's
    submission  simply  about  "Zambrano"  situations.   It  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's child to leave the United  Kingdom
    and the appeal should be allowed.

 9. Mr Kotas urged me to accept that SF had been decided on quite different
    facts and that unlike the child in "MA" this was  a  very  young  child
    born some two days prior to hearing who was yet to establish a  private
    life and there is nothing unreasonable in all the circumstances, and no
    significant obstacles,  preventing  this  appellant  returning  to  his
    country of origin.

10. The first thing to say is I reject Mr Kotas's submission that the  IDIs
    are simply about  the  "Zambrano"  situation.   Amongst  other  things,
    paragraph 11, as stated in paragraph 11.1, they are a policy  statement
    as to the factors to  be  considered  when  assessing  a  child's  best
    interests under the family and  private  life  Immigration  Rules  with
    particular reference to instructing how to assess whether it  would  be
    reasonable  to  expect  a  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  when
    considering paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of
    part 7.

11. The guidance goes on to detail factors to  consider.   In  this  appeal
    there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  The child is
    a British citizen.  In looking at whether it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect a British citizen to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  the  guidance
    states at paragraph 11.2.3:-

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship."

    On the facts of this appeal there is no criminality falling  below  the
    threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or  a  very
    poor immigration history where it can be said that  the  appellant  has
    repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

12. Any decision as to the best interests of  a  child  will  depend  on  a
    number of factors, including those referred to in  EV  (Philippines)  &
    Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.
    Mr Kotas submitted that the child in this particular appeal is not  yet
    7 years which of course I accept.  It is though not the only factor  to
    be taken into account.  I am guided  by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The best interests  of  a  child
    are and in total part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8
    of the ECHR and must be a primary consideration,  although  not  always
    the only primary consideration.  Whilst the best interests of  a  child
    can be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations,  no
    other consideration can be treated as inherently more significant.   Mr
    Collins urges me to accept that considerable weight must  be  given  to
    the IDIs.  He referred me to paragraph 9 of SF which state: -

         "9.  It appears to us inevitable that if the guidance to  which  Mr
             Wilding has drawn  our  attention  had  been  applied  to  the
             present family, at any time after it was published, and on the
             basis that the  youngest  child  is  a  British  citizen,  the
             conclusion would have been that  the  appellants  should  have
             been granted a period of leave in order to enable the  British
             citizen child to remain in the United Kingdom with them.   The
             question is then whether the  guidance  as  guidance  has  any
             impact on the First-tier Tribunal or on us".

13. I find in considering all the above, including the respondent's own IDI
    and the individual facts of this appeal the public  interest  does  not
    require this appellant's removal as he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside that decision.

16. The appeal is allowed.

17. No anonymity direction but the fee award is given on the basis that the
    appeal is allowed.






Signed
Date 20 November 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
