
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/11604/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 July 2019                          |On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                            mR BED BAHADUR THAPA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Beg  in  which  she
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her application for leave to enter in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  24  April  2018.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Beg on 4 April 2019 and was dismissed. The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 27  June
    2019 in the following terms

       The Judge found the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the
       Immigration  rules  and  was  not  assisted   by   article   8   and
       distinguished the circumstances from those of his brother.


       The  grounds  argue  that  the  Judge  erred  in  respect   of   the
       circumstances in which the Appellant had left to work  in  Malaysia,
       the circumstances of his return and his situation since then. It  is
       argued that the Judge went on to err in respect of the  family  life
       test and under section 117B.


       It is arguable that the Judge proceeded on a factually flawed  basis
       and in that event the grounds are arguable.


Background


 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Nepal born on 2 May 1982. He applied for leave to enter  the
    UK as the adult dependent relative of his father an ex-Gurkha  soldier.
    The Secretary of State refused his application because he was over  the
    age of  30  and  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  financial  and
    emotional dependency and he had an independent life and had lived apart
    from his father for more than two years of the time of the application.




 4. At the appeal hearing the  Appellant's  father  and  mother  both  gave
    evidence and submitted written  witness  statements.  The  Judge  found
    their evidence, for the most part,  to  be  credible  and  that  normal
    family life existed but that this did not go  beyond  normal  emotional
    ties or show a relationship of real, committed and  effective  support.



 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge  erred  in  law  by  making
    factual errors. The Appellant had not carved out an independent life by
    relocating to Malaysia following the sponsor's settlement in the United
    Kingdom Further the Judge had made a material misdirection in requiring
    cumulatively real, committed and effective support.


Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me Ms McCarthy appeared for the Appellant. She
    said that the Judge has misunderstood the timing of the period of work
    in Malaysia and concluded in error that he formed an independent life.
    Paragraph 21 of the decision is wrong and conflicts with paragraph 18
    which is right. When the Appellant returned from Malaysia his parents
    were still in Nepal and he returned to live with them.  In addition to
    that error further elements of the evidence were not considered. The
    error if the one misunderstanding.


 7. For the Respondent Mr Walker said that he could not argue against the
    grounds. The Judge has made a material error of fact.

 8. Both representatives agreed that I should remake the decision on the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly, I gave
    an extempore decision allowing the appeal and setting aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remade the decision by allowing
    the appeal. My reasons are given below.
Decision

 9. This case involves a Gurkha family who have sought to settle in  United
    Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  and
    guidance. The Appellant's father (the sponsor) is an ex-Gurkha  soldier
    and he was granted permission to settle in  the  United  Kingdom  along
    with his wife and they arrived in the UK on 13 June 2012. The Appellant
    and his brother applied together to join their parents in July 2015 but
    their applications were refused. The Appellant's brother  appealed  and
    his appeal was allowed so he was able to  join  the  family  in  United
    Kingdom. The Appellant reapplied  and  was  again  refused.  Judge  Beg
    dismissed his appeal against that refusal.

10. In dismissing the appeal and in considering whether a protected  family
    life existed between the Appellant  and  his  parents  the  Judge  made
    contradictory findings. At paragraph 18 of her decision the Judge  says
    "I find in any event ... that the appellant did work in Malaysia."  She
    then went on to note the submission that when the Appellant returned to
    Nepal in 2011 he did not  work  and  the  bonds  of  family  life  were
    reconstituted. At paragraph 21 the Judge says "following the  sponsor's
    settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  carved   out   an
    independent life for himself by relocating to Malaysia where  he  lived
    and worked for three years."

11. The inconsistency reveals a very distinct error of fact. It was  always
    the case that the Appellant went to work in  Malaysia  to  support  his
    family in Nepal before they obtained permission to settle in the United
    Kingdom. The Appellant returned from Malaysia when his  contract  ended
    in 2011 as noted by the judge at paragraph 18. The Appellant's  parents
    did not arrive in the United Kingdom until 13 June  2012.  He  did  not
    therefore relocate to Malaysia following his parent's settlement in the
    United  Kingdom  rather  he  returned   from   Malaysia   and   resumed
    cohabitation with them prior to their departure.

12. As conceded by Mr Walker the error is material because the  Appellant's
    actions evidence not only a continuation of family life but of a family
    life which goes beyond normal emotional ties. It is accepted  that  the
    Appellant supported his family before  they  left  Nepal  and  is  also
    accepted that the Appellant's  family  supported  him  following  their
    settlement in the United Kingdom. The  Judge  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant's parents are in regular contact with him and, although  this
    is not mentioned the decision, the evidence before the judge  was  that
    this regular contact included conversations between the  Appellant  and
    his mother almost every day.

13. In view of the accepted error of law I allow the appellant's appeal and
    set aside the decision of the First-tier tribunal.

14. In remaking the decision I take into account the positive  findings  in
    the decision of the  First-tier  tribunal.  I  add  to  those  positive
    findings the matters referred to above and in doing so I find that  the
    Appellant continues to enjoy a family life with his  parents  and  that
    this is a family life that goes beyond normal emotional  ties  in  that
    there is a mutual dependency that has existed for many years. There  is
    evidence of this mutual dependency  in  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    travelled away from his home in Nepal  to  obtain  employment  to  help
    support his parents whilst they  remained  in  Nepal.  This  dependency
    continues but has been reversed in that since their settlement  in  the
    United Kingdom the Appellant parents now  support  him  in  Nepal.  The
    appeal against the decision to refuse entry  clearance  is  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.



Summary of decision

15. Appeal allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

16. I remake the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance on human rights grounds.







Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2019


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



