
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/11487/2015

                                                  HU/11496/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2017                       |  On 24 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                    mr Atiqullah Naseri (first Appellant)
                  mrs Fouzia Sardar Khel (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Jussab, Solicitor from Asghar and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R  L
    Walker (the judge), promulgated on 9 June 2017, in which  he  dismissed
    their appeals.  Those appeals arose from the Respondent's decision of 7
    November 2015, refusing their respective human rights claims.

 2. The Appellants, both citizens of Afghanistan, had arrived in the United
    Kingdom in January 2014 as visitors.  The human rights claims were made
    on 14 July 2014 and these were initially refused by the  Respondent  on
    11 August that year, without a right of appeal.

 3. Following a judicial review claim the Respondent agreed  to  reconsider
    the applications and in due course an appealable decision  was  issued.
    In essence, the basis of the  Appellants'  claims  was  that  they  had
    established not only private life in the  United  Kingdom  but  also  a
    family life in respect of various relatives present in this country.




The judge's decision

 4. The judge makes reference to Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules  and
    then goes on to state  that  there  were  two  factual  issues  in  the
    appeals:  first,  whether  there  would  be   necessary   support   and
    accommodation for the Appellants were they to  return  to  Afghanistan;
    and second, whether their health  conditions  would  render  a  removal
    disproportionate (paragraphs 21 and 22).

 5. In paragraphs 23 to 28 and 31 the  judge  makes  a  number  of  adverse
    findings in respect of the credibility of the evidence before him.   In
    essence he found that the Appellants' particular circumstances were not
    as claimed to be.  In addition, the judge  found  that  there  were  no
    significant health issues in respect of either Appellant (paragraphs 33
    to 36).

 6. In the concluding paragraph the judge states that the Appellants  could
    not meet the requirements of the Article 8-related  Rules.   The  final
    sentence of that paragraph states: "their [the Appellants'] return will
    not result in any breaches of Article 8 of the ECHR".




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to conduct a  proper
    assessment of the Article 8 claim according to the well-known  approach
    set out in Razgar.  In particular it is said that the judge  failed  to
    have any or any adequate regard to the claimed family  life  aspect  of
    the claims.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    but then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 18 September 2017.




The hearing before us

 9. Mr Jussab relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  judge
    had wrongly restricted himself to a  consideration  of  the  Article  8
    claims  within  the  context  of  the  Rules.   There  was  no   proper
    consideration of the family life aspect.

10. Mr  Clarke  candidly  accepted  that  there  had  been  no  substantive
    consideration of the family life aspect of the Appellants' claims.   He
    accepted that there had been no findings  or  analysis  in  respect  of
    either the Appellants' own adult children or their  grandchildren.   He
    accepted not only that this was an error on the part of the judge,  but
    that it was material.  In light of this he accepted  that  the  judge's
    decision should be set aside.  He indicated to us that the  appropriate
    form of disposal would be  to  remit  the  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in light of the absence of factual  findings  related  to  the
    family life issue.

11. Mr Jussab did not demur from this course of action.




Decision on error of law

12. In light of Mr Clarke's position in these appeals and having considered
    matters for ourselves, we conclude that there are  material  errors  of
    law in the decision of the judge and we therefore set it aside.

13. Whilst the  specific  adverse  credibility  findings  relating  to  the
    Appellants' own personal circumstances may have been open to the judge,
    it is clear that he failed to deal adequately with matters going to the
    family life claim.  Whilst the outcome of a proper assessment  of  this
    issue would not necessarily favour the Appellants, it certainly  cannot
    be said that the cases are bound to fail.  We agree with Mr Clarke that
    the judge's failure to deal  with  the  family  life  aspect  of  these
    appeals constitutes a material error of law.

14. We set aside the judge's decision.




Disposal

15. We agree  with  both  representatives  that  these  appeals  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, having regard  to  the  particular
    circumstances and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement.   There  are
    inadequate  findings  of  fact  in   relation   to   material   matters
    (specifically those relating to familial relationships  in  the  United
    Kingdom) for us to go on and re-make the decisions ourselves.

16. We have considered whether or not findings of fact made  by  the  judge
    should be preserved in respect of the remitted hearings.   Whilst  seen
    in isolation these findings are not necessarily infected by  errors  of
    law, it would in our view be unhelpful to the First-tier Tribunal,  and
    quite possibly artificial, to preserve these findings.  It may be  that
    evidence relating to the familial relationships will be  interconnected
    with that relating to the Appellants' own personal  circumstances,  and
    vice versa.  In our view the  sensible  course  of  action  is  not  to
    preserve any findings of fact,  and  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider these appeals afresh in due course.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law.

We aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

We remit these appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) these appeals  are  remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing  with  no
         findings of fact preserved;

      2) these appeals shall remain linked;

      3) it has been  accepted  by  the  Appellants  throughout  that  their
         Article 8 claims cannot succeed  with  reference  to  the  relevant
         Immigration Rules.  Therefore the core issue is  an  assessment  of
         Article 8 outside the context of the Rules.




No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        [pic]             Date: 21 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



