
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11647/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        PUNITKUMAR DASHRATHLAL NAYEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M West, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, who appeals with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal
against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal L K Gibbs, in which
she allowed the appeal of Mr Nayee against a decision of the Secretary of
State, dated 11 May 2018, refusing him leave to remain on human rights
grounds. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before
the First-tier Tribunal. From now on I shall refer to Mr Nayee as "the
appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

The appellant came to the UK to study. On 11 May 2018 he made a human
rights application seeking further leave on the grounds of his private life
and family life with his partner, Ms [CN], who is a British citizen ("the
sponsor"). The appellant married the sponsor on 29 October 2012 and had
twice been granted leave as a spouse.

The respondent refused the appellant's application by reference to
suitability grounds[1] because, following information provided by
Educational Testing Service ("ETS"), the appellant was considered to have
used deception in a previous application by employing a proxy test-taker at
his speaking test held at Portsmouth International College on 17 April
2012. It was noted that, at his interview on 11 May 2018, the appellant had
been unable to recall where he took the test and said it had been "in the
London area". The appellant's presence in the UK was not considered
conducive to the public good. Additionally, there were no insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing in India.

Judge Gibbs noted that the ETS SELT Source Data document submitted by the
respondent recorded that the appellant's test was "questionable". She
considered this was very significant because, as explained in the generic
witness statements relied on by the respondent, this categorisation is not
evidence that the test-taker used a proxy. It means the test was
"inconclusive" due to "administrative irregularities" at the test centre,
where numerous other tests had been invalidated.

At paragraph 13 of her decision, Judge Gibbs noted that Beatson LJ said in
SSHD v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 that, where the generic
evidence was not accompanied by evidence showing that the individual under
consideration's test had been invalid, as opposed to questionable, the
respondent faced a difficulty in respect of the evidential burden at the
initial stage[2].

Judge Gibbs went on in any event to consider whether the interview record
could assist the respondent to discharge the initial burden but she
considered it did not. She noted the respondent had not relied on it in the
refusal letter other than that the appellant could not remember the exact
location of the test. She said,

         "I am however satisfied that, some six years later, this is not
         unreasonable (he knew it was in London) and I am not satisfied that
         the respondent has discharged the evidential burden that is on
         him."

She added that she found the appellant to be "a credible witness" because
his evidence was consistent with the interview record. She found it
"plausible" that he chose the test centre on the advice of his college and
she found he was able to describe the nature of the tests taken. She did
not give weight to the suggestion it was damaging to his credibility that
he had been unable to estimate the number of people taking tests that day
because it is tricky to estimate numbers and the appellant would have been
focused on his test.

The respondent raised a single ground in his application seeking permission
to appeal which was that Judge Gibbs arguably made a material error of fact
in her assessment of the appellant's credibility because she had assumed
the test had been taken in London, failing to notice it had been taken in
Portsmouth. The respondent had relied on the test being taken in Portsmouth
in the reasons for refusal letter. The First-tier Tribunal granted
permission to appeal on this basis.

I heard submissions from the representatives on the question of whether
Judge Gibbs's decision should be set aside as a result of the error
identified.

Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds summarised above. He said the refusal
letter clearly stated the test had been taken in Portsmouth and it was
damaging to the appellant's credibility that he suggested he took the test
in the London area or "around London".

Mr West replied at length but it is not necessary to set out his
submissions in full because I largely agree with them. In my judgment,
there is no error of law in Judge Gibbs's decision.

The only error suggested is one of fact. However, there is no evidence to
show that Portsmouth International College is in Portsmouth or, at least,
not in the London area.  The appellant said in his witness statement he
took a train from Crawley to London. In other words, he maintained the test
was taken in London, albeit he could not remember exactly where in London.
It is a simple point that, absent evidence of the college's whereabouts, it
has not been shown that Judge Gibbs made a mistake of fact.

In any event, I read the decision of Judge Gibbs as showing that she found
no evidence capable of taking the respondent over the initial burden
because the test taken by the appellant had not been invalidated by ETS.
Rather, the results had been cancelled because it was deemed
"questionable". As she noted, that is not sufficient.

It is not entirely clear whether she then considered whether the interview
record was sufficiently damaging to the appellant that it was evidence
capable of placing a burden on him to provide an innocent explanation. This
seems to me doubtful given the absence of accompanying evidence of the
college's location. It is clear that her findings in the ensuing paragraphs
about the appellant's credibility were made in the alternative and her
primary finding was that there was no burden on the appellant.

Even if I were wrong in that analysis and the judge did err by not
regarding the interview record as sufficient to place the burden on the
appellant, it is clear the judge gave a number of cogent reasons for
finding the appellant credible such that he could be considered to have
provided a plausible explanation (see paragraph 57 of SM and Qadir (ETS -
Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC), citing the earlier
decision of Muhandiramge (Section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC)).
Those findings have not been challenged save for the same point about the
whereabouts of the college. For the reason already given, that is a bad
point.

Having made sustainable findings on the deception allegation, the judge
found the rules were met and that, absent any other considerations,
removing the appellant would breach Article 8. In effect, the public
interest had been removed. There is no material error in her decision,
which is upheld. The appeal of the respondent is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of law
and her decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 7 March 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
-----------------------
[1] Paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of the rules in respect of family
life and paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of the rules in respect of private life.
The former reads that leave to remain will be refused if:  "[t]he presence
of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good because
their conduct (including convictions which do not fall within paragraphs S-
LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations, or other reasons, make it
undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

[2] See paragraph 30 of the judgment.

