
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11275/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field house                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th September 2018               |On 16th October 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                            Ms MTETYANA ONYSHCHUK
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MS J Norman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ukraine, born on 17  April  1969,  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 11 April 2016 refusing her
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE and
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules and  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge CH O'Rouke dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 8 September 2017. Permission to appeal was
    first refused by Tribunal Judge Mark Davies but subsequently granted by
    Dr HH Storey, an Upper Tribunal Judge stating that it is arguable  that
    having accepted the sponsor would face "very significant  difficulties"
    if he accompanied the appellant to Ukraine the Judge arguably erred  in
    finding that there would be no insurmountable obstacle to the appellant
    and the  sponsor  continuing  their  relationship  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 4. At the hearing it was agreed that  the  Judge  had  made  an  error  by
    confusing Article 8 and EX1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  I
    was referred to the case of TZ (Pakistan) and PG  v  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA 1109 sets out recent decision
    of the Supreme Court in R (on the application of Agyarko) and Anor  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 where it  was
    made clear that the scheme established by the rules and  the  Secretary
    of State's instructions are  lawful  and  compatible  with  Article  8.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State is entitled  to  apply  a  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of  the  family  within  the
    rules and the test of exceptional circumstances  as  described  outside
    the immigration rules.

 5. In respect of insurmountable  obstacles,  the  Judge  found  that  "the
    sponsor would face very significant difficulties in Ukraine which he is
    unlikely to be able to overcome". The Judge listed  these  difficulties
    as that the sponsor speaks no  Ukrainian  and  therefore  he  would  be
    hindered in operating his business in that  country.  Even  if  he  was
    minded to re-establishing his business to operate in Ukraine,  starting
    afresh in a foreign country it would be very  unlikely  that  he  could
    operate the business to the same level. The sponsor  is  effectively  a
    sole trader/sole director with only one employee and his business has a
    large element of face-to-face engagement. He could not run his business
    effectively from Ukraine and as a consequence his livelihood  would  be
    damaged.

 6. It is established law that  appellant's  application  should  be  first
    considered under the immigration rules and only if the  applicant  does
    not qualify, the appeal should be considered outside immigration  rules
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  as  to
    whether the appellant's removal would amount to a breach of her Article
    8 rights.

 7. The only issue taken by the respondent in respect  of  the  immigration
    rules was whether the appellant comes within the exception set  out  in
    EX 1 (b) of the immigration rules. The Judge's findings were  that  the
    appellant's British citizen sponsor faced insurmountable  obstacles  in
    relocating to Ukraine which he  could  not  overcome  but  nevertheless
    found that he could relocate  to  Ukraine  with  the  appellant.  These
    findings are clearly contradictory, and the Judge has not  applied  the
    immigration rules correctly.

 8. EX.1. This paragraph applies if:

    (b)    the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

 9. The findings of the Judge were that the appellant's sponsor would  face
    insurmountable  obstacles  or  put  another   way,   very   significant
    difficulties to relocate to Ukraine which could not be  overcome.  This
    should have therefore entitled  the  appellant  to  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules. That was the only issue taken by the respondent.

10. The question was whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life with her partner continuing outside the United Kingdom.  EX1  only
    applies to the appellant,  if  she  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen settled in the United  Kingdom  and
    there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  with  her  spouse
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.

11.  Insurmountable  obstacles  have  been  defined  as  very   significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in
    continuing the family life together  outside  the  United  Kingdom  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the applicant or their partner.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into material error by  his  finding
    that the appellant did not come within the exceptions set  out  in  EX1
    even though he found that there were insurmountable obstacles  for  the
    appellant's British citizen sponsor to relocate to Ukraine to  continue
    family life with the appellant in that country.

13. The appellant's sponsor cannot relocate to Ukraine for the reasons  set
    out  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Therefore,  the
    appellant comes within the exception set out in EX1 of the  immigration
    rules.

14. I therefore set aside the decision of  Tribunal  Judge  and  remake  it
    allowing the appellant's appeal under the immigration rules.

DECISION

Appeal allowed pursuant to the Immigration Rules.


                                         Dated this 11th day of October 2018
.............................................
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana
