
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: HU/11473/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2020                    |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Clyde Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Clarke  ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  2  January  2020
    dismissing his human rights claim. Permission to appeal was granted  on
    1 April 2020.

 2. On 29 June 2020 directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal expressing
    the preliminary view that the error of law issue in this  appeal  could
    be determined without a hearing.

 3. On 4 July 2020 the respondent submitted submissions stating that it was
    accepted that the judge materially erred  by  not  making  findings  on
    whether paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules was satisfied
    or conducting a full proportionality assessment under article  8  ECHR.
    The respondent also submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. The appellant also expressed
    the view that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In the light of the  position  of  the  respondent,  I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside  on  the  basis
    that it involved the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.  As  the
    appeal will need to be considered afresh with  no  findings  preserved,
    having regard to  para.  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice  Statements  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is allowed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by  a  different
    judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Daniel Sheridan                      |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated:  16 August 2020               |






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email















