
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Hu/11732/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 April 2019                                |On 14 May 2019                 |
|                                                |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                   ADESANYA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Rashid &
                    Rashid, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. I have drawn upon what I said in finding that the determination  of
        the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error of law  in  setting  out
        the history of this appeal.

     2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 29 May 1971.
        He appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
        S. Meah promulgated on 25 July 2018 dismissing his appeal against
        the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his application
        for further leave.

     3. The appeal comes by way of a human rights appeal and it falls
        within the statutory requirements of what is now the new Part 5A of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The relevant
        provisions are to be found in s. 117B, Article 8 and the public
        interest considerations applicable to all cases.  Before dealing
        with the relevant material it is necessary to point out that this
        is not a deportation appeal and the further provisions of s.117C do
        not apply to it.

     4. The issue is a narrow one, and that is whether the judge correctly
        applied s. 117B(6), which is in the following terms:

"In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where -

(a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom."

     5. In the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 the Supreme Court has
        provided guidance as to the extent to which other considerations
        come into play in looking at whether it would be reasonable to
        expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  According to the
        decision of the Supreme Court, this is a self-contained exercise
        which refers simply to the interests of the children and does not
        therefore engage in a wider consideration of the reasonableness of
        the departure of the children from the United Kingdom, given the
        nature of the father's immigration status, his immigration claims
        and his own behaviour.

     6. In view of the approach adopted in KO (Nigeria), albeit an approach
        which was not developed until the Supreme Court gave its judgment,
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong in law.  It
        did not engage with the decision of the Supreme Court in KO
        (Nigeria).  I set it aside.

     7. Since the time I found the error of law, the Upper Tribunal (The
        President and UTJ Gill) has developed the thinking upon how the
        principle identified by the Supreme Court should be approached in
        practice.  In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey
        [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC), the headnote reads:

           Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
           2002 requires a court or tribunal to hypothesise that the  child
           in question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is  not
           likely to be the case, and ask whether it would be reasonable to
           expect the child to do so.

     8. The effect of this approach is to exclude the normal operation of a
        proportionality balance in which all the various factors are
        assessed in a holistic fashion such that the reasons in favour of
        the appellant's removal (normally his poor immigration history) are
        weighed against the impact upon the child.  By focussing solely on
        the effect upon the child, the Tribunal (the body to whom s. 117B
        is directed) is excluded from a consideration of the appellant's
        conduct.

     9. So much is clear from what is said in paragraph 41 of JG:



           We accept that this interpretation may result in an underserving
           individual or family remaining in the United  Kingdom.  However,
           the fact that Parliament has mandated  such  an  outcome  merely
           means that, in such cases, Parliament has  decided  to  be  more
           generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998.
           It can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part
           5A of imposing greater consistency in  decision-making  in  this
           area by courts and tribunals.


    10.  The hearing before me proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

    11. In paragraph 56 of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge, there was an express finding that it was accepted by the
        respondent that the appellant has a genuine subsisting parental
        relationship with his two children. However, in paragraph 57, the
        judge found that this was outweighed by the fact that the
        appellant's failure to meet the suitability requirements and his
        criminal offending.

    12. This approach by the First-tier Tribunal is now no longer lawful.

    13. The appellant is the father of two British children born on 30 July
        2012 and 14 April 2014 respectively.  Those children are living
        with their mother, who is also a British national.  It follows from
        this that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
        the United Kingdom.  The consideration is confined to the
        children's own best interests.  The appellant has a genuine and
        subsisting parental relationship with those children although he
        does not live with them.

    14. Ms Everett, on behalf of the Secretary of State, was not able to
        submit that he did not have a genuine subsisting parental
        relationship with his children notwithstanding the fact that the
        appellant does not live with them in the same household, given the
        facts as found by the judge.

    15. In these circumstances she did not feel able to argue that it was
        reasonable for these children to go to Nigeria.

    16. I entirely endorse the approach adopted by Miss Everett on the
        facts of the case.

DECISION

           i) Having made a material error of law, I set aside the
              determination of the first-tier Tribunal.

          ii)  I re-make the decision allowing the appeal against the
              decision of the Secretary of State refusing to grant him
              further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on Article 8
              grounds.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                               25 April 2019

