
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11735/2018
                                                               HU/11717/2018
                                                               HU/11721/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         RUTH [A] (FIRST appellant)
                           G A (SECOND appellant)
                            E A (THIRD appellant)
         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE FOR 2nd and 3rd APPELLANTS ONLY)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Ntochukwu of Counsel, instructed by Cardinal
                    Hume Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Under challenge in this appeal is the decision of Judge Siddall of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 5 February 2019 dismissing the appeal
    of the appellants against the decision made by the respondent on 15 May
    2018 refusing her application for leave to remain.  The appellants  are
    mother and two children. All are citizens of Nigeria.  The  second  and
    third appellants were born in June 2009 and October 2012  respectively.
    The first appellant arrived in the UK in 2008  on  a  student  visa  to
    study health and  social  care,  but  in  2013  her  college  lost  its
    sponsorship and she did not  complete  her  qualification.   The  third
    appellant, E, has been diagnosed as having special  needs.   The  first
    appellant is a single parent.  At the hearing before the FtT the family
    was being supported by their church and friends who provide  them  with
    food and small amounts of money.

2.   The appellants' grounds of appeal were heavily discursive.   The  judge
    who considered the application for permission  granted  leave  only  on
    "what I will call Ground 1 that is, the  reasonableness  of  the  child
    leaving the UK".  The appellant's skeleton argument produced  for  this
    hearing sought to reformulate this  ground  so  that  the  main  errors
    concerned alleged failure to apply the judicial  principles  enunciated
    in respect of the reasonableness of expecting  the  second  child  (now
    aged 9) to leave the UK as set out as a requirement of  paragraph  EX.1
    of the Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the  NIAA  2002  or  to
    give adequate reasons for departing  from  these  principles.   It  was
    argued that the judge erred in  taking  into  account  the  parent  not
    having a right to remain in the UK.  This was said to be at  odds  with
    the guidance set out by the Supreme Court in KO [2018] UKSC 53  and  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph 49.  This error was said to
    have been committed by the judge at paragraph 50, wherein she wrote:

         "50. The case of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 confirms much  of  the
             reasoning in MA (Pakistan) but emphasises that the conduct  of
             parents should  not  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing
             whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK and
             whether for example the test set out in section 117B(6) can be
             met.  However the case also suggests that the position of  the
             parents may be indirectly relevant to the question of  whether
             it is reasonable for the child to leave.  The words of Lewison
             LJ in the case of EV were approved when  he  stated  that  the
             assessment of the best interests of the child must be made  on
             'real world' facts and take into account the position  of  the
             parents: 'Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable
             to expect the child to follow the  parent  with  no  right  to
             remain to the country of origin?'  To  that  extent  therefore
             the fact that a parent may be removed  because  they  have  no
             right to remain will be a relevant factor".

    The same error was said to have been made in paragraph 61.


3.   The judge's approach was also said to be contrary to the  reasoning  of
    the Court of Appeal in SSHD v AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661  which
    held, in line with JG  (section  117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC), that it is not a  requirement  of  section
    117B(6) for there to be a realistic prospect of the child  leaving  the
    UK as a consequence of the person's removal.  The grounds  pointed  out
    that in JG the Upper Tribunal found that it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK, notwithstanding  that  the  appellant
    was highly dishonest and unscrupulous.  It was further  submitted  that
    the judge erred in  linking  the  life  of  the  child  G  (the  second
    appellant) around her parent.  Aim was taken at what the judge set  out
    at paragraph 54:

         "54. Following the guidance in MA  (Pakistan)  I  give  significant
             weight to the fact that G has lived all her life here  and  is
             now aged nine.  She has entered the school system here  and  I
             find that it would be disruptive to her life and her education
             if she were to return with her mother to a country  that  will
             be unfamiliar to her.  Nevertheless, she has not yet reached a
             crucial stage of her education and is at a young age when  her
             life inevitably revolves around  her  parent.   She  has  been
             living within a Nigerian community at her friend's house which
             would make her transition easier".

    The judge was said to have  been  plainly  wrong  and  inconsistent  in
    paragraph 54 of the decision in finding on the one hand that  it  would
    be disruptive to the second appellant's life and education if she  were
    to return with her mother to Nigeria (a country with which she was  not
    familiar), and on the other hand  concluding in the same paragraph that
    G could be returned to  Nigeria  with  her  parent.   In  this  regard,
    emphasis was placed on the judge's finding at paragraph 57 that:

         "57. Clearly it is in the best interests of the children to  remain
             living with their mother.  On balance I find that it would  be
             in G and E's best interests to remain in  the  UK  with  their
             mother as a move to Nigeria would be disruptive for them and E
             would no longer be able to access the substantial support  she
             has been receiving to address her particular needs".

4.   The judge was said to have erred further in  departing  without  reason
    from established  judicial  and  statutory  guidance  when  finding  at
    paragraph 54 of her decision that G "has not reached a crucial stage of
    her education and is at a young age when her life  inevitably  revolves
    around her parent".  In addition to G's school ties and connections  to
    her friends, the fact that she had resided in the  UK  for  over  seven
    years (nearly ten) meant that the judge was obliged to consider whether
    there were "powerful reasons" why G who had been in the UK  for  nearly
    ten years should be removed, notwithstanding that  the  two  children's
    best interests were found to lie in remaining  in  the  UK  with  their
    mother.  Reference was made to the reported case of MT and ET  (child's
    best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC).

5.   I heard submissions from both representatives for which  I  express  my
    gratitude.

My Assessment

6.   I do not find any of the appellants' grounds made out.

7.   It is argued that the judge erred by taking into account  the  parent's
    immigration misconduct when assessing reasonableness, contrary  to  the
    guidance given in KO.  It is true that in paragraph 59, when conducting
    her analysis of reasonableness, the judge  stated  that  "I  take  into
    account that the first appellant is a single parent  who  has  not  had
    leave to remain in  the  UK  since  2013".   However,  as  the  grounds
    themselves recognise, that statement must be read  in  the  context  of
    what the judge said at paragraph 50.  The judge opens the paragraph  by
    accurately describing the  principle  set  out  in  MA  (Pakistan)  and
    confirmed by KO that the conduct of the parent should not be taken into
    account when assessing reasonableness.  In stating that the position of
    the parents "may be indirectly relevant to the question of  whether  it
    is reasonable for the child to leave", the judge  was  not  seeking  to
    depart from the guidance set out in MA (Pakistan) and KO but rather  to
    underline that part of that guidance was an acceptance of the  indirect
    relevance of parental conduct.  In paragraph 50 and related  paragraphs
    the judge was simply noting, accurately, what was said by Lord Carnwath
    in paragraph 18 of KO:

         "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them.  To that extent the record of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave.  It is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain.  The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd in
             SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:


                  '22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                      whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave
                      the UK one has to address the  question,  'Why  would
                      the child be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom?'
                      In a case such as this there can only be one  answer:
                      'because the parents have no right to remain  in  the
                      UK'.  To approach  the  question  in  any  other  way
                      strips away the context in which  the  assessment  of
                      reasonableness is being made ...'"

    Hence, the appellants' principal submission must fail.  The  judge  did
    not depart from Supreme Court guidance, which in  turn  drew  on  other
    Court of Appeal cases.

8.   To the extent that the grounds  seek  to  pray  in  aid  the  Court  of
    Appeal's and Upper Tribunal's guidance in SSHD v AB  (Jamaica)  and  JG
    respectively, I again see nothing to indicate that the  judge  departed
    from it.  The judge does not base her assessment of  reasonableness  of
    there being a realistic prospect of the  child  leaving  the  UK  as  a
    consequence  of  the  first  appellant's  removal.   The  judge  simply
    hypothesised what the children's situation would be if  they  left  the
    UK, and concluded that taking all the  circumstances  into  account  it
    would be reasonable for them to leave the UK.

9.   I see no merit in the attempt in the grounds to use  JG  as  a  factual
    precedent.  The fact that in the JG case the Upper Tribunal found  that
    the very poor immigration history  of  the  parent  did  not  make  the
    appellant's removal reasonable, was a finding on the  particular  facts
    of that case.  It was already the premise of the judge's assessment  in
    this case that the conduct of the  parent  should  not  be  taken  into
    account except indirectly.

10.  It is also readily  observable  from  the  judge's  decision  that  she
    should approach her assessment  of  reasonableness  in  line  with  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)  so  as  to  ask
    whether there were "powerful reasons as to  why  leave  should  not  be
    granted" (paragraph 58).

11.  The grounds seek to argue that having found at paragraph  57  that  "it
    would be in the best interests of the children to remain in the UK with
    their mother as a move to Nigeria would be disruptive for  them  and  E
    would no longer receive the substantial support she has been  receiving
    to address her particular needs", it was inconsistent of the  judge  to
    have concluded that there were powerful reasons for them to be expected
    to leave the UK.  However, in making  that  assessment  the  judge  was
    careful to apply the principles from case law,  specifically  referring
    in paragraph 45 to what Elias LJ said at paragraph 47 of MA  (Pakistan)
    that - "even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still
    not be reasonable to require the child to leave".

12.  Whilst the judge's assessment  of  the  appellants'  circumstances  was
    robust, I do not consider it was legally flawed.  Reading  the  judge's
    decision it is clear what the powerful reasons were for  expecting  the
    children to leave: in terms of  linguistic  considerations,  she  found
    that they both had some familiarity with Yoruba  and  that  English  is
    spoken in Nigeria  in  any  event  and  that  there  is  a  functioning
    education system in Nigeria; in terms of social and  cultural  factors,
    she noted that in the UK they were living within a household of  ethnic
    Nigerians; in terms of E's health, she noted that the evidence did  not
    demonstrate that she was autistic  and  that  the  background  evidence
    indicated that it was possible to access paediatric and speech  therapy
    services in Nigeria;  in  terms  of  family  circumstances,  the  judge
    expressly did not accept the  first  appellant's  claim  to  have  lost
    contact with family in Nigeria; and in terms of economic circumstances,
    the judge noted that the first appellant had acquired skills  and  work
    experience in the UK which would assist her in finding  employment  and
    being able to support her family back in Nigeria.

13.  In amplifying the grounds  and  his  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Ntochukwu
    contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  treating  the  oldest   child's
    connections as confined to that with her  mother.   However,  what  the
    judge said at paragraph 54 was that "she has not yet reached a  crucial
    stage in her education and is at a young age when her  life  inevitably
    revolves  around  her  parent".   In  stating  that  the  child's  life
    "revolved" around her mother, the judge clearly did not mean to suggest
    the child has  no  other  ties.   The  judge  was  clearly  drawing  on
    observations made in a range of decided cases which have emphasised the
    relevance of whether or not a child is at an advanced or critical stage
    of their education.  In relation to both G and  E,  the  judge  clearly
    recognised that they had friendships through school and community.   At
    paragraph 63 the judge notes that:

         "63. The letters of support contained in  the  bundle  demonstrates
             that the first appellant and her children have  established  a
             strong private life in the UK since her arrival  and  she  has
             been supported by her friends and by the church (although this
             support is not without limits, as demonstrated by  the  letter
             from Ms [O]).  I must take into account  the  fact  that  this
             private life has been established while  her  leave  here  has
             been highly precarious".

14.  In short, the judge's assessment of  reasonableness  was  characterised
    by a particularly careful attention to higher court  guidance  and  her
    application of that guidance to the facts of the appellants' case  does
    not disclose any material error of law.

15.  For the above reasons I conclude that the appellants' grounds  fail  to
    identify an error of law in the judge's assessment  of  reasonableness.
    Accordingly, her decision must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third appellant are granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both  to
the second and third appellants and to the respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2019
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
