
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11628/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                            |On 8 January 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         miss chenchira mangkhalakun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi, Counsel instructed by Rehoboth Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent  on  27  February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a  citizen  of  Thailand,
    against a decision made by the respondent on 10 November 2015  refusing
    leave to remain.

2.   It is unnecessary for me to set  out  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  any
    detail because Ms Ahmad accepts that the judge erred in failing to take
    into account the fact that the appellant is the  parent  of  a  British
    citizen child.

3.   In light of this failure on the part of  the  judge  I  set  aside  his
    decision for material error of law.  I consider I am in a  position  to
    re-make the decision without further ado.

4.   I re-make the decision by allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   Applying
    the guidance given in  SF  and  Others  [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC)  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant falls within the scope of S.117B(6) of the
    NIAA 2002 by virtue of being the parent of a British citizen child.  As
    regards reasonableness, it is the respondent's own policy that save  in
    cases featuring criminality or serious immigration misconduct it  would
    not be reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK  in
    order to be with a parent.  There is no issue of  criminality  in  this
    case.  Whilst the appellant came to the UK in August 2014 as a  visitor
    and overstayed, it is not suggested that her migration  history  is  of
    such an order as to take her outwith  the  scope  of  the  Home  Office
    policy.  Accordingly, because the appellant falls within the  scope  of
    the policy, there is no public interest in her being required to  leave
    the UK.  Her appeal succeeds on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:5 January 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



