

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/11011/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4th of April 2018                  |        On 13th April 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MR DEORAJ LIMBU
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Shrestha of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 1st of  January  1977.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Khan
      sitting at Hatton Cross on 20th  of  July  2017  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
      dated 18th of March 2016. That decision was to refuse the  Appellant's
      application for entry clearance as the  adult  dependent  son  of  his
      mother, the widow of an ex-Gurkha, pursuant to  section  EC-DR.1.1  of
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and Annex K of  IDI  Chapter  15,
      section 2A 13.2 as amended on 5th of January 2015.



The Appellant's Case

   2. The  Appellant's  case  was  that  he  was  unemployed  and  therefore
      financially dependent upon his mother who in turn was  dependent  upon
      her deceased husband's army pension and her pension entitlement in the
      United Kingdom. The Appellant maintained daily contact with his mother
      by telephone.  His  mother  was  willing  and  able  to  maintain  and
      accommodate him without recourse to public funds.  The  Appellant  was
      dependent upon her for financial and emotional support.

The Reasons for Refusal

   3. The Respondent refused the claim stating that the  Appellant's  mother
      was reliant on public funds in United Kingdom and as her dependent the
      Appellant too would become dependent upon public funds. The Respondent
      was not satisfied that the Appellant's mother's income was  sufficient
      to adequately support the  Appellant  as  well  as  meet  her  monthly
      outgoings in the form of rent, bills and maintenance. The  application
      was refused under section EC-DR 1.1 (D) of Appendix FM.


   4. Under Annex K the former Gurkha Sponsor must have  settled  under  the
      2009 discretionary arrangements and be in the process of being granted
      settlement in the United Kingdom under the discretionary  arrangements
      at the same time as the applicant. In this case the  Appellant's  late
      father did not fall within that requirement and Annex K did  not  make
      provisions for the adult children of an ex-Gurkha widow. The Appellant
      was 39 years of age and had not  declared  any  care  arrangements  or
      requirements in Nepal. There was no  personal  incapacity  or  medical
      conditions or disability. The Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant was wholly financially and/or emotionally dependent  on  his
      UK Sponsor as required by Annex K. That he was living apart  from  his
      mother was a direct result of her decision to migrate  to  the  United
      Kingdom rather than as a result of the Appellant being away  from  the
      family unit as a consequence of  educational  or  other  requirements.
      There were no exceptional compassionate circumstances in this case why
      the application should be allowed. This decision was upheld on  appeal
      by the entry clearance manager.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant's mother who said she only
      had one son the Appellant.  He  collected  her  husband's  pension  in
      Nepal. That was where the pension was paid to her  and  she  gave  the
      Appellant a certain amount of money out of it.  She  had  been  giving
      money to the Appellant since 2011 when she came to the United Kingdom.
      When she was in Nepal she and the Appellant had no place of their own,
      they lived in rented accommodation. She had  daily  contact  with  the
      Appellant sometimes 2 or 3 times per day. She  returned  to  Nepal  in
      2014 for four weeks and again in 2017. The Appellant had not done  any
      work since leaving university in 2000 because he could  not  find  any
      work. There were no jobs available in Nepal even though he had been to
      the capital Kathmandu to look for work.


   6.  Although she said she had only one son she in fact  had  another  son
      who had gone to India but she sometimes  forgot  things.  She  had  no
      contact with her son in India. She had lived at an address in Hounslow
      for the past three years and did not know why her  statement  gave  an
      address in Bracknell. In answer to questions from the Judge  she  said
      that her son in India was older than the Appellant. He had gone  there
      in about 2009, he was not married and had no  children.  She  had  not
      been to Nepal earlier than 2014 because of insufficient funds.


   7. At [26] to [34] the Judge  set  out  his  conclusions.  He  found  the
      Sponsor's evidence to be vague and evasive for  example  on  how  many
      sons she had and why the Appellant had not worked since completing his
      education in 2000. Although she had substantial funds in  her  account
      in Nepal she continued to send money from the United  Kingdom  to  the
      Appellant. This was just to support the Appellant's application to the
      United Kingdom. There was nothing to  show  the  Appellant  was  being
      financially supported before 2011 or how he had been supported  whilst
      he was at university. The Sponsor's evidence was neither credible  nor
      consistent.


   8. The Judge did not find it credible or consistent  that  the  Appellant
      would not have undertaken employment or that no work was available  to
      him in Nepal. If the Appellant had not undertaken any work during  his
      adult life it was from choice rather  than  necessity.  The  Appellant
      could not bring himself within the provisions of annex K and the Judge
      did not accept that  the  Appellant  was  financially  or  emotionally
      dependent on his mother. The requirements of Appendix FM could not  be
      met either. Any family and private life ties between the Appellant and
      his mother amounted  to  no  more  than  normal  emotional  ties.  The
      Appellant had spent the whole of his life in Nepal and had friends and
      lived  in  the  community  there.  The   Respondent's   decision   was
      proportionate in all circumstances. The Judge dismissed the appeal

The Onward Appeal

   9. The Appellant appealed against this decision making two  main  points.
      The 1st was that the Judge had erred in finding that the  family  life
      between the Appellant and his mother  did  not  amount  to  more  than
      normal emotional ties. The 2nd  was  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
      consider the historical injustice  in  the  proportionality  balancing
      exercise at [34] of the  determination.  The  grounds  criticised  the
      Judge's findings relating to the money sent  by  the  Sponsor  to  the
      Appellant. It was not open to the Judge to  find  that  the  financial
      support  provided  to  the  Appellant  was  a  matter  of  choice  not
      necessity.
  10. Citing the case of Pun [2011] UKUT 377 this ground stated: "Although a
      contrived dependency would carry little if any  weight,  if  financial
      dependency was of choice to the extent that an applicant was dependent
      so that they could pursue further  studies  this  would  not,  without
      more, mean that such a dependency could not  properly  be  taken  into
      account.


  11. The 17,000 Nepali rupees received by the Appellant from  his  mother's
      account in Nepal was not always sufficient  to  pay  for  studies  and
      living expenses. It was not  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
      Appellant was not working because of choice. The  Appellant  had  been
      unable to find work in Nepal as employment was scarce there. That  had
      not been challenged by the Respondent. The Appellant  was  emotionally
      dependent on the Sponsor and there was extensive evidence  of  contact
      between the two. The Appellant had lost his  father  when  he  was  14
      years old and had not seen his brother  since  the  brother  left  for
      India. The Sponsor had maintained regular contact with  the  Appellant
      since coming to the United Kingdom in 2011. Family life had existed at
      the time the Appellant's mother left Nepal and had  endured  as  there
      was regular contact.


  12. In relation to proportionality the grounds cited at some  length  from
      the Court of Appeal decision in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8. The historic
      injustice was an important factor to be  taken  into  account  in  the
      balancing exercise. The adult dependent child  of  a  Gurkha  who  was
      settling in the United Kingdom had a strong claim to have his  Article
      8 rights vindicated notwithstanding the potency of the  countervailing
      public interest in the maintenance of a firm immigration policy. If  a
      Gurkha could show that but for the historic injustice  he  would  have
      settled in the United Kingdom at a time when his dependent  now  adult
      child had been able to accompany him as a dependent  child  under  the
      age  of  18  that  was  a  strong  reason  for  holding  that  it  was
      proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family now.


  13. In Ghising [2013] UKUT 567 it was held  that  the  historic  injustice
      would carry significant weight on the Appellant's side of the  balance
      and was likely to outweigh matters relied upon by the Respondent where
      those consisted solely of the public interest in  maintaining  a  firm
      immigration  policy.  The  Judge  had  made  no  reference  to   these
      authorities in his decision.


  14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Foudy on 8th of February 2018. She found it arguable that the  Judge's
      finding that there was no dependency between  the  Appellant  and  his
      mother may amount to an error of law in the  light  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal decision in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

The Hearing Before Me

  15. As a consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before  me
      to determine in the first place whether there was a material error  of
      law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it fell to be
      set aside. If there was I would give directions for the  rehearing  of
      the matter. If there was not then  the  decision  at  Firstt  instance
      would stand.


  16. For the Appellant counsel argued that the Judge was wrong to say  that
      there was no family life in this case. The Judge had  failed  to  take
      into account the most recent authority of the Court of Appeal  in  the
      case of Rai. That case dealt with how Article 8 was engaged in a  case
      where there were adult dependent children.  This  case  was  about  an
      Appellant  who  was  the  child  of  a  former  Gurkha  soldier.   The
      Appellant's father died when the  Appellant  was  14  years  old.  The
      Appellant's mother had been sending money to the Appellant  since  she
      came to the United Kingdom in 2011, it was not a  case  that  she  had
      only been sending money since  the  refusal.  There  was  evidence  of
      regular every day contact between the Appellant and his mother. In the
      light of all this evidence the Judge had to  consider  whether  family
      life existed.


  17. He had failed to take into account all of  the  jurisprudence  on  the
      subject of Gurkha dependents. He dealt with the issue  of  Gurkhas  in
      one paragraph. The Respondent's own guidelines said  if  an  applicant
      could not satisfy the policy, consideration had to be given to Article
      8. The issue in the case following Rai  was  whether  there  was  real
      effective support from the Appellant's mother for the  Appellant.  The
      Judge had not even dealt with that. The question was whether there was
      family life between the Appellant and his mother when his mother chose
      to come to the United Kingdom. The Judge had not made any findings  on
      that point either. Hundreds of pounds  had  been  spent  on  telephone
      calls between the Appellant and his mother and there was  evidence  of
      money sent by her to him.


  18. The Judge had echoed the Respondent's view that because the  Appellant
      had  not  met  the  requirements  of  the  rules  the   decision   was
      proportionate under Article  8.  The  Appellant's  older  brother  had
      disappeared and was not in contact with the family. The correct course
      of action was to set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside and
      remit the matter back to the First-tier to for a proper assessment  to
      be made.


  19. In response the Presenting Officer argued there was no material  error
      of law in the determination. Whilst it was true that the case law  had
      not been  mentioned  in  the  determination  the  Appellant  had  left
      university 16 years ago. He was living within his community  in  Nepal
      and there were no more than normal emotional ties between him and  his
      mother. Had the Judge incorporated Rai into his decision it would have
      made no material difference. The decision should stand. In  conclusion
      counsel argued that the failure to take the cases into account was  an
      error of law. The grounds  had  referred  to  the  case  of  Pun  (see
      paragraph 10 above). This was not a contrived  dependence.  The  Judge
      had made a material error of law in coming to that conclusion.

Findings

  20. The issue in this case was whether the Appellant could succeed outside
      the Immigration Rules under the provisions  of  Article  8  (right  to
      respect for private and family life) of the Human  Rights  Convention.
      It appears that there is a typographical error at the end of  [33]  of
      the determination where the Judge wrote "the  Respondent  decision  is
      breach of Article 8 of the ECHR". It is clear from the  general  tenor
      of the determination that the  Judge  meant  to  say  there  that  the
      Respondent's decision was  not  a  breach  of  Article  8.  The  Judge
      considered for himself Article 8 at [34] and rejected the claim.


  21. The point in this case was whether there was family life  between  the
      Appellant and his mother which went beyond normal emotional  ties.  In
      Rai the Court of Appeal made it clear that what had to  be  considered
      when assessing Article 8 was whether there was family life between the
      Appellant and his parent at the time of the separation when the parent
      came to the United Kingdom and whether  that  family  life  continued.
      Where the Upper Tribunal had erred in that case was  in  concentrating
      on the decision of the Appellant's parents to leave Nepal  and  settle
      in the United Kingdom.


  22. At paragraph 34 of the Court of Appeal decision it was made clear that
      it was not of itself fatal if a  Judge  did  not  give  a  clear  self
      direction in the terms synthesised in the Upper Tribunal's decision in
      Ghising. What was necessary was to consider whether the support if any
      provided by the parent in the United Kingdom was real or committed  or
      effective. In Rai the Court found "ample and  undisputed  evidence  on
      which the Upper Tribunal Judge could have based the finding that  such
      support was present in the Appellant's case". What the Court of Appeal
      also stated was whether an Appellant enjoy family life at the relevant
      time was a question of fact for the Tribunal to decide.


  23. Did the Judge's decision in the instant case fall short of  a  careful
      consideration of all  the  relevant  facts  in  deciding  whether  the
      Appellant did enjoy family life at  the  relevant  time?  The  Judge's
      conclusion  section  was  concise,  it  occupied  two  pages  of   the
      determination, but the Judge had set out the evidence and  submissions
      before him. The difficulty for the Appellant in this case was that the
      evidence given by the Sponsor was found to be vague and  evasive.  The
      Judge  was  clearly  unimpressed  by  the  Appellant's  mother's  oral
      evidence that she only had one son when her statement had said she had
      two. The Judge noted that the mother was extremely vague as to why her
      son in India did not keep in touch with her and the Appellant.


  24. The burden of establishing that the family life which existed  between
      the Appellant and his mother went beyond normal emotional ties lay  on
      the Appellant. If the evidence produced by the Appellant to the  Judge
      was not credible and/or was vague and evasive, it was  not  surprising
      that the Judge in those circumstances would not find that family  life
      beyond normal emotional ties existed. The Appellant's case  rested  on
      stating that he was dependent upon his  mother  both  financially  and
      emotionally. The Judge rejected both arguments. Funds were being  sent
      from the United Kingdom to the Appellant as a  matter  of  choice  not
      necessity and there was no evidence to show how the Appellant had been
      supported whilst he was at university.


  25. The Appellant was now aged 40 years and the  Judge  did  not  find  it
      credible or consistent that the Appellant would  not  have  undertaken
      employment in Nepal.  The grounds of onward appeal  claimed  that  the
      money sent by the Appellant's mother to the Appellant was "not  always
      sufficient to pay for his studies". The Appellant had claimed  to  the
      Respondent that he had commenced a  BEd  course  in  2015,  see  [14].
      Whether the Appellant was still studying was unclear. The  Sponsor  in
      her evidence claimed that the Appellant could not  continue  with  his
      studies because there were always strikes in colleges  in  Nepal.   In
      the absence of clear evidence that the Appellant was still studying it
      is not perhaps surprising that the Judge found  the  evidence  he  did
      receive as to dependency to be implausible.


  26. The Judge had to make a finding whether the Appellant could  discharge
      the burden of showing that he was unable to work when  there  were  no
      documented medical concerns in this case and there was no evidence  of
      jobs whether in the hotel trade or otherwise  being  applied  for  and
      rejected. Rather more evidence (that  could  reasonably  be  obtained)
      needed to be produced than was made  available.  The  grounds  claimed
      that the Respondent had not challenged the  Appellant's  inability  to
      find work in Nepal. That is not strictly accurate. Leaving aside  that
      a refusal letter is not a pleading, the Respondent's view was that the
      Appellant was a fit and capable adult  who  was  able  to  look  after
      himself. That necessarily meant that  the  Respondent  considered  the
      Appellant could work. The Judge was entitled to deal with  this  issue
      in his determination. and the Sponsor had been given  the  opportunity
      in  oral  evidence  to  deal  with  the  point,  see   [20]   of   the
      determination. The  evidence  before  the  Judge  fell  far  short  of
      demonstrating an inability to find or hold down a job.


  27. There is a family life between a mother and her son but where,  as  in
      this case, it was a relationship between two adults it  was  necessary
      for the Appellant to show that that relationship  went  beyond  normal
      emotional ties, that is that there was a dependency. If the  Appellant
      could not could not show that then the Article 8 claim would  stop  at
      that point. There was sufficient in the determination to indicate  why
      Article 8 was not engaged in this case. This was not  because  of  the
      decision of the Appellant's mother to leave the Appellant  behind  and
      travel to the United Kingdom (the error of the Upper tribunal in Rai).
      It was because there was no cogent evidence of  dependency  either  at
      the date that the Sponsor left  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  or
      subsequently.


  28. The Judge's finding was that as a 40-year old man  who  had  completed
      his university education the Appellant would not remain unemployed for
      the length of time claimed. The financial dependency was not accepted.
      This was a contrived dependency which was rejected by the Judge.  This
      was not a case of a dependency being continued because  the  Appellant
      wished to continue in higher education while an adult, see above.  The
      Appellant's university education had finished in 2000.  There  was  no
      reason why the Appellant should be dependent on money sent to  him  by
      his mother particularly as there was no good reason why he had  failed
      on his case to find a job. There were gaps in the history  as  to  how
      the Appellant had been supported at times which inevitably  undermined
      the credibility of the Appellant's application. The evidence about the
      Appellant's  older  brother  was  particularly   unsatisfactory.   The
      evidence ranged from there being only one son of the  Sponsor  to  two
      sons. If the Sponsor could not be relied upon to say how many children
      she had what evidence she gave as to dependency whether at the date of
      separation or subsequently could be relied upon? It  is  not  for  the
      Upper Tribunal as an appellate jurisdiction to second-guess a Judge in
      those circumstances. I remind myself that Judge Khan had  the  benefit
      of seeing the Sponsor give evidence  which  he  found  fell  short  of
      proving the Appellant's case.


  29.  The  2nd  argument  made  in  the  case  of  Rai  was  the  issue  of
      proportionality which relates to the argument attached to the historic
      injustice. It was argued before the Court of Appeal that  such  weight
      is given to that argument that it will normally be enough to cause the
      proportionality  balance  to  fall  in  an  Appellant's  favour.  That
      argument overlooks the fact that after Ghising was decided  Parliament
      enacted Section 117A to D of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002. That stipulates the matters which must be taken into account
      when assessing the proportionality or otherwise of  interference  with
      family life. Any argument as to historic injustice  does  not  relieve
      the Tribunal of the obligation to consider such provisions.


  30. The Respondent had considered this matter in his refusal  notice  when
      it was stated that the Appellant's mother was reliant on public  funds
      and as her dependent the Appellant would become an extension of  this.
      This would be a clear breach of section 117B (3). The matter was  left
      somewhat open by the Court of Appeal in Rai because the case  did  not
      reach as far as to consider the issue  of  proportionality  since  the
      Upper Tribunal had not correctly considered whether there  was  family
      life between the Appellant and his parents.


  31. In the instant case before me the Judge has considered  whether  there
      was family life between the Appellant and his mother and found that it
      did not go beyond normal emotional ties. At paragraph 51  of  Rai  the
      Court of Appeal stated that if the Appellant had failed  to  establish
      he had a family life with his parents it would follow that  there  was
      no need for the Judge to embark on a  proportionality  assessment.  It
      was not strictly necessary for Judge Khan to  consider  the  issue  of
      proportionality since he found that there was no  family  life  beyond
      normal emotional ties to be interfered with.


  32.  Nevertheless,  the  Judge  did  go  on  to  consider  the  Article  8
      proportionality issue at [34] and found that the Respondent's decision
      was a proportionate interference  with  the  Appellant's  private  and
      family life. The Judge explained why the Appellant's private life  was
      not disproportionately interfered with because of the Appellant's ties
      to his community in Nepal. The Judge did not refer to Section 117B  in
      terms although that is not an error in itself. Section 117B would  not
      have assisted the Appellant since he could not  show  self-sufficiency
      as the Respondent pointed out in the refusal letter. It  is  difficult
      to see how the historic  injustice  argument  would  have  tipped  the
      balance in the Appellants favour given the effect of the statute, even
      assuming the case would have reached that far.


  33. This case as so often with Article 8 appeals turned very much  on  its
      own facts. The Judge's decision was open to him on the evidence before
      him given the unreliability of the oral evidence he received. I  agree
      with the submission that the grounds of appeal in this case amount  to
      no more than a disagreement with the result. They do not indicate  any
      material error of law on the Judge's part and I therefore dismiss  the
      Appellant's onward appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 5th of April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 5th of April 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




