
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/11598/2015
                                                               hu/11593/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 16 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              veejayen soondrum
                             yuvaranee soondrum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Jaufurally, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the   respondent's
    decision of 9 November 2015 refusing further leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds.



Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Mauritius, the first appellant was  born
    on 17 June 1961 and is the father of the second appellant  born  on  22
    September 1993.  The first appellant's wife   has indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK and there is another adult child of the family.   They
    live together as a family unit in the UK.

3.   The first appellant entered the UK in January 2006 as the dependant  of
    his wife who was a student.  His leave was  extended  on  a  number  of
    occasions and finally expired on 27  May  2015.   On  26  May  2015  he
    applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  private  and  family
    life.  The second appellant is dependent on his application.

4.   The decision was considered  under  the  ten-year  partner  route  and,
    whilst  it  was  accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his  Mauritian  wife  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, there was no evidence that there were insurmountable  obstacles
    in accordance with para EX.2. i.e. that there would be very significant
    difficulties in continuing family life outside  the  UK  in  Mauritius,
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship.  The
    application was also considered under the  ten-year  parent  route  but
    their children were over the age of 18 at the date of application.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant could meet the  private
    life requirements of the Rules  or  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances relating to the family which might  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave outside the requirements of the Rules.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    The  judge  also  found  that  the  appellants  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Rules and went on to consider  the  position  under
    article 8.  He accepted that both family and private life  was  engaged
    but for the reasons he set out in [51], he found that the  interference
    with their right to respect for  their  private  and  family  life  was
    outweighed by the public interest in  maintaining  effective  and  fair
    immigration control.  For this reason, the appeal was dismissed.

6.   In the grounds of appeal,  it  is  argued  that  there  was  procedural
    unfairness in that amended grounds were filed in January  2017  on  the
    basis that the appellants could meet the requirements of para  276B  of
    the Rules as they  had  acquired  ten  years'  lawful  residence.   The
    appeal, originally listed for 6 January 2017, had been  adjourned  with
    directions given by the First-tier  Tribunal  ordering  the  return  of
    passports to enable the appellants to  sit  the  para  276B(iv)  tests.
    They did so and were successful. The respondent  was  to  withdraw  the
    decision so that the appellants could make an application on the  basis
    of long residence but  there  was  no  response  and  the  Tribunal  by
    direction dated 1 October 2017 confirmed that  the  appeal  was  to  go
    ahead.  At the  resumed  hearing  on  2  November  2017,  the  relevant
    certificates were given to the judge and submissions  were  made  about
    the length of the appellants' residence.

7.   The second ground  argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons  for  his  decision  and  had  failed  to  assess  whether  the
    appellants met the terms of para 276B in the  light  of  the  direction
    given to the respondent to supply the appellants with their  passports,
    the amended grounds and the request to the respondent to  withdraw  the
    earlier decision.  Thirdly, it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to take into account all the documentary evidence  provided  to
    the Tribunal.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that at the date of the hearing the appellants had lived in the UK  for
    over ten years and it was arguable that the judge had erred in  law  by
    failing to consider the facts as at that date or  to  consider  whether
    the appellants could satisfy the Rules in relation to long residence.

Submissions

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Jaufurally adopted his  grounds.   He  also
    referred to the skeleton argument dated  6  January  2017  raising  the
    issue of the length of the appellants' continuous lawful residence  and
    to the Home Office guidance that  a  person  may  complete  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence while they are awaiting the outcome  of  an
    appeal and submit an application on this basis,  although  it  was  not
    possible to submit an application when an appeal was outstanding but an
    applicant could submit further grounds to be considered at the  appeal.
    The judge had erred, so he argued, by failing to deal at all  with  the
    issue of continuous residence.

10.  Mr Whitwell conceded that the judge  had  erred  in  this  respect  but
    submitted that it would not be appropriate for the appeal to be allowed
    to the extent of granting indefinite leave but if the decision was  re-
    made and allowed, the issue of what leave  should  be  granted  to  the
    appellants should be a matter for the respondent  who  would  have  the
    opportunity of considering whether there were any  reasons  whether  it
    would be undesirable for them to be given indefinite leave to remain.

Assessment of the Issues

11.  I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing to  consider  the
    issue of long residence when assessing proportionality.  The issue  had
    been raised on behalf of the appellants when the application  was  made
    for the appellants' passports to be released so that  they  could  take
    the Knowledge about Life in the UK test and the hearing  of  6  January
    2017 had  been  adjourned  accordingly.   The  appellants  subsequently
    passed the test and original certificates were produced at the  resumed
    hearing.  The appellants also filed amended grounds of  appeal  raising
    the long residence issue in accordance with the  guidance  set  out  in
    Long Residence Guidance 14.0 p.22.  The appellants had also written  to
    the respondent asking for the decision under appeal to be withdrawn  so
    that they could make a fresh application on the basis of long residence
    but there was no response. In these circumstances, it is understandable
    why the Tribunal directed that the hearing should proceed.

12.  In the light of the failure to consider the  appellants'  claim  to  be
    entitled to indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years lawful
    residence, the proper course is for the decision to be set aside.  Both
    representatives accepted that I should re-make the decision taking that
    matter into account.

13.  There is no doubt that the appellants meet  the  requirements  of  para
    276B(i), (iv) and (v).  The respondent has,  constructively  at  least,
    been aware of this application in the light of the amended grounds  and
    the request to withdraw the decision but nothing has been  produced  to
    show that there is any public interest making it  undesirable  for  the
    appellants to be granted leave or that they fall for refusal under  the
    general grounds for refusal.  There is nothing in the  evidence  before
    me to suggest that either is the case, but the respondent has  not  yet
    considered this issue.  I am satisfied on the evidence before  me  that
    the strong likelihood that they were entitled to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    substantially diminishes the public interest in  maintaining  effective
    and fair immigration control such that removal at this stage would be a
    disproportionate interference with their right to respect  for  private
    and family life.

14.  I think that the right course is to allow the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds under article 8.   It  is  in  the  public  interest  that  the
    respondent does have an  opportunity  to  consider  whether  there  are
    reasons which would justify refusing the appellants indefinite leave to
    remain under para 276B (ii) or (iii).  It will  therefore  be  for  the
    respondent to decide, hopefully without undue delay, what leave  should
    be given to the appellants in the light of this decision.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside.   I
    substitute a decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds under
    article 8.  No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:  3 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

