
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11940/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 29 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MOHAMED HEDI SEHLI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent under  the  respondent
    as the appellant, as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 14 April 1975 and is a male citizen
    of Tunisia. The Secretary of State, in a decision dated  16  May  2018,
    refused the appellant's application to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    which, in a decision promulgated on  24  September  2018,  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds. The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Manchester on 23 April  2019,  the  appellant
    did not attend nor was he represented. I am satisfied that  the  notice
    of hearing has been sent to the appellant's solicitor in Manchester and
    to the  appellant's  last  known  address  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    Warrington. One does not, perhaps, have to look very far for the reason
    for the appellant's absence; the appellant left the United  Kingdom  on
    18 September 2018 and returned to Tunisia apparently because his father
    was unwell. His departure is recorded in the judge's decision at  [48].
    Indeed, prior to the  promulgation  of  the  Tribunal's  decision,  the
    appellant sought to withdraw his appeal an application which the  judge
    refused because the application had not been made in writing before the
    hearing and because the application  was  not  made  by  the  appellant
    orally at the hearing.

 3. As Mr Tan, who appeared for the Secretary of  State  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, pointed out,  the  judge  has  overlooked  the  operation  of
    section 92(8) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended):

         (8)  Where an appellant brings an appeal  from  within  the  United
         Kingdom but leaves the United Kingdom before the appeal is  finally
         determined, the appeal is to be treated  as  abandoned  unless  the
         claim to which the appeal relates has been certified under  section
         94(1) or (7) or section 94B.

 4. The section is unequivocal; the appellant's appeal  was  not  certified
    under section 94 so the judge  should  have  treated  it  as  abandoned
    whether or not he gave permission for the appeal to be withdrawn. I  am
    aware that this issue is not referred to in the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal but attention was  drawn  to  it  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission and I have dealt with it  because  it  goes  to  the
    status of the appeal. Given that the judge was aware that the appellant
    had left the country before  he  promulgated  his  decision  (there  is
    nothing to indicate that the judge gave any indication at  the  hearing
    itself of the outcome of the appeal) he should have treated the  appeal
    as abandoned.

 5. In the circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision. I  have  remade
    the decision. The appellant's appeal was, from 18 September 2018, to be
    treated as abandoned by operation of section 92(8) of the 2002 Act.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  24
    September 2018 is set aside. I have remade the decision. The appeal  of
    the  appellant  shall,  as  from  18  September  2018,  be  treated  as
    abandoned.


Signed                              Date 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
