
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11153/2017
                                                               HU/03319/2018
                                                               HU/03322/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 January 2019                          |On 07 February 2019            |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               1) MA (NIGERIA)
                               2) TO (NIGERIA)
                               3) IA (NIGERIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Aborisade, Partner, OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Paul sitting at Taylor House on 29 June 2018)  dismissing  their
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse their human  rights  claims  in
    which the central question was whether it was reasonable to expect  the
    third appellant, who had been born in the  UK  in  September  2010,  to
    leave the UK with her parents, neither of whom had an independent right
    to remain.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.   However,
    since the sole issue in this appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  whether
    the Judge erred in law in his disposal of a new allegation made at  the
    hearing that the third appellant faced a risk  of  FGM  in  Nigeria,  I
    consider  that  an  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate   for   these
    proceedings in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to  protect  the  third
    appellant from harmful publicity.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The first appellant and the second  appellant  are  partners,  and  the
    third appellant is their daughter.  The  parents  are  overstayers.  In
    early 2016 the parents sought to regularise their status  and  that  of
    their child by making an application for leave to  remain  outside  the
    Rules.  The applications were refused without a right  of  appeal,  but
    following an application for a judicial review, the  Department  agreed
    to reconsider its decision, and  the  applications  were  refused  upon
    reconsideration on 12 September 2017 and 16 January 2018  respectively,
    in both cases with a right of appeal.  The refusal of 12 September 2017
    related to the first appellant, and the  refusal  of  16  January  2018
    related to the second and third appellants.

 4. The Department's case in respect of the third appellant  was  that  she
    was aged 5 years and 4 months at the date of application,  and  so  she
    did not come within the scope of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).  On the  topic  of
    the child's welfare and well-being, the Department asserted that family
    and friends were financially supporting the family in the UK, and there
    was nothing to prevent them from continuing to do this on the  family's
    return to Nigeria.  It was accepted that the best interests of a  child
    whose parents were facing removal from the UK was best served  by  that
    child remaining with her parents and  being  removed  with  them.   The
    mother had not provided any evidence that indicated that she would  not
    be able to maintain her daughter in  Nigeria,  or  that  she  would  be
    unable to provide for her safety and welfare.  The  mother  raised  the
    fact that she suffered from high blood pressure.   But  this  condition
    did not appear to be life-threatening, and it was not an illness of the
    type of severity that would found a claim to remain in the UK.

 5. OA Solicitors settled the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
     These grounds ran to three closely-typed  pages.   They  pleaded  that
    returning the family to Nigeria would  disrupt  the  third  appellant's
    education.  A good standard of education was not as  accessible  as  it
    was in the UK unless an extortionate  amount  of  money  was  paid  for
    education at a private school.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Before Judge Paul, the appellants were represented by Ms Sobande of  OA
    Solicitors, but there was no Presenting Officer.

 7. In advance of the hearing on 22 June 2018, the  appellant's  solicitors
    filed with the  Tribunal  a  bundle  of  documents  containing  witness
    statements from the parents.  In his witness statement  dated  19  June
    2018, the first appellant said that returning him  and  his  family  to
    Nigeria would expose them to hardship and destitution as he  would  not
    be able to return to his family house, and his wife had no family house
    to return to.  This would also jeopardise their  safety  and  security.
    In her witness statement, dated 19 June 2018, the second appellant said
    the same.  It would not be possible for them to continue  receiving  in
    Nigeria the help and assistance  that  they  had  been  receiving  from
    family and friends here.

 8. In his subsequent decision, Judge Paul gave an account of the  evidence
    given by the parents at paragraphs [8]-[10] and he recorded the  thrust
    of the closing submissions of Ms Sobande at paragraphs [11]-[15].

 9. At paragraph [10] the  Judge  recorded  the  following  evidence  given
    orally by the second appellant:

         "This lady, when she gave evidence, also said that if her  daughter
         was taken back to Nigeria  she  might  well  be  circumcised.   She
         described this as being a consequence of the community that she and
         her  husband  came  from,  and  that  circumcision  would  be   the
         inevitable consequence of her daughter having to live in Nigeria."

10. The Judge set out his findings at paragraphs [16]-[22].  These included
    the following findings at paragraph [19]:

         "However, there is nothing in the evidence  before  me  to  suggest
         that the third appellant - who is a young, bright and keen child  -
         will suffer  as  a  result  of  leaving  the  UK.   Young  children
         regularly move around the world,  as  part  of  the  modern  global
         workplace.  In this case, the third appellant  -  who  clearly  has
         Nigerian parents who are,  for  all  practical  purposes,  embedded
         within the Nigerian community in  the  UK  by  reference  to  their
         church activities and family friends - would simply be  replicating
         that life in Nigeria.  No evidence was advanced which  demonstrated
         that the first and second appellants' living  conditions  would  be
         significantly worse in Nigeria because, on  their  own  case,  they
         were dependent upon handouts here, and in Nigeria would be able  to
         work and support their daughter."

11. At paragraph [21], he observed that while it was correct  to  say  that
    wrong-doing should not be inflicted on the child, the family unit would
    be returning as a whole in circumstances where there was no evidence to
    show that their living conditions - both for the adult  appellants,  or
    the third appellant - would be any worse.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

12. On 10 October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert refused permission
    to appeal, finding inter alia as follows:

         "The decision  displays  adequate  evidence-based  reasoning.   The
         grounds are disingenuous in arguing failure to address  the  safety
         of the child and the appellant's evidence that there was a risk  of
         FGM being inflicted on her in  Nigeria.   If  safety  were  a  real
         issue, it is for the appellant to make a claim or  appeal  on  that
         basis.  There is no asylum or Article 3 claim or ground of  appeal,
         and there is no record  of  any  argument  on  this  basis  in  the
         skeleton argument or in the ROP."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. Following a renewed application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on 10 December  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the Judge erred in failing to  deal  with  the
         claim that the daughter would be subjected to FGM if returned  when
         considering whether it was reasonable for her to  return  with  her
         parents."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Mr  Aborisade  agreed  that  the  FGM  allegation  had  not  been
    foreshadowed in any way.  It was first made by the mother when she gave
    her oral evidence. However, the allegation having  been  made,  it  was
    incumbent on the Judge, he submitted, to analyse the  evidence  and  to
    make a specific finding on the allegation in his  subsequent  decision.
    Alternatively, The  Judge  should  have  remitted  the  matter  to  the
    Secretary of State for consideration in accordance with section  55  of
    the 2009 Act.

15. I put to Mr Aborisade that the FGM allegation constituted a new  matter
    for the purposes of section 85(5) of the 2002 Act, and that accordingly
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, had no jurisdiction to consider  it,  as
    the Secretary of State had not given the First-tier Tribunal consent to
    do so.   Mr Aborisade's initial response was to the effect that the FGM
    allegation was not an allegation of serious harm which engaged  Article
    3 ECHR. Ms Everett interjected that it was the Department's  policy  to
    treat allegations of FGM as engaging  Article  3  ECHR.   Mr  Aborisade
    submitted that nonetheless the Judge ought to have  addressed  the  FGM
    allegation as part of his assessment of the claim under Article 8 EHCR.

16. Having heard from the Legal Representatives, I ruled that no  error  of
    law was made out.  I give my reasons for so  finding  orally  in  short
    form, with extended written reasons to follow.

Discussion

17. The Judge clearly did not ignore the oral evidence of the mother  about
    the asserted risk of FGM on return to Nigeria, as the Judge highlighted
    this oral evidence in his account of the proceedings.

18. Although the Judge did not specifically refer  to  the  FGM  allegation
    when making his findings, it would be unreasonable to  infer  that  the
    findings he made in paragraph [19] do not cover the FGM allegation.  In
    short, when the Judge says that there is nothing in the evidence before
    him to suggest that the third appellant will  suffer  as  a  result  of
    leaving the UK, this should be taken as including a finding that  there
    is no credible risk of her suffering female circumcision.

19. I accept that there is no overt analysis of the second appellant's oral
    evidence on this issue, but I  do  not  consider  that  an  absence  of
    analysis is material to the outcome.  The FGM allegation  was  made  at
    the hearing without prior warning, and without there being a  shred  of
    supporting evidence for it.  The allegation was not even  supported  by
    the first appellant, who had already given his evidence without raising
    the FGM allegation. Under those circumstances, it is difficult  to  see
    how any reasonable Tribunal properly directed could have done  anything
    else other than attach no weight to this late and unsupported claim.

20. An additional consideration is  that  the  Judge  does  not  record  Ms
    Sobande as relying on the FGM allegation in her closing submissions  as
    fortifying the case that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  third
    appellant to return to Nigeria with her parents. On the face of it, she
    ignored the allegation, which would be consistent with her  recognising
    that procedurally it could not be relied on in the current appeal  (see
    below).

21. Alternatively, if the Judge erred in failing to  explain  why  the  FGM
    allegation did not make it unreasonable to expect the  third  appellant
    to return to Nigeria with her parents, I do not consider that his error
    was material, having regard to sections 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act.

22. The general rule, as set out in 85(4), is that on an appeal  against  a
    decision the Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  relevant
    to the substance of the decision, including a matter arising after  the
    date of the decision.  But under 85(5) the Tribunal must not consider a
    new matter unless the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent
    to do so.  A new matter is defined in 85(6).  A matter is a new  matter
    if (a) it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind  listed  in  section
    84, and (b) the Secretary of State has not  previously  considered  the
    matter in the context of - (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1),
    or (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

23. The allegation that the third appellant might face  a  risk  of  female
    circumcision on return to Nigeria is a world away  from  an  allegation
    that her education will be disrupted; or  that  the  family  will  face
    destitution and hardship for economic  reasons.   As  submitted  by  Ms
    Everett, the mother's allegation that her daughter faced a risk of  FGM
    was an allegation that her daughter faced a real risk of serious  harm,
    and therefore it disclosed an asylum claim or request for international
    protection which, if refused, would afford the third appellant a  right
    of appeal under section 82(2)(a).  She would have a right of appeal  on
    the ground  that  her  removal  from  the  UK  would  breach  the  UK's
    obligations under the Refugee  Convention.  Alternatively  and  in  any
    event, Rule 327 defines an asylum applicant as a  person  who  makes  a
    request to be recognised as a refugee under the Refugee  Convention  or
    who otherwise makes a request for international protection.

24. It is no answer to say that because the  third  appellant  was  already
    pursuing a Human Rights appeal, the FGM allegation did not constitute a
    new matter so far as a putative Human Rights claim under Article 3 ECHR
    was concerned. The Secretary of State had not previously considered the
    FGM allegation when deciding the application and it had not been raised
    in a statement under section 120.

25. Thus, the Judge had no jurisdiction  to  consider  the  FGM  allegation
    which had not been relied on in the application or in  the  grounds  of
    appeal; and in respect of which the consent of the Secretary  of  State
    had neither been sought nor obtained.

26. As a result, the Judge did not err in law in not explicitly  addressing
    the FGM allegation when assessing whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to return with her parents to Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
