
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11621/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |On 1 June 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              KHIM BAHADUR RANA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R K Rai instructed by Sam Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Sullivan ('the Judge') who, in a decision  promulgated
       on 20 December 2020, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
       refusal of an application for entry clearance as the son of a  former
       member of the Gurkha Regiment, the appellants father and his sponsor,
       on human rights grounds.
    2. The appellant applied for leave to enter in  April  2016,  which  was
       refused by an Entry Clearance Officer on 11 May 2016  and  an  appeal
       against that decision dismissed on  18  September  2017.   The  Judge
       notes the current appeal stems from a similar application made on  12
       March 2019.

Background

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on  27  April  1985.
       The Judge sets out an assessment of the  evidence  and  the  findings
       from [15] of the decision under challenge.
    4. The Judge finds there was no evidence the  appellant  was  unable  to
       care for himself on a daily basis  or  that  he  requires  long  term
       personal care, leading to it being found  he  does  not  qualify  for
       entry clearance under paragraph EC-DR of the Immigration Rules.
    5. It was also found that as at the date of the current application  the
       appellant was 33 years of age he did  not  satisfy  the  criteria  at
       Appendix K  of  the  Rules.  Appendix  K  was  introduced  to  enable
       qualifying adult children of former Gurkha soldiers denied the  right
       to enter the United Kingdom with their fathers as  a  result  of  the
       'historic injustice' to have their cases considered in line with  the
       case law that developed in relation to this area.
    6. In relation to the ability of the appellant to  succeed  outside  the
       Rules the Judge's core findings are  set  out  at  [21  -31]  in  the
       following terms:

           "21.   I find that there is a lack of clarity  in  the  sponsors
                evidence about the whereabouts of the Appellant's  siblings.
                In oral evidence I heard that the Appellant had been  living
                with his  brothers  in  the  family  home  until  2015.  The
                sponsors evidence was that the Appellant's siblings had then
                gone somewhere else; in evidence in chief he said that after
                the earthquake destroyed the  family  home  the  Appellant's
                brothers had gone elsewhere and the Appellant  had  gone  to
                Butwal. I  find  that  this  differs  from  earlier  written
                evidence. According to the sponsors first witness  statement
                his son Dhanendra Rana was then living in  Butwal  with  his
                wife and children as were the family of his son Toman  Singh
                Rana who was then working in Qatar.  In his  second  witness
                statement the sponsor wrote that in 2015 the  Appellant  had
                decided to move out of the family home he had  been  sharing
                with his siblings "as all of his siblings married". He  said
                nothing  there  to  update   the   information   about   the
                whereabouts of the Appellant's siblings.  In  oral  evidence
                the sponsor said that his son Dhanendra and his  family  and
                the family of his son Toman had now gone to other places; he
                did not say when or why they left Butwal or, where they have
                gone. He did confirm, contrary to  his  evidence  in  chief,
                that initially they had gone to Butwal from Birbas.  I  find
                that the Appellant has had his family living close to him in
                Butwal from 2015 until very recently and  that  the  sponsor
                has in parts of his evidence sought to minimise evidence  of
                family proximity to the Appellant.


           22.    The sponsor has  provided  phone  screenshots  and  calls
                lists which he says show his contact with the  Appellant.  I
                accept that these are illustrative and were not intended  to
                show every call made. It was clear to me from  watching  the
                sponsor give oral evidence that  when  talking  about  video
                calls with the Appellant he was visualising how those  calls
                were made. I accept that he has been  in  contact  with  the
                Appellant by Internet enabled voice  and  video  calls.  The
                sponsor says that those calls can take place up to 5 times a
                week. It is apparent from some of the telephone  screenshots
                showing multiple dates that there are weeks in which contact
                between the sponsor and the Appellant was not that  frequent
                (e.g. AB, p.A141, A167-168). While acknowledging that  other
                pages in the AB show more contact, between 30 September 2018
                and 16 October 2018 the calls between  them  lasted  only  1
                minute 18 seconds in total (AB, p.161).  It  is  also  clear
                that not every  entry  on  the  phone  lists/screenshots  is
                evidence of effective  communication,  there  being  several
                which are annotated as "cancelled", "missed call" or show  a
                call of  zero  duration  (e.g.  AB,  pp.A153,  A155,  A141).
                Considering the evidence as a whole I am not satisfied  that
                the  sponsor  and  Appellant  speak  with  one  another   as
                frequently as the sponsor claimed.  The  Refusal  identifies
                the paucity of visits by the sponsor and his wife  to  Nepal
                after 2005.


           23.    Neither  of  the  sponsors  witness  statements  provides
                insight into what he  and  the  Appellant  talk  about.   On
                enquiry, it became apparent that the sponsor does not  know,
                for example, about any personal relationship  the  Appellant
                might have and had not discussed with the Appellant  whether
                or not he should  undertake  further  education/training  to
                assist him in finding work.


           24.    I asked the sponsor when the Appellant had last asked for
                his advice; he replied that he had gone to Nepal last  year.
                I find that this evidence shows  that  between  17  December
                2019 and 11 November 2020 the Appellant  did  not  seek  any
                advice from  the  sponsor;  this  is  not  indicative  of  a
                relationship of dependence between  them.  I  asked  if  the
                Appellant had considered further training or  education  and
                the sponsor said that he had not  asked  the  question,  but
                that it would require money. I am  not  satisfied  that  the
                Appellant turns to the sponsor  for  advice  about  personal
                matters, personal development, or about future plans  (other
                than coming to the United Kingdom).


           25.    The sponsor also appears to be unaware of  other  aspects
                of the Appellant's  life.  The  Respondent's  representative
                asked whether the  Appellant  has  a  driving  licence.  The
                sponsor said that he (the sponsor) had  seen  the  Appellant
                riding a borrowed motorcycle but that  he  did  not  have  a
                driving licence. I contrast that  with  the  money  transfer
                documents (e.g. AB, p.A122) which appear to  show  that  the
                Appellant  repeatedly  relied  on  his  driving  licence  to
                collect money in Butwal.


           26.    Asked about what the Appellant  does  each  day  all  the
                sponsor could say was that the Appellant was mainly  on  the
                phone and probably crying. Asked  what  the  Appellant  does
                when he is not on the phone the sponsor replied that he does
                not know. I am not satisfied that  the  sponsor  knows  much
                about   the    Appellant's    daily    life    or    current
                interests/activity.


           27.    There is no witness statement from the Appellant. He  has
                not said what expenses he encounters from day  to  day.  The
                only document providing any such detail is the 2016  tenancy
                agreement (AB, pp.A76-A77) which shows monthly rent  of  Rs.
                8,000 to have been payable in May 2016, to increase  by  10%
                every 2 years, and confirms that responsibility  for  paying
                electricity, water and communication charges rested with the
                Appellant.


           28.    The sponsor claims that he sends money to Nepal  to  meet
                all of the Appellant's  housing,  food,  medical  and  other
                expenses.  Numerous  money  transfer  documents  have   been
                provided; again I accept  that  these  are  intended  to  be
                illustrative and are not intended to represent the  entirety
                of the money transfers. I  have  reviewed  the  evidence  of
                money transfers whether evidenced by bank statement  entries
                or money transfer receipts;  there  is  duplication  in  the
                evidence (e.g. AB, pp.A107 & A111, A109 & 130, A108  &  131,
                A110 & 134, A111 & 133). Discounting those duplications  and
                taking an average over  the  five  years  (February  2015  -
                January 2020) covered by  the  documents  I  find  that  the
                sponsor has been sending the Appellant more than  sufficient
                to cover the rent payable on the  Butwal  property,  with  a
                surplus which could be used to meet other expenses.


           29.    Police  and  other  Nepalese  authorities  have  provided
                letters/certificates confirming  the  Appellant's  place  of
                residence, marital status, family composition and employment
                status. None of the authors of these letters appears  to  be
                aware that the Appellant has been  living  in  Butwal  since
                2015 and this brings the reliability  of  their  information
                into question. Furthermore,  the  various  certificates  are
                dated in 2016 and February 2019; the most recent is  1  year
                and 9 months out of date.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  they
                provide current or reliable evidence that the  Appellant  is
                unmarried or unemployed.


           30.    I am not satisfied that I have been told the truth  about
                the Appellant's work experience in  Nepal.  When  explaining
                how the Appellant would manage in the  United  Kingdom.  The
                sponsor ventured that he (the Appellant) would  be  able  to
                work in a hotel washing dishes or serving food and that  the
                Appellant had done so in the past. It appears to me that the
                sponsor then tried to resile from that  evidence  saying  at
                one stage that the Appellant had  never  done  any  work  in
                Nepal, that he had been referring to the  Appellant  washing
                dishes and serving meals in the family home and then that he
                (the sponsor) did not know whether or not the Appellant  had
                work experience in  Nepal.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
                Appellant has been unemployed  since  leaving  education  in
                Nepal. In consequence of this, and the absence  of  evidence
                from the Appellant as to his expenses and resources I am not
                satisfied that the Appellant relies on  money  sent  by  the
                sponsor in order to  meet  his  essential  needs.  In  other
                words, I am not satisfied that the Appellant is  financially
                dependent  on   the   sponsor   notwithstanding   the   sums
                transferred by the latter.


           31.    I am not satisfied that the Appellant is  financially  or
                emotionally dependent on the sponsor  (or  vice  versa).  In
                consequence, I am not satisfied that they now  share  family
                life. For the purposes of Article 8 of the 1951 Convention."

    7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, which was refused  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  the  grounds
       were no more than disagreement with the findings that the  Judge  was
       entitled to make regarding the family relationship.
    8. The application was renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  where  it  was
       granted; the operative part of  the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "3.    The grounds argue that the judge erred in his  assessment
                of the evidence and, in effect, overstated the  requirements
                to establish 'family life' in Gurkha case  following  Rai  v
                ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320, especially at [17] and [38].


           4.     Whilst the judge may have made sustainable  findings  (at
                [30]) in relation to an absence of financial dependency,  it
                is arguable that the judge has not, despite his citation  of
                Rai at [9], sufficiently grasped and applied what the  Court
                said at [17] that family life may well be constituted,  even
                though the relationship "falls well short" of dependency, in
                particular in the light of the evidence concerning emotional
                dependency. For  these  reasons,  permission  to  appeal  is
                granted."


Error of law

    9. The Judge is criticised for focusing too  much  on  the  evidence  of
       dependency and in failing to find whether  the  support  the  sponsor
       provides to the appellant was real, committed or  effective,  and  in
       failing to take into account relevant facts when  assessing  the  key
       questions in the appeal. It is also argued  that  the  Judge  ignored
       practical and financial realities entailed in the decision  to  leave
       Nepal by the sponsor to pursue a legitimate legal right as  a  former
       member of the Gurkha Regiment.
   10. In Rai at [17] and [38] the Court of Appeal found:

           "17.    In Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
                Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  Sedley  L.J.  said  (in
                paragraph 17 of his judgment) that "if  dependency  is  read
                down as meaning "support", in the personal sense, and if one
                adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  "real"   or
                "committed" or "effective" to the word  "support",  then  it
                represents ... the irreducible minimum of what  family  life
                implies". Arden L.J. said (in paragraph 24 of her  judgment)
                that the "relevant factors ... include identifying  who  are
                the near relatives of the appellant, the nature of the links
                between them and the appellant, the age  of  the  appellant,
                where and with whom he has resided  in  the  past,  and  the
                forms of contact he has maintained with the other members of
                the family with whom he claims to have a family  life".  She
                acknowledged (at paragraph 25) that "there is no presumption
                of family life". Thus "a  family  life  is  not  established
                between an adult child and his  surviving  parent  or  other
                siblings unless something more exists than normal  emotional
                ties". She added  that  "[such]  ties  might  exist  if  the
                appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa",  but
                it was "not ... essential that the  members  of  the  family
                should be in the same country". In Patel and others v Entry
                Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17,  Sedley  L.J.
                said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which  Longmore
                and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an extant
                family life falls well short of what constitutes dependency,
                and a good many adult children ... may still have  a  family
                life with parents who are now settled here not by  leave  or
                by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".


           ...


           38.    Throughout his findings and conclusions  with  regard  to
                article 8(1), the Upper Tribunal judge concentrated  on  the
                appellant's parents' decision to leave Nepal and  settle  in
                the United  Kingdom,  without,  I  think,  focusing  on  the
                practical and financial realities entailed in that decision.
                This was, in my opinion, a mistaken approach."

   11. There was no challenge to the evidence in Rai, the issue in that case
       being whether article 8 ECHR was engaged on the facts. At [30] of the
       decision the Court also record:

           "30.   The first difficulty  I  have  in  accepting  Ms  Patry's
                argument here is that  the  Upper  Tribunal  judge  did  not
                actually express a distinct and definite conclusion  on  the
                question of whether or not the appellant did in  fact  enjoy
                family life with his parents, within the meaning of  article
                8(1). There is, it seems to me, no clearly stated resolution
                of that issue in the determination."

   12. In this appeal the Judge makes a clear finding at  [31]  that  family
       life recognised by article 8 ECHR was not engaged  on  the  evidence.
       Whether article 8 is engaged is a question of fact. The Judge arrived
       at this finding having considered the evidence holistically and  with
       knowledge of the relevant case law.
   13. Mr McVeety referred in his submissions to Rai at  [41]  where  it  is
       written:

           "41.   The burden of the evidence of the appellant's father  and
                mother in their witness statements, and the  appellant's  in
                his,  was  this:  that,  in  consequence  of  the  "historic
                injustice", it was only in 2010 that  his  father  had  been
                able to apply for leave to enter the  United  Kingdom;  that
                his parents would have applied upon the  father's  discharge
                from the army had that been possible; that  they  could  not
                afford to apply at the same time as each other or with their
                dependent  children  -  the  appellant  and  their  daughter
                Chandra; that the stark choice they  had  had  to  make  was
                either to remain with the appellant and Chandra in Nepal  or
                to take up their long withheld entitlement to settle in  the
                United Kingdom; that they would all have applied together if
                they could have afforded to do so; that  the  appellant  had
                never left the family home in Nepal,  begun  an  independent
                family life of his own, or found work outside  the  village;
                and that he had remained, as his father put it, "an integral
                part of the family unit" even after his parents had  settled
                in the United Kingdom."

   14. It was submitted that the key finding  of  the  Judge  failed  to  go
       beyond  consideration  of  the  normal  relationships  between  adult
       siblings and  their  parents  and  that  the  extent  and  degree  of
       emotional contact showed the closeness of the bond, but  the  finding
       that no such additional element existed is supported by  the  Judge's
       reasons, especially those relating to the lack of knowledge that  the
       sponsor had concerning his son in Nepal.
   15. The conclusion of the Judge that it  had  not  been  shown  that  the
       appellant  remained  part  of  the  sponsor's  family  unit  and   by
       implication that he would have remained the same but for the historic
       injustice argument, is an important finding.
   16. The Judge was clearly aware of the relevant case law  as  noted  from
       [9] in which the Judge writes:

           "9.    The requirements of the Rules relevant to this appeal are
                at section EC-DR of Appendix FM. A case involving issues  of
                family or private life must be assessed in  accordance  with
                sections 117 A, B and D of the 2002  Act.  Guidance  on  the
                application of  Article  8  in  cases  involving  the  adult
                sons/daughters of former Gurkha servicemen is given in Rai v
                Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ  320.  I
                should consider whether there  is  a  sufficient  degree  of
                financial or emotional dependence between adults and whether
                family life has endured beyond the sponsor's departure  from
                Nepal. Guring & Ors, R (on the application of)  v  Secretary
                of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8,
                emphasised  the  significance  of  the  historic   injustice
                recognised in the past treatment of  Gurkha  servicemen  and
                their   families,   particularly   when   any   Article    8
                proportionality assessment is made."

   17. In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)  [2013]
       UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In finding that the  weight  to
       be accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases  was
       not to be regarded as less than that  to  be  accorded  the  historic
       wrong suffered by British Overseas citizens, the Court of  Appeal  in
       Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did  not  hold  that,  in  either
       Gurkha or BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong is  to  reverse
       or otherwise alter the burden of proof  that  applies  in  Article  8
       proportionality assessments; (ii) When an Appellant  has  shown  that
       there is family/private life and the decision made by the  Respondent
       amounts to  an  interference  with  it,  the  burden  lies  with  the
       Respondent to  show  that  a  decision  to  remove  is  proportionate
       (although Appellants will, in practice, bear  the  responsibility  of
       adducing evidence that lies within their remit and  about  which  the
       Respondent may be unaware); (iii) What concerned the Court in  Gurung
       and others was not the burden of proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of
       weight in a proportionality assessment. The Court held  that,  as  in
       the case of BOCs, the historic wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen
       should be given substantial weight; (iv)  Accordingly,  where  it  is
       found that Article 8 is engaged and, but for the historic wrong,  the
       Appellant would have been settled in  the  UK  long  ago,  this  will
       ordinarily determine the outcome of  the  Article  8  proportionality
       assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the matters relied  on  by
       the SSHD/ECO consist solely of the public interest in  maintaining  a
       firm immigration policy; (v) It can therefore be seen that Appellants
       in Gurkha (and BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed,  even  though
       (a) their family life engages Article  8(1);  and  (b)  the  evidence
       shows they would have come to the United Kingdom with  their  father,
       but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from  settling  here
       earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and  above  the
       public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which argue
       in favour of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  matters
       must be given appropriate weight in the balance in  the  Respondent's
       favour. Thus, a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may
       still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing  on  the
       Appellant's side of the balance.
   18. In this appeal the core  question  is  whether  the  Judge  has  made
       findings not reasonably open to him on  the  evidence  in  concluding
       that it had not been made out that family life recognised by  article
       8 exists. The Judge was not helped by it becoming clear that  he  has
       not been told the truth about the appellant's work experience and the
       appellant's case was not helped by the evidence given showing a  lack
       of knowledge or understanding by the sponsor of the appellant's  life
       and circumstances within Nepal. I do not find it made  out  that  the
       Judge's conclusion that the appellant is not an  integral  member  of
       the sponsor's family unit, when taking all the history of  this  case
       into account, is a finding outside  the  range  of  those  reasonably
       available to the Judge on  the  evidence.  It  is  neither  perverse,
       irrational, or contrary to the evidence.
   19. I therefore find that in  finding  that  family  life  recognised  by
       article 8 ECHR was not shown to exist the Judge  has  not  materially
       erred in law. As such family life does not exist the  Judge  was  not
       required to consider the proportionality of the decision pursuant  to
       article 8(2) where the historic injustice argument  may  have  become
       relevant.

Decision

   20. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 18 May 2021
