
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/11756/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                        |Promulgated                         |
|On 15 March 2018                        |       On 29 March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            HASTA BAHADUR GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms R Dulay, counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the respondent against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the  applicant  against  the  Entry
    Clearance officer's decision of 27  October  2015  refusing  him  entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as the dependent son  of  his  father,  a
    former Gurkha soldier.  In this decision, I will refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  applicant  as  the
    appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer respondent as the respondent.




Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on  10  September  1986.   His
    father served in the Brigade of Gurkhas for 15 years, being  discharged
    on 14 August 1981 with his military conduct assessed as exemplary.   At
    that stage he was not able to  apply  for  settlement  in  the  UK  but
    following a change in the respondent's policy, he  and  his  wife  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  1  March  2007.   They
    have five children, three daughters who live in the UK, all of whom are
    married with their own families.   Their  eldest  son  is  married  and
    living in Nepal with his family.  The appellant is the youngest child.

3.   In 2007 the appellant applied for entry clearance to join his  parents,
    but he included false educational documents with  his  application  and
    this was one of the issues raised when it was refused.  His explanation
    is that these documents were submitted without  his  knowledge  by  the
    person he had paid to make the application.

4.   The appellant now lives alone in Nepal after initially living with  his
    aunt. His parents send him money and he has access  to  their  Nepalese
    bank account.  They have visited  him  on  a  regular  basis  for  long
    periods, from 4 April 2009 to 3 March 2011, 9 April 2011  to  29  March
    2013, 17 September 2014 to 13 December 2014 and finally  from  21  July
    2015 to 11 April 2017.  The appellant applied for  entry  clearance  to
    join his parents on 30 September 2015.  His application was refused  on
    27 October 2015, a decision upheld in the entry clearance review  after
    he submitted his notice of appeal.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

5.   The hearing before the judge proceeded solely on the basis  of  article
    8.  It was not argued that the appellant could meet the requirements of
    the Rules or the published policy in IDI chapter 15, Section 2A,  Annex
    K.  The judge reminded herself of the Supreme Court judgment in  Hesham
    Ali v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 60, that the fact that  the  Rules
    were not met was a relevant and important consideration when  assessing
    article 8, of the five-step approach to  article  8  set  out  by  Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and of the Upper  Tribunal's  findings
    in Lama (video recorded evidence - weight - Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT  16
    that there were no hard and fast rules as to  what  constituted  family
    life within the compass of article 8.   She  found  that,  despite  the
    appellant's age (29 at the date of application), he was the youngest in
    the family and the only child who had not married and started  his  own
    family.  He was financially dependent on his parents but, perhaps  more
    unusually, for a 31-year-old man (his age at the date  of  hearing)  he
    was emotionally dependent on them which was why, despite ill health and
    advancing age, his parents had returned regularly and for long  periods
    to Nepal.  The judge found that more  than  the  usual  emotional  ties
    existed between the appellant and his parents and that family life  was
    established for the purposes of article 8.

6.   The judge then went on to consider whether  the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse entry clearance was proportionate, taking  into  account  the
    public interest in maintaining immigration control and  protecting  the
    economic well-being  of  the  country.   In  [17]  she  identified  the
    following four factors as weighing in the appellant's favour:


        (i)   the historic  wrong  arising  from  the  inability  of  Gurkha
        soldiers to settle in the UK until the Rules were changed,
        (ii)   the  fact  that  had  the  appellant's  father  been  granted
        settlement under the 2009 discretionary arrangements, the  appellant
        would have met the relevant paragraphs of annex K,
        (iii)  his parents had made extended visits to Nepal which would not
        be possible going forward because of his father's ill-health and
        (iv)  his father had offered loyal service to the UK in his military
        service.

7.   The judge said that she had to apply the provisions of  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  and
    having considered them, she was  not  persuaded  that  there  were  any
    factors which particularly weighed in the public interest  requiring  a
    refusal of the appeal.  Accordingly, the appeal was  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge found the  appellant  to  be
    emotionally and financially dependent upon his parents, but she did not
    appear to have regard to any evidence of regular communication such  as
    postcards, text messages and conversations.   The  respondent  did  not
    dispute that family life existed but simply that the evidence  did  not
    show elements of dependency beyond the normal  emotional  ties  between
    adults.  It is argued that it was pure speculation on the judge's  part
    that, were it not for the historic injustice  remedied  by  the  Gurkha
    settlement policy, the appellant's father would have chosen  to  settle
    in the UK on discharge from the army in 1981.

9.   Further, the judge failed have proper regard, so it is argued,  to  the
    public interest considerations set out  in  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    There were no relevant findings on the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
    English, to  maintain  financial  independence  or  to  integrate  into
    British society.   Finally,  the  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  had
    entirely overlooked the fact that the  appellant  had  submitted  false
    documents in support of a previous application.   In  consequence,  she
    had failed to make a balanced proportionality assessment.

10.  In her submissions Ms Everett's primary focus was on whether the  judge
    had been entitled to find that family life existed within article 8(1).
     She submitted that she had failed to give any adequate explanation for
    that finding and had conflated different elements of family life.   She
    accepted that  when  assessing  proportionality,  the  judge  had  been
    entitled to take into account the historic injustice,  but  she  should
    have given full consideration to the public interest considerations  in
    s.117B.

11.  Ms Dulay submitted that, in substance, the grounds amounted to no  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.  It was accepted
    that the appellant was financially and  emotionally  dependent  on  his
    parents, a dependency illustrated by the  length  of  their  visits  to
    Nepal.  She submitted that the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in
    Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, supported
    her submission that the judge had reached  findings  properly  open  to
    her. As far as proportionality was concerned, the judge had  noted  the
    point about  the  false  document,  but  the  appellant  had  given  an
    explanation.  She had referred in [18] to  s.117B  and  had  considered
    those factors but had found  that  there  were  no  particular  factors
    weighing in the public interest to offset the  other  factors  she  had
    identified.

Assessment of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

12.   The  grounds  and  submissions  essentially  raise  two  issues.    Ms
    Everett's primary submission was that the judge erred in law in finding
    that family life  within  article  8  was  established.   I  have  been
    referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Rai.   The  judgment
    of Lindblom LJ at [19]  confirms  that  whether  an  individual  enjoys
    family life is one of fact and depends on a  careful  consideration  of
    all the relevant aspects of the particular case.  He also endorsed  the
    comment of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha
    policy) [2012] UKUT 160 that "[the] different outcomes  in  cases  with
    superficially similar features emphasises to us that  the  issue  under
    article 8 (1) is highly fact sensitive".

13.  The judge accepted  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been  and
    continued to be  financially  dependent  upon  his  parents  but,  more
    significantly, he was also  emotionally  dependent  on  them.   In  the
    grounds it is argued that the judge failed to have regard to  the  lack
    of evidence of regular communication but that completely overlooks  the
    evidence accepted by the judge that his  parents  had  made  four  long
    visits between 2009 and 2017.  She  was  also  entitled  to  take  into
    account the cultural background set out in the witness statements  that
    in Nepalese families an unmarried child was regarded as a part  of  his
    parents' family until he married.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    finding  of  fact  that  article  8  was  engaged  in  the   particular
    circumstances of the appellant was a finding property open to  her  for
    the reasons she gave.

14.  The other issue in dispute is whether the judge erred  in  law  in  her
    assessment of  proportionality.   I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  no
    substance in this ground.  She reminded herself that the fact that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules was a relevant and
    important consideration in the assessment of proportionality.  She  set
    out the factors weighing in the appellant's favour in [17].  Whilst she
    did not deal at any great length with the provisions of s.117B  of  the
    2002 Act, she took them into account.  There is no  reason  to  believe
    that the judge left out of account the issue of  the  false  documents,
    having referred to the appellant's explanation or that  she  failed  to
    give proper weight to the public interest. I  am  satisfied  that  when
    weighing up the pros and cons, as the  judge  put  it,  she  reached  a
    decision properly open to her.  In summary, I am not satisfied that the
    judge erred in law in reaching her decision that the appeal  should  be
    allowed on article 8 grounds.


Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:     26 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

