

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11606/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 March 2019                               |On 5 April 2019              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              MR ANANDA MENDON

                           (Anonymity not DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)










                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with  the
    permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it  made  on  17  November
    2017, following a hearing of 31 October 2017, and which it sent to  the
    parties on 31 November  2017.  The  tribunal  decided  to  dismiss  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision made by the Secretary  of  State
    on 17 April 2016 to refuse to grant him indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom (UK).

 2. By way of background, the claimant is a national of India and was  born
    on 4 March 1978. He entered the UK on 1 June 2003  having  successfully
    obtained entry clearance from abroad. He did so  for  the  purposes  of
    work permit employment. He obtained an initial extension of leave until
    15 November 2004 and then further extensions, given on the same  basis,
    to take him up to 26 September 2011. However, on 13 July  2009  he  was
    informed that the grant of leave until  26  September  2011  was  being
    curtailed so that it would expire on 11 September 2009. On 12 September
    2009, one day after the expiry of his curtailed leave, he  applied  for
    further leave but on 12 November 2009 that application was refused.  He
    next sought leave on 15 December 2011 (over two years later)  and  that
    application was granted, leave being extended until 1 January 2015.  He
    secured a further extension as a Tier 2 Migrant to take him  up  to  16
    January 2018. But on 3  November  2015  he  had  made  a  human  rights
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    long residence. It was that application which had led to  the  decision
    of 17 April 2016 and then to the appeal to the tribunal  and  now  this
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The claimant was legally represented before the tribunal at the hearing
    of 31 October 2017. The Secretary of State was  also  represented.  The
    claimant gave oral  evidence.  Essentially,  his  argument  before  the
    tribunal was that although there were gaps  in  his  period  of  lawful
    residence which meant that technically he could not fulfil the  10-year
    long residence requirement  contained  within  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Home Office operated a policy whereby, if  there
    were gaps in lawful residence not the fault  of  an  applicant  and  if
    exceptional circumstances applied, the existence of the gaps  could  be
    waived on discretionary grounds. As to the circumstances which had  led
    to the  gap,  the  claimant  explained  to  the  tribunal,  as  he  had
    previously done in writing, that there had been difficulties  with  his
    former employer in 2009, that the  former  employer  had  lost  a  pre-
    existing sponsor licence which had led to  the  curtailment  of  leave,
    that after some four months the company  for  which  the  claimant  had
    worked had been taken over by new management but that  the  new  entity
    did not have an appropriate sponsorship licence and that, therefore, he
    had had to leave that employment and find new  employment.  His  having
    done so it was that new employment which  formed  the  subject  of  his
    application for leave in  December  of  2011.  So,  the  basis  of  his
    argument as to exercise of the discretionary policy was that the gap in
    his lawful residence had not  been  his  fault  but  rather,  had  been
    attributable to  circumstances  beyond  his  control.  There  was  also
    another issue which had to be dealt with at the  appeal  concerning  an
    allegation that the claimant had submitted as  a  Knowledge  Life  Pass
    Notification Letter which was not genuine or which did  not  relate  to
    him. But I need  not  say  anything  further  about  that  because  the
    tribunal resolved that matter in the claimant's favour  and  there  has
    been no subsequent challenge to that part of its decision.

 4. As to the question of discretion, though, the tribunal ensured that  it
    had a copy of the policy before it (see  paragraph  3  of  the  written
    reasons of 17 November 2017). It noted that the appeal  before  it  was
    proceeding on human rights grounds under section 82(1)(b)  and  section
    84(1)(c) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (see
    paragraph 22 of the written reasons). It said of the policy:

         "35.     The Home Office policy gives guidance to  decision  makers
         that they must consider evidence of exceptional circumstances  that
         prevented the applicant from applying within the first twenty-eight
         days of overstaying. The threshold for what constitutes exceptional
         circumstances  was  high.  Examples  are  given  of  unexpected  or
         unforeseeable causes of delays. These are simply examples; they are
         not  exclusive  (as  evidenced  by  the  use  of  the  phrase  "for
         example"). One example given is  "inability  to  provide  necessary
         documents" in exceptional or unavoidable circumstances  beyond  the
         applicant's control. This is similar to the present case,  in  that
         the Appellant was unable to provide an employer's  sponsor  licence
         but the reason for  this  was  beyond  his  control.  The  previous
         employer's sponsor licence had been withdrawn and he was, I accept,
         making efforts to find a new employer,  who  had  a  valid  sponsor
         licence".

5.    The tribunal then went on to consider whether  the  claimant,  in  his
    particular circumstances, could benefit from or fall within  the  terms
    of the policy such that his  appeal  should  succeed  on  human  rights
    grounds. It did not expressly say so  at  this  point  in  its  written
    reasons but no  doubt  it  had  in  mind  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). It said this:

         "36.      In  my  view,  in  this  case   there   are   exceptional
         circumstances, namely the actions of the  previous  employer  which
         led to his sponsorship licence being removed.

         37.      I accept that he and others reported the  issue  with  the
         employer to the police. He was no longer legally able to  work  for
         the previous employer once the  latter's  sponsorship  licence  had
         been revoked and had to find new employment, which he did. Although
         he sought work, clearly the date on which he began  new  employment
         depended on the availability of work and the offer  of  employment;
         any delay in finding a new job was not primarily of his making.

         38.      However, balanced  against  this  is  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant did not make a further application for  leave  to  remain
         for over two years (on 15.12.11). Whilst some of that delay may, as
         I have said above, be reasonably attributable to the issue with the
         previous employer, the Appellant had not  satisfactorily  explained
         why it took him so long to make a fresh application.

         39.        For   the   above   reasons   the   refusal   was    not
         disproportionate".

6.    So, the appeal was dismissed but permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was both sought and obtained. The two grounds of appeal, as  I
    understand them, were to the effect that  the  tribunal  had  erred  in
    failing to appreciate that the gap of over two years  was  attributable
    to "the licence issue" or,  if  it  was  not  wholly  so  attributable,
    through failing to explain what  proportion  of  the  gap  was  not  so
    attributable (ground  1)  and  through  failing  to  conduct  a  proper
    holistic Article 8 assessment (ground 2). A  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal saw reason to grant permission essentially on  what  had  been
    said in ground 1. Permission having been granted the matter was  listed
    for an oral hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  (before  me)  so  that
    consideration could be given as to whether  or  not  the  tribunal  had
    erred in law and if so, what should flow from that.

7.    It is apparent from  the  Upper  Tribunal's  file  that  although  the
    claimant had representation before the tribunal and at the  point  when
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought, he is no  longer
    represented. He did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  me  and  nobody
    attended on his behalf. But on 7 March 2019 he sent  an  email  to  the
    Upper Tribunal asking that the appeal be postponed and re-listed  on  a
    different date. As to why he wanted a postponement he said, "I  am  not
    feeling that well and I am unable  to  find  a  suitable  Solicitor  to
    represent my case". It is perhaps  worth  noting  that  this  case  had
    previously been listed for hearing on 18  January  2019  and  had  been
    postponed on that occasion because the claimant had  indicated  he  was
    unwell then too. On that occasion it appears that he provided a  letter
    from a GP though there was no such letter provided in relation  to  the
    current postponement request. In the circumstances Mr Mills invited  me
    to proceed in the absence of the claimant. Bearing in  mind  principles
    of fairness and natural justice and  the  content  of  rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I  decided  to  do  so.
    That is because the claimant did not supply medical evidence to support
    his claim to be unwell; because his assertion that he was "not  feeling
    that well" fell short, on the face of it, of an assertion that  he  was
    unable  to  attend  a  hearing;  because  there  had  been  a  previous
    postponement; because I did not  feel  confident  that  if  I  were  to
    adjourn the situation regarding attendance  would  necessarily  be  any
    different  at  a  reconvened   hearing;   because   with   respect   to
    representation if the claimant had not been able to obtain  alternative
    representation  in  readiness  for  this  hearing  there  could  be  no
    certainty that he would be able to for a re-convened  hearing;  because
    his grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  had  been  professionally
    drafted in any event and it was not apparent that  his  presence  would
    add anything to  that:  and  because  taking  an  overall  view  I  was
    satisfied I could justly decide  the  error  of  law  issue  at  least,
    without an adjournment. I took the view that if I did decide there  had
    been an error of law  so  as  to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  the
    tribunal's decision, I could if I felt it necessary, direct  a  further
    hearing on a different date when evidence could be given. But there was
    no good reason not to deal with the error of law issue itself.

8.    Mr Mills argued  that  the  grounds  were  unmeritorious.  As  to  the
    discretionary policy he said that the Secretary of State had decided it
    was inappropriate to apply the policy in the  particular  circumstances
    obtaining and that the tribunal had, as had been open to it, taken  the
    same view. The reasoning, contained from paragraph 36 to  paragraph  38
    of the tribunal's written reasons was  legally  sound.  Mr  Mills  also
    informed me, by way  of  background,  that  the  claimant  had  made  a
    separate application for leave to remain which had been refused by  the
    Secretary of State on 27 June 2018 and that the appeal he had  made  to
    the tribunal against that decision, and a  subsequent  application  for
    permission to appeal, had both been  unsuccessful.  None  of  that  was
    directly before me and has not impacted upon my  decision  but  it  was
    helpful of Mr Mills to bring it to my attention.

9.    Turning then to the application which is before  me,  the  policy  the
    claimant sought to rely upon before the tribunal is to be characterised
    as  a  discretionary  one.  By  that  I  mean  if  certain   prescribed
    circumstances exist the Secretary of State permits himself but does not
    require himself to exercise discretion in an applicant's favour.

10.   The tribunal accepted much of what the  claimant  had  to  say  as  is
    apparent  from  its  analysis  which  I  have  set  out   above.   But,
    essentially, it seems to me that the primary point it  was  seeking  to
    make was that the evidence before it did not demonstrate that the whole
    of the extensive gap of in excess of two years was solely  attributable
    to the claimant's difficulties with respect to  his  previous  employer
    or, at least, it had not been demonstrated by evidence that they  were.
    In other words, the tribunal was concluding that the claimant  had  not
    demonstrated that he could not,  for  example,  have  more  assiduously
    pursued fresh employment with a potential new employer  and  so  sought
    and obtained leave at an earlier stage than he did. It was open to  the
    tribunal to reach that view and it was not required,  as  a  matter  of
    law, to divide up the gap and say that a certain proportion was  and  a
    certain proportion was not attributable to the claimant's  difficulties
    with his former employer. So, I conclude that the tribunal did not  err
    in the manner in which it is suggested it did at ground 1.

11.   As to ground 2,  it  is  right  to  say  that  the  tribunal  did  not
    undertake a thorough and holistic  examination  of  all  matters  which
    might conceivably  have  had  relevance  to  a  broad-based  Article  8
    assessment. But the case had not been  put  to  it  in  that  way.  The
    grounds of appeal to the tribunal did not raise  general  private  life
    issues or any family life issues, they simply focussed upon  the  issue
    of fraud and the issue of the break in  lawful  residence.  A  document
    headed  "Skeleton  Arguments"  was  similarly  framed.   Against   that
    background the tribunal was not required to initiate  and  undertake  a
    broad-based holistic assessment for itself. It cannot be  right  for  a
    claimant not to pursue arguments before the tribunal and  then  assert,
    when seeking to demonstrate that it made an error of law, that  it  did
    not deal with such assertions or arguments. So, ground 2  is  not  made
    out either.

12.   In the circumstances I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  make
    an error of law and that its decision should stand. As to anonymity,  I
    have not directed it. I was not asked to and there does not  appear  to
    be any proper basis for me to do so.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law.  Accordingly,  the  claimant's
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.


Signed:                                 Dated: 26 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

