
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11122/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th January 2018                  |On 27th February 2018                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 AWA SANOGO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Parakos (counsel, instructed by Kamberley
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mali. The Appellant applied for leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of her family life with  her  husband,  a
    British citizen. The Appellant entered the UK  illegally  in  2002  and
    remained until an application for leave was made on 11 March 2014.  The
    application was refused on 8 April  2014.  A  further  Article  8  ECHR
    application was made on 3 March 2016. This was refused  in  a  decision
    dated 8 April 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal was heard
    by Judge Herbert OBE who allowed it in a decision  promulgated  on  the
    29th of September 2017 and again on the 11th of October 2017.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal finding that the  Immigration  Rules  were
    met. In doing so he found that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's husband adapting to Mali and that  paragraph  EX.1.  of
    Appendix FM was met.  Further, He was not  familiar  with  the  country
    although he was from Cote d'Ivoire and spoke French. He  would  not  be
    able to find work and the couple would have no accommodation there.

 4. The decision on insurmountable obstacles also  took  into  account  the
    appellant's French nephew who had come to live with her and her husband
    in 2017. The evidence was  that  the  child's  biological  father,  the
    appellant's brother, was having difficulty caring for him.  At  [21(6)]
    the First-tier Tribunal found that if the  appellant  and  her  husband
    went to Mali, the child would face disruption and detriment if  he  had
    to return to live with his father in France. Further,  at  [21(7)]  the
    Judge referred to the child as a qualifying child for the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002
    Act) and to it being unreasonable for the child to go to Mali.

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in grounds dated 9th of October 2017. It was argued  that  the
    Judge erred in finding that the Appellant's husband would be unable  to
    find work in Mali. It was also submitted that the findings  in  respect
    of the child were unsustainable,  there  was  no  documentary  evidence
    showing the immigration status of the  child  who  could  not,  in  any
    event, be considered a qualifying child for the purposes of the Article
    8 assessment under or outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Robertson  on  the
    26th of October 2017. Judge Robertson observed  that  it  was  arguable
    that Judge Herbert erred in finding that the  child  was  a  qualifying
    child. It was difficult to say how that had affected  the  decision  as
    the new appeal regime applied and the appeal had been allowed under the
    Immigration Rules which was not open to the Judge.

 7. At the start of the hearing Mr Paraskos sought to  take  a  preliminary
    point on jurisdiction on the basis  that  the  respondent's  permission
    application pre-dated the promulgation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. An examination of the Tribunal file showed that the  decision
    had  been  promulgated  twice,  as  indicated  above.  There   was   no
    explanation why such a course of action was followed and a  reading  of
    the decisions sent out showed that they were identical. We decided that
    although the decision being issued twice was puzzling there was nothing
    material arising  therefrom  and  that  we  did  have  jurisdiction  to
    entertain the appeal.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing we indicated  that  our  decision  was
    that the decision of Judge Herbert did contain errors of law  and  that
    the decision would be set aside and the case remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal  for  re-hearing  with  no  findings  preserved.  The  written
    decision giving the reasons for the findings was reserved.

 9. It is unarguable that the child here did not meet the definition  of  a
    qualifying child for the purposes of Appendix FM or s.117B(6)  of  2002
    Act and that including the reasonableness of his going to Mali  in  the
    assessment amounted to a material error of law. Further, at the date of
    the decision the child had been in the UK for  less  than  a  year.  No
    documentary evidence showed him to be the nephew of  the  appellant  or
    that the father had agreed to him coming to the UK.  Nothing  indicated
    that Social Services in France or the UK had assessed how the child was
    being cared for in the UK with relatives other than his parents.  There
    was  very  little  evidence  on  which  to  conduct  a  best  interests
    assessment. The position of this child living with  the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor in those circumstances gave us serious concern.

10. With regard to the position of the Appellant's husband, a chef, it  was
    for the Appellant to show that he would be unable  to  obtain  work  in
    Mali and there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal from  the
    Appellant on that point other than assertion. Further, the  finding  in
    [21(7)]  that the  couple would be without accommodation immediately on
    return to Mali was not in our view a significant factor which would  be
    a normal incident of relocation even within the UK.

11. In addition the Judge  did  not  explain  why,  if  little  weight  was
    attracted to the Appellant's relationship as it was formed  whilst  she
    was in the UK  illegally,  this  factor  was  not  significant  in  the
    insurmountable obstacles assessment and the assessment as a whole.  The
    Judge gave no consideration to the Appellant's illegal presence in  the
    UK since her arrival and the heavy delay before  this  application  was
    made. That would be a weighty factor in  the  balancing  exercise  when
    assessing whether the public interest in the enforcement of immigration
    control was outweighed by other factors.

12. In our view the decision of Judge Herbert was fundamentally  flawed  in
    the approach taken to the child, to the relationship with the  Sponsor,
    her immigration history and their ability to live in Mali. We therefore
    set aside the decision. No material findings remain and it is therefore
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  re-
    made.

CONCLUSIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

We set aside the decision and remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for re-making with no findings preserved, not  to  be  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  we  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In setting aside the decision and remitting it to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
we make no fee award which remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd February 2018

