
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11447/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th November 2020                        |On 10th December 2020         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               MR NAEEM SHARIF
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
    For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, instructed by Magna Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and  the  respondent  to  this  appeal  is  Mr
    Sharif.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision
    I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I  refer  to  Mr
    Sharif as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The hearing before me on 17th November 2020 took the form of  a  remote
    hearing  using  skype  for  business.  Neither  party  objected.    The
    appellant joined the hearing by Skype and throughout, he  was  able  to
    see and hear me and the representatives.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil
    Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in  exactly  the
    same way as I would have been if the parties had attended  the  hearing
    together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted  a  hearing  in  open
    court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no  party
    has  been  prejudiced;  and  that,  insofar  as  there  has  been   any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified  as  necessary  and
    proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
    and in accordance with the  overriding  objective  to  proceed  with  a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I  was  satisfied  that  a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and  justly
    in a way that is proportionate to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
    complexity of the issues that arise,  and  the  anticipated  costs  and
    resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing  I  was  satisfied
    that  both  parties  had  been  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
    proceedings.


Background


 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.   On  5th  September  2017  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  10
    years long residence.  The application was refused for reasons set  out
    in a decision dated 19th June 2019.


 4. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  was  allowed
    by FtT Judge Frazer for reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on
    11th March 2020. Judge Frazer found the respondent had  discharged  the
    initial  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the  TOEIC  certificate
    submitted in support of a previous application dated  14th  April  2014
    was obtained by dishonesty.  Judge Frazer heard oral evidence from  the
    appellant and went on to  find  that  the  appellant  had  provided  an
    explanation to the minimum  level  of  plausibility  and  in  the  end,
    concluded that the respondent has failed to discharge the legal  burden
    of proving dishonesty. Having found the appellant's application did not
    fall for refusal under the general  grounds  for  refusal  set  out  in
    paragraph 322(2) of the immigration rules,  Judge  Frazer  went  on  to
    consider the effect of that finding. At paragraph [20], he said:


     "I shall now consider the effect of this  finding  on  the  Appellant's
         application. I have had regard to the respondent's position as  set
         out in Khan v Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2018] EWCA Civ 1684.  Ms Rushforth  handed  up  a  refusal  letter
         dated 19th February 2014.  The college's  licence  was  revoked  on
         30th October 2013 and he did not make an application to change  his
         sponsor or make a fresh application for entry clearance.  Therefore
         on 19th February 2014 his leave was  curtailed.  Therefore  between
         19th February 2014 and 14th April 2014 the Appellant was present in
         the UK unlawfully.  This cannot be remedied by the Respondent as it
         is based on the Appellant's  failure  at  this  point  in  time  to
         regularise his status. Therefore, the Appellant's  application  for
         leave to remain on a 10 year basis cannot succeed.  His  length  of
         residence is not continuous."


 5. The chronology set out in paragraph ]20]  is,  as  Mr  Sharma  accepts,
    incorrect.  On 19th February 2014, the respondent curtailed  the  leave
    to remain previously granted to the appellant so  that  it  expired  on
    20th April 2014.  Before the leave to remain  expired,  on  14th  April
    2014, the appellant made an application for further leave to remain  as
    a student.  It was that application that gave rise to the decision made
    by the respondent in July 2014.


 6. In any event, Judge Frazer also found that the appellant does not  meet
    the requirements for leave to remain on the grounds of private life set
    out in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  At paragraph [22] of
    his decision, Judge Frazer said:


     "To the extent only that the respondent has not  discharged  the  legal
         burden of proving dishonesty the appeal succeeds"


The appeal before me


 7. The respondent claims  Judge  Frazer  erred  in  allowing  "the  appeal
    against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the  application  under
    paragraph 322(2) of the immigration rules".    Permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted by FtT Judge  Nightingale  on  18th  May
    2020.  She noted:


     "The grounds are arguable.  Having found that the  respondent  had  not
         established  exclusion  on  suitability  grounds  under   paragraph
         322(2), the Judge should arguably have  gone  on  to  consider  the
         substantive requirements of the rules reflecting the  human  rights
         obligations of the United Kingdom in coming to  a  decision  as  to
         whether the appellant succeeded on human rights grounds..."


    The matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Frazer is vitiated by a material error of  law,  and  if  so,  to
    remake the decision.


Error of Law


 8. After hearing the parties submissions, I informed the parties  that  in
    my judgement the  decision  of  First-tier  Frazer  is  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law and must be set  aside.  I said that I would give
    full written reasons in writing.  This I now do.


 9. Section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") provides that a person may appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where the SSHD has decided to refuse  a  human  rights  claim.
    The only ground of appeal available to the appellant pursuant to s84(2)
    of the 2002 Act was that the respondent's decision is unlawful under s6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.


10. Although Judge Frazer found that the application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK did not fall for refusal under the general  grounds
    for refusal and that  the  respondent  had  not  established  that  the
    appellant used deception in his application of 14th April  2014,  Judge
    Frazer nevertheless concluded  at  paragraphs  [20]  and  [21]  of  his
    decision, that the appellant is unable to satisfy the requirements  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the  grounds  of  long  residence,  or  on
    private life grounds.


11. I reject the submission made by Mr Sharma that one can reasonably infer
    that the appeal was allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  and  that  any
    failure to set out the route to the success of the human rights  claim,
    is immaterial, because the outcome of the appeal would be the same.   I
    accept that the reasons given by  the  judge  should  be  read  on  the
    assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,  the  judge
    knew how he should perform his functions and which  matters  he  should
    take into account.  However, the duty to give reasons, is in  part,  to
    enable the losing party to know why they have lost and it  is  also  to
    enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the reasons  for  the
    decision are, so that they can be examined in case there  has  been  an
    error of approach.  Judge Frazer does not  state  that  the  appeal  is
    allowed on human rights grounds, but states,  at  [22],  that  "To  the
    extent only that the  respondent  has  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving dishonesty, the appeal succeeds.".  Put another way, the appeal
    was allowed only to the extent that the respondent had  not  discharged
    the burden of proving dishonesty.  The appeal before the Tribunal was a
    human rights appeal, not an appeal under the Immigration Rules.


12. Having found that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of  the
    immigration rules, it is impossible to discern from  the  decision  any
    reasons whatsoever as to why the appeal  could  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The basis upon which the human rights claim  can  succeed  in
    circumstances where the  Judge  found  that  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules are not met, are neither identified nor apparent from
    the decision. Furthermore there is no reference to the Judge having had
    regard to the public interest considerations set out in  s117B  of  the
    2002 Act when determining whether the decision breaches the appellant's
    right to respect for private and family life under Article 8.


13. It is in my judgment  plain  from  paragraph  [22]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision that Judge Frazer decided  the  appeal  on  grounds
    other than those set out in sections 84(2) of the 2002 Act.  There  was
    no jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  simply
    on the basis that the SSHD had  not  discharged  the  legal  burden  of
    proving dishonesty. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frazer simply  failed  to
    address whether the respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 and it follows that  his  decision  must  be  set
    aside.


Remaking the decision


14. Following my 'error of law' decision, I informed the parties that in my
    judgment, the appropriate course is for the decision to  be  remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  Neither party objected. I  preserved  the  finding
    made by Judge Frazer that  the  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK did not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
    refusal and that the respondent had not established that the  appellant
    used deception in his application of 14th April  2014.  The  respondent
    did  not  challenge  that  finding.   Neither  party  objected  to   my
    preserving that finding and I was not invited to preserve  any  of  the
    findings made by Judge Frazer.


15. The only ground of appeal  available  to  the  appellant  is  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC
    11 confirms that the fact that the immigration  rules  cannot  be  met,
    does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full  merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate  issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between  the  individual  and
    public interest, giving due weight to  the  provisions  of  the  Rules.
    Although the appellant's ability to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  is
    not the question to be determined, it is plainly  capable  of  being  a
    weighty factor when deciding whether such refusal is  proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.


16. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to show, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that he has established a family  and/or  private  life,
    and that the refusal of leave  to  remain  would  interfere  with  that
    right. It is then  for  the  respondent  to  justify  any  interference
    caused. The respondent's decision must be in accordance  with  the  law
    and must be a proportionate response in all the circumstances.


The evidence


17. Following the hearing before me, the appellant's  representatives  sent
    to the Tribunal, at my request, a copy of  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents that was relied upon at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  For reasons that are neither  apparent  nor  explained,  the
    appellant's representatives sent a further email, again  attaching  the
    bundle of documents that had been relied upon  by  the  appellant,  but
    this time also including an additional witness statement signed by  the
    appellant and dated 17th November 2020.  The respondent does not appear
    to have been copied into the email sent to  the  Tribunal,  and  so  it
    would appear the respondent  may  have  no  knowledge  of  the  further
    statement that the appellant has made, following the hearing before me.




18. In any event, there is no Notice  provided  by  the  appellant  or  his
    representatives under Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules  2008  inviting  the  Tribunal  to  admit  the  further
    evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  explaining
    why it was not submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  considering
    whether to admit the further statement of the  appellant,  I  have  had
    regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay  in  producing  the
    statement of the appellant dated 17th November  2020.   The  underlying
    decision that is  the  subject  of  this  appeal  is  the  respondent's
    decision of 19th June 2019.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Frazer was promulgated on 11th March 2020.  The respondent was  granted
    permission to appeal on 18th May 2020 and notice of the hearing  listed
    before me on 17th November 2020 was sent to the parties on 14th October
    2020. I have been provided with no explanation whatsoever regarding the
    delay in producing the statement and in my  judgement  there  has  been
    unreasonable delay.  Mr Sharma  did  not  object  to  me  remaking  the
    decision in the  Upper  Tribunal.   Neither  did  he  suggest  that  in
    remaking  the  decision  I  should  hear  further  evidence  from   the
    appellant, nor that the appellant would seek permission to rely upon  a
    further witness statement.  The  issues  in  the  appeal  were  plainly
    apparent. It was the appellant's own case before the FtT  that  if  the
    respondent could not establish dishonesty and that his application fell
    for refusal under the general grounds for refusal, he should be put  in
    the position that he  would  have  been  in,  but  for  that  erroneous
    conclusion.  It would in my judgement be procedurally unfair for me  to
    admit a statement  that  the  respondent  has  had  no  opportunity  of
    considering or to make submissions upon, after  the  hearing  has  been
    concluded.  It would be contrary to the overriding objective  to  avoid
    delay, so far as  compatible  with  the  proper  consideration  of  the
    issues.  It is in my judgement, entirely inappropriate for me to  admit
    the further statement of the appellant, and I decline to do so.


19. I have in the papers before me a copy of the bundle of  documents  sent
    to the First-tier Tribunal under cover of a letter  dated  10th  August
    2019 from Magna Solicitors and relied upon by the appellant in  support
    of his appeal.  The bundle includes a witness statement signed  by  the
    appellant on 10th August 2019.  I also  have  a  copy  of  an  'Amended
    Witness Statement of the Appellant' signed by  the  appellant  on  26th
    February 2020 that was sent to the First-tier Tribunal in readiness for
    the hearing on 28th February 2020 and a copy of the  skeleton  argument
    settled by counsel, Mr Sharma,  dated  27th  February  2020.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt I confirm I have read  those  documents  before  the
    Tribunal, whether referred to in this decision or not.


20. The appellant did  not  give  evidence  before  me  and  there  was  no
    application to adduce any further evidence.  In his  witness  statement
    dated 10th August 2019, the appellant confirms  that  in  2012  he  was
    studying for an ACCA qualification at St Peters  College,  in  Aldgate,
    East London.  A few months later the college licence was revoked by the
    respondent, and the appellant was permitted 60 days  to  obtain  a  new
    CAS.  He states that in 2013, he applied for, and was granted leave  to
    remain as a student until 2015. He states  that  it  "..  was  sad  and
    petrifying that my new College was also revoked by the Home  Office.  I
    again was required to find another college and  apply  to  Home  Office
    within 60 days which I did.".  He goes on to refer to  the  refusal  of
    his application in July 2014 and to address the respondent's claim that
    the TOEIC certificate was fraudulently obtained.


21. In his 'Amended Witness Statement' signed by the  appellant  and  dated
    26th February 2020, the appellant repeats some of that which is set out
    in his previous statement and elaborates upon the arrangements that  he
    made to  complete  the  English  Language  tests  at  Premier  Language
    Training Centre, and the impact of the refusal upon the appellant.


22. As I have already set out, the only ground of appeal available  to  the
    appellant pursuant to s84(2) of the 2002 Act is that  the  respondent's
    decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.   I  have
    preserved the finding made by Judge Frazer  that  the  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK did not fall for refusal under the
    general grounds for refusal and that the respondent has not established
    that the appellant used deception in  his  application  of  14th  April
    2014.


23. I must consider the consequences that flow from that  finding,  and  in
    particular, what had been said by the Court of Appeal in Ahsan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, and in Khan v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1684.   The
    respondent's compromise in those cases, was that where  a  finding  was
    made by the FtT in an ETS case that there had been  no  deception,  the
    appellant would be put back in the position he/she was in prior to  the
    decision being made, and would be able to make a fresh application.  In
    Ahsan -v- SSHD Underhill LJ said, at [120]:

         "120.  The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on a
         human rights appeal an appellant were found not  to  have  cheated,
         which inevitably means that the section 10 decision had been wrong,
         the Secretary of State would be obliged to deal  with  him  or  her
         thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not  been  made,
         i.e. as if their leave to remain had not  been  invalidated.  In  a
         straightforward case, for example, she  could  and  should  make  a
         fresh grant of leave to remain equivalent to that  which  had  been
         invalidated. She could also, and other things being  equal  should,
         exercise any relevant future discretion, if necessary "outside  the
         Rules", on the basis that the appellant had in fact  had  leave  to
         remain in the relevant period notwithstanding  that  formally  that
         leave remained invalidated. (I accept that how to exercise  such  a
         discretion would not  always  be  easy,  since  it  is  not  always
         possible to reconstruct the world as it would have been;  but  that
         problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on  judicial
         review.) If it  were  clear  that  in  those  ways  the  successful
         appellant could be put in substantially the same position as if the
         section 10 decision had been  quashed,  I  can  see  no  reason  in
         principle why that should not be taken  into  account  in  deciding
         whether a human  rights  appeal  would  constitute  an  appropriate
         alternative remedy. To pick up a particular point relied on  by  Mr
         Biggs, I do not regard the fact that a person  commits  a  criminal
         offence by remaining in the UK  from  (apparently)  the  moment  of
         service of a  section  10  notice  as  constituting  a  substantial
         detriment such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to  have  the
         notice quashed, at least in circumstances where there has  been  no
         prosecution. (It is also irrelevant that  the  appellant  may  have
         suffered collateral consequences from the section  10  decision  on
         the basis that his or her  leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
         losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot  alas  cannot  be
         remedied by either kind of proceeding.)

24. In order to consider, so far as is  possible,  the  position  that  the
    appellant would have been in, if the respondent  had  not  refused  the
    application made  on  14th  April  2014  because  of  the  respondent's
    conclusion that the appellant had used deception  and  his  application
    fell for refusal  on  the  general  grounds  for  refusal  set  out  in
    paragraph 322, it is appropriate for me to say a little more about  the
    appellant's immigration history.


The appellant's immigration history


25. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 7th October 2006 with
    entry clearance as a student valid until 31st May 2008.   On  22nd  May
    2008, he made an 'in-time' application for further leave to remain as a
    student and  was  granted  leave  to  remain  until  31st  March  2009.
    Following further 'in-time' applications,  the  appellant  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  until  30th  April  2014.
    However, on 6th April 2013 his leave to remain was curtailed so that it
    expired on 6th September 2013.  On  30th  August  2013,  the  appellant
    applied for, and was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 student  valid
    until 6th July 2015.  On 19th February 2014, the appellant  was  served
    with a decision to curtail the leave granted to him.  In  the  decision
    dated 19th February 2014, the respondent stated:


         Curtailment of Lave


         ...


         You were granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 General Student  until
         expiry of 06-Jul-2015 in order to undertake a course  of  study  at
         Northam College.


         On 30-Oct-2013 the sponsor licence for Northam College was revoked.


         Home Office records have been checked and there is no evidence that
         you have made an application to change your sponsor or made a fresh
         application for entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to  remain
         in the United Kingdom in any capacity.


         It is not considered that the circumstances of your case  are  such
         that discretion should be exercised in your favour.  The  Secretary
         of State has therefore decided to curtail your leave  to  enter  or
         remain as a Tier 4 Migrant so as to expire on 20-Apr-2014.


         Your leave has been curtailed under  paragraph  323A(b)(i)  of  the
         immigration rules.


         Before your current leave to  enter  or  remain  expires  you  must
         either leave the United Kingdom or submit a fresh  application  for
         leave to remain.


         ..."


26. On 14th April 2014, the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student.  That application was refused for
    reasons set out in a decision that appears to have  been  made  by  the
    respondent on 3rd July 2014, but which the appellant maintains was  not
    served upon him until 28th July 2014.   Insofar  as  is  material,  the
    respondent stated:


         "Refusal to grant leave to remain


         We have considered your application on behalf of the  Secretary  of
         State for the home Department ("SSHD"), and  your  application  has
         been refused under paragraphs 322(1A) and 245ZX of the  Immigration
         Rules...."


27. The respondent set out two reasons for refusing the application. First,
    the scores taken from the test taken on 18th September 2012 at  Premier
    Language Training Centre have been cancelled by ETS and the  respondent
    was satisfied that there is substantial evidence to conclude  that  the
    appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained. The respondent  said
    that as deception had been used in relation  to  the  application,  the
    application was refused under paragraph 322(1A).   As  the  application
    therefore fell for refusal under the general grounds  for  refusal  the
    respondent concluded that the appellant does not meet  the  requirement
    set out at paragraph 245ZX(a) of the immigration rules.


28. The second reason given by the respondent related to the  'Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies' ("CAS") relied upon by  the  appellant.  The
    respondent stated:


         "You have claimed 30 points under Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).  However,
         the SSHD is not satisfied that you have a valid  CAS,  because  the
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies Checking Service was checked
         on 3 July 2014, and it confirmed that the CAS with reference number
         [....] that you submitted with your application has been  withdrawn
         by your sponsor.  Therefore, you have not met the  requirements  to
         be awarded 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules...."


29. As the appellant had not provided a valid CAS, the respondent concluded
    that she could not be satisfied that the appellant should be awarded 10
    points under Appendix C.  The respondent decided that the appellant was
    therefore also unable to meet the requirements set  out  in  paragraphs
    245ZX(c) and (d) of the immigration rules.


30. Following the refusal  of  that  application,  in  September  2014  the
    appellant claimed asylum but later withdrew that claim during the  same
    month.  In March 2015 he applied for further leave to remain on  family
    and  private  life  grounds.  That  application  was  refused  on  30th
    September 2015.  A further application for leave to  remain  on  family
    and private life grounds made in November  2015  was  refused  on  10th
    September 2016.  An application made on 7th October 2016 for indefinite
    leave to remain on the grounds of 10-years long residence  was  refused
    on 7th February 2017. Neither the  appellant  nor  the  respondent  has
    provided the Tribunal with copies of the decisions dated 30th September
    2015, 10th September 2016, nor 7th February 2017.


31. On 5th September 2017, the appellant again applied for indefinite leave
    to remain on the grounds of 10-years long residence.   The  application
    was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
    19th  June  2019.   The  respondent  gave  four  reasons.   First,  the
    appellant has not had leave to remain in the UK in any  capacity  since
    3rd July 2014 and he is therefore unable to establish that he  has  had
    at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom  as
    required by paragraph 276B(i) of  the  immigration  rules.   Second,  a
    TOEIC certificate submitted in support of a previous application  dated
    14th April 2014 was fraudulently obtained and the  appellant  had  used
    deception. The respondent concluded that the  appellant's  presence  in
    the UK is not conducive to the public good because his conduct makes it
    undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.  The application was also
    refused under the general grounds for  refusal  set  out  in  paragraph
    322(1A) of  the  immigration  rules.   Third,  the  appellant  has  not
    demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the   English   language   and
    sufficient knowledge about life in the UK, in accordance with  Appendix
    KoLL as required  by  paragraph  276B(iv)  of  the  immigration  rules.
    Finally, the appellant cannot  satisfy  the  requirement  in  paragraph
    276B(v) of the immigration rules that the applicant must not be in  the
    UK in breach of immigration laws.


The parties submissions


32. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni submits that winding  the  clock
    back, the respondent had given two reasons in her decision of 3rd  July
    2014 refusing the application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  student.
    She submits that on any view, the respondent was entitled to refuse the
    application because the appellant did not have a  valid  CAS.   As  the
    respondent noted in her decision, the Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies Checking Service was checked on 3rd July 2014 and it  confirmed
    that the CAS relied upon by the appellant had  been  withdrawn  by  his
    sponsor.  Therefore, the appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements
    of the immigration rules and it was open to the  respondent  to  refuse
    the application in any event.  The  respondent's  conclusion  regarding
    the lack of a valid CAS remains undisturbed and the appellant  has  not
    been lawfully resident in the UK since July 2014.   Mrs  Aboni  submits
    the  appellant  cannot  therefore  meet  the  requirement  set  out  in
    paragraph 276B of the immigration rules that he has  had  at  least  10
    years continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.  She  submits
    there is no other basis upon which the appellant should be permitted to
    remain in the UK outside the immigration rules.


33. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Sharma drew my  attention  to  paragraph
    [11] of the appellant's statement dated 10th August 2019 in  which  the
    appellant claims that the respondent did not serve the refusal decision
    of 3rd July 2014, until 28th  July  2014  and  until  that  point,  the
    appellant had no knowledge that his application had been refused.   The
    appellant explains that on 28th July 2014, he was detained and informed
    that his application had been refused.  He had  informed  the  officers
    that he had not received any refusal decision and the  officers  agreed
    that the decision had not previously been served  upon  the  appellant.
    Mr Sharma submits the appellant's oral evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that he was still attending  the  College  in  July  2014,
    although he accepts that here was no evidence before  the  Tribunal  to
    support the appellant's oral evidence.


34. During the course of Mr Sharma's submissions it  became  apparent  that
    there was no evidence before the Tribunal regarding the  CAS  that  was
    relied upon by the appellant in support of his application for leave to
    remain as a student made on 14th April 2014.  The  appellant  confirmed
    that in July 2014 he was attending the  Advanced  College  of  Business
    Management, in Romford, East London.


35. Mr Sharma submits that any application for further leave to remain made
    following the refusal in July 2014, would have proved futile and  would
    have been refused on the general grounds for refusal.  He  submits  the
    respondent should now  re-consider  the  decision  made  in  July  2014
    without taking into account the erroneous conclusion that the appellant
    had used deception and fell for refusal under the general  grounds  for
    refusal.  He submits that here, the applicant  should  be  put  in  the
    position of being able to make a further application,  and  during  the
    intervening period, the appellant should be treated  as  having  lawful
    leave to remain.  He submits that even if the appellant may not succeed
    under the rules, the background and history is  a  factor  that  weighs
    heavily  in  favour   of   the   appellant   in   the   assessment   of
    proportionality.


Findings and Conclusions


36. Both the decisions in Ahsan and Khan are primarily concerned  with  the
    availability and nature of a right of appeal in which the  respondent's
    allegation of proxy test taking  could  be  fairly  considered  on  the
    merits. The decision in Ahsan involved direct challenges  to  decisions
    to remove taken under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  as
    it was prior to the amendments brought about  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014. The decision in Khan,  was  concerned  with  the  appeals  regime
    introduced by the Immigration Act 2014, involved direct  challenges  to
    curtailment decisions in respect of  which  there  were  no  rights  of
    appeal. A compromise was reached by the parties in Khan  in  which  the
    appellants would make human rights claims and, if they were  successful
    in a subsequent human rights appeal on the  basis  that  they  did  not
    cheat, save in the absence  of  a  new  factor,  the  respondent  would
    rescind  her  curtailment  decisions  and  afford  them  a   reasonable
    opportunity to secure further leave to remain.


37.  Here,  Judge  Frazer  found  that  the  appellant's  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK did not fall for refusal under the
    general grounds for refusal and that the respondent has not established
    that the appellant used deception in  his  application  of  14th  April
    2014.  The respondent would therefore  be  obliged  to  deal  with  the
    appellant thereafter, so far as possible, as if that error had not been
    made.  Mrs Aboni submits the respondent was in any  event  entitled  to
    refuse the application because the application was not supported  by  a
    valid CAS.  She submits, putting aside the respondent's conclusion that
    the application fell for refusal under the general grounds for refusal,
    the application would have failed in any event and so on any view,  the
    applicant cannot establish that he has had at least 10 years continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom.


38. I have carefully considered the  evidence  before  me.   I  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that he was not aware of the respondent's decision
    made in July 2014, until he was provided with a copy of it on 28th July
    2014.  At paragraph [17] of his  decision,  Judge  Frazer  records  the
    appellant's evidence in cross-examination that he was  still  attending
    the college at the time (i.e. in  July  2014)  despite  the  CAS  being
    revoked.  I pause to note that the CAS was  not  'revoked'  because  as
    often happens, the sponsor licence had been revoked, but  according  to
    the respondent's decision, the CAS was 'withdrawn' by the  college.   I
    note that at paragraph [19] of his decision, Judge Frazer said:


         "... His evidence was that the college was still open and  that  he
         continued to attend. I have no evidence about the specific date  of
         the college's physical closure and therefore in the  light  of  the
         other evidence given I accepted his evidence on this point..."


39. Neither  party  submitted  that  that  finding  be  preserved.   In  my
    judgement the difficulty with  that  finding  is  that  it  appears  to
    proceed on an erroneous premise or mistake as to  fact.   Judge  Frazer
    considered that there was no evidence regarding the 'specific  date  of
    the college's physical closure'.  Here, the respondent  did  not  claim
    that  the  sponsor  licence  had  been  revoked,  a  step  that   could
    potentially have resulted in physical closure of the college, but  that
    the CAS had been withdrawn by the sponsor.   That  is  something  quite
    different.   Withdrawal  of  a  CAS  would  not  prevent  the   College
    continuing to operate, but operates so that the college is no longer  a
    sponsor of the appellant.  The CAS was not therefore  invalid  because,
    as often happens, of circumstances entirely beyond the control  of  the
    appellant, and in  circumstances  where  the  sponsor  licence  of  the
    college  had,  unbeknown  to  the  appellant,  been  revoked   by   the
    respondent.  A CAS can be withdrawn by a  sponsor  for  any  number  of
    reasons, including the simple failure of an student to attend  classes.
     The reasons why the CAS had been withdrawn are not apparent,  but  the
    appellant does not claim that the respondent erroneously claims the CAS
    had been withdrawn by the college.


40.  Having carefully considered the evidence before the Tribunal, I reject
    the appellant's claim that in July 2014, he  was  still  attending  the
    Advanced College of Business Management, in Romford, East London.


41. Importantly, the appellant does not, and has  never  claimed  that  the
    respondent erroneously asserts that the CAS had been withdrawn  by  his
    sponsor.  The appellant does not claim that the CAS he relied upon  was
    valid in July 2014 and had not been withdrawn by the sponsor.


42. It is not credible that the appellant would have been able to  continue
    attending the college after the CAS had been withdrawn by his  sponsor.
    The appellant has known since the respondent's decision provided to him
    on 28th July 2014 that the respondent claims  that  the  CAS  that  was
    submitted with his application "has been withdrawn  by  your  sponsor".
    The appellant does not challenge that claim in his statement dated 10th
    August 2019.   At  paragraphs  [11]  to  [13]  of  that  statement  the
    applicant maintains that the decision reached  in  July  2014  was  not
    served upon him until 28th July 2014, when he was detained following an
    enforcement visit at his home address. The appellant claims that during
    the time when  he  was  detained,  his  English  language  ability  was
    assessed by caseworkers but nowhere in his statement does he claim that
    he had continued attending the college notwithstanding the  claim  made
    by the respondent that the CAS issued to him, had been withdrawn by the
    sponsor. Similarly, he does not say that he was unaware  that  the  CAS
    had been withdrawn by his sponsor. If, as the appellant claims, he  had
    been able to  continue  attending  the  Advanced  College  of  Business
    Management, notwithstanding the withdrawal of the CAS,  it  would  have
    been open to the appellant to provide the  Tribunal  with  evidence  in
    support of that claim from the Advanced College of Business Management,
    or from others that could attest to his continued attendance there.


43. I quite accept that corroboration is not necessary but in my  judgement
    evidence to support the account given by the  appellant  is  or  should
    readily  be  available.   Although  there   is   no   requirement   for
    corroboration, if evidence is relevant  and  available,  it  should  be
    produced.   No such evidence is relied upon by the appellant.


44. A refusal of leave to remain is a very serious step  for  an  appellant
    and I acknowledge that common law  fairness  will  usually  require  an
    applicant to be provided with a reasonable time with which  to  find  a
    substitute college on which to base their application for an  extension
    of stay to obtain a relevant qualification.  Here, in  September  2013,
    the appellant had been granted further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    General Student until 6th July 2015.  However, the leave was  curtailed
    so that it expired on 20th April 2014.  In the respondent's decision of
    19th February 2014, the appellant was informed that the sponsor licence
    for Northam College had been revoked and  the  appellant  was  informed
    that he should make arrangements to plan his departure from the UK, or,
    if he intends to remain in the UK, he should make a further application
    for leave before his  current  leave  expired.  The  appellant  made  a
    further application for leave to remain on 14th April 2014, before  the
    leave expired on 20th April 2014.  In support of  that  application  he
    relied upon  the  CAS  issued  by  the  Advanced  College  of  Business
    Management.


45. In my judgement, the position was quite different when  the  respondent
    reached her decision in July 2014. The CAS relied upon by the appellant
    was not invalid because the respondent had revoked the sponsor licence,
    but because it had been withdrawn by the sponsor.  On balance, it seems
    to me more likely than not that the appellant had been informed by  his
    sponsor that the CAS been withdrawn.  It would have been unfair for the
    respondent to revoke the college's status  after  the  application  had
    been made, when it was an approved  sponsor,  and  not  to  inform  the
    applicant of such revocation and not afford him an opportunity to  vary
    the application, but that was not the  situation  here.   There  is  no
    evidence before me as to the reasons why the CAS had been withdrawn  by
    the sponsor but I am satisfied that the appellant had actual  knowledge
    that the CAS had been withdrawn by his sponsor and that  he  thereafter
    took no steps to amend his application by  seeking  to  substitute  the
    CAS.


46. It was in my judgement therefore open to the respondent to  refuse  the
    application for leave to remain in the UK on the additional ground that
    the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant had  a  valid  CAS.
    The appellant has been exonerated by Judge Frazer from  the  allegation
    of deception that was  previously  made  against  him,  such  that  the
    respondent will be unable to rely upon that allegation  in  any  future
    applications that are made by the appellant.  However, in my  judgment,
    it remains the position that on any view of  the  facts  and  a  proper
    application of the  immigration  rules,  winding  the  clock  back  and
    dealing with the appellant so far as possible as if the  allegation  of
    deception had not been made in the respondent's decision of July  2014,
    the appellant cannot not satisfy the requirement set out  in  paragraph
    276B that he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful  residence  in
    the UK.  On the chronology and facts as I find them, the respondent has
    not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom since the  refusal  of
    his application that was served upon the appellant on 28th July 2014.


47. I have found that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence.  There  is
    no evidence before me upon which I could  properly  conclude  that  the
    appellant can meet any of the requirements for leave to remain  as  set
    out in paragraphs 276ADE and Appendix FM of the immigration  rules.   I
    have carefully considered  the  matters  referred  to  in  the  witness
    statements of the appellant and I find that  there  is  nothing  within
    that evidence  to  establish  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Pakistan.


48. There is no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  has
    established a family life in the UK.  The appellant  has  however  been
    living in the UK  since  October  2006  and  although  there  is  scant
    evidence before the Tribunal regarding his connections to the  UK,  and
    in particular, what he has been doing since  2014,  I  am  prepared  to
    accept that on balance, he will have established a private life  during
    the time that he has been in the UK. I also find that the  decision  to
    refuse the appellant's leave to enter, may have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8, and I accept that  the
    interference is in accordance with the law, and that  the  interference
    is necessary to protect the economic well-being of the country.


49. The issue in this  appeal,  as  is  often  the  case,  is  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  In reaching my decision I have had regard to the factors set
    out in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and
    note that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
    public interest.  I note that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.  The  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student with limited leave to remain and has had no  leave
    to remain since July 2014.  Even winding the clock back, the  appellant
    has remained in the UK unlawfully since July 2014.


50. In my assessment of proportionality, I have considered  the  fact  that
    the appellant has  overstayed  in  the  UK,  in  part,  because  of  an
    unfounded allegation of deception made  by  the  respondent.   However,
    quite apart from the unfounded allegation of deception, it was open  to
    the respondent to reach the decision served on 28th July 2014, for  the
    additional reason that the CAS relied upon by the  appellant  had  been
    withdrawn.


51. I have had regard to the appellant's evidence as set out in his witness
    statement and I am quite prepared to accept that both the appellant and
    his parents have invested a significant amount,  both  financially  and
    emotionally, to give the  appellant  the  best  possible  education.  I
    accept that he has now spent  several  years  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, although appellant might prefer to continue his education  and
    life in the UK, that does not equate to a right to do so  in  law.   On
    the evidence before me, there are no exceptional circumstances  capable
    of establishing that the refusal  of  leave  to  remain  amounts  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right  to  enjoyment
    of his private life.  Having carefully considered the  evidence  before
    me, and taking all relevant factors  into  account,  I  find  that  the
    decision  to  refuse  the  application  for  leave  to  remain  is  not
    disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of   immigration   control.
    Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


DECISION


52.  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Frazer
    promulgated on 11th March 2020.


53. I remake the decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal on  Article  8
    grounds.

    V. Mandalia                         Date     23rd November 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





