
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11473/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2018                         |On 12th November 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr Seyed Davood Moosavi Nejad
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell promulgated on 30 July 2018.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran,  born  on  3  March  1966.   He  is
    married and there are children of the marriage.

3.   In the course  of  his  decision,  the  judge  considered  whether  the
    appellant was  entitled  to  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. A careful evaluation of the background led the judge
    to conclude:

         [27] There does not appear to be any reason as to why she [that  is
         the appellant's wife] cannot travel to Iran.  The appellant's  wife
         was brought up in Iran and obviously can speak a language  of  that
         country. Although there may be  associated  discrimination  against
         women that does not appear to be any reason as to why she could not
         return to Iran with her  husband  apart  from  the  fact  that  her
         children would be unwilling to do so.


         [28] I do not consider that the appellant has shown that there  are
         very significant obstacles to his reintegration into the country to
         which he would have to go;  similarly  there  is  no  unjustifiable
         harshness or very substantial difficulties for his wife going there
         with him.  I therefore do not consider that the appellant has shown
         that he has met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
         Immigration Rules. (emphasis added)

4.   Having therefore dismissed the appeal under the Rules, the  judge  went
    on to consider the application  of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  by
    reference to the test articulated by the Supreme Court in Agyarko v the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11,  recognising
    that a human rights appeal  may  succeed  if  the  consequence  of  the
    refusal decision were to cause very substantial difficulties  or  there
    were exceptional circumstances or  it  would  constitute  unjustifiable
    harshness to the appellant.

5.   In dealing with this matter the judge said this:

         [35] However  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  this
         decision based solely on the English language  test  assessment  is
         not necessary in this democratic society.  The analysis in the case
         of  Bibi  shows  that  the  interference  in  this  case   is   not
         proportionate  to  the  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved   and
         ultimately that the  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved  is  not
         legitimate in this particular case.  The facts  of  this  case  are
         quite unique and peculiar and I conclude that it is unreasonable to
         expect the appellant and his family to relocate to Iran in all  the
         circumstances or for them to be  separated.   I  do  conclude  that
         there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and his  family
         relocating to Iran simply because the family will not go  with  the
         appellant  and  the  consequences   would   be   separation.    The
         circumstances   are   exceptional.    The   interference   is   not
         proportionate  to   the   legitimate   aim   sought.    There   are
         compassionate or unjustifiably harsh consequences as  a  result  of
         the  decision.   I  do  not  consider  that  the  decision   is   a
         proportionate interference with the appellant's, his wife's or  his
         family's Article 8 rights.  I do  consider  that  the  decision  to
         refuse leave is not proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
         sought to be achieved.  I therefore allow the appeal under  Article
         8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. (emphasis added)

6.   I indicated to the representatives my provisional view that  there  was
    a fundamental difficulty with the decision because of what  I  consider
    to be an irreconcilable dissonance between the content of paragraph  28
    and the content of paragraph 35, both of which I have rehearsed in full
    and with added emphasis. This irreconcilable dissonance  is  such  that
    the reader cannot, with confidence, place reliance on the decision as a
    whole.

7.   I raised with Ms Willocks-Briscoe whether she wished to argue that  the
    decision under the Immigration Rules was correct  and  that  the  judge
    ought not to have entertained the matter under Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  She declined that invitation, in my  view  properly.  She  said
    that the mutually contradictory nature of the decision  was  such  that
    the better course would be for it to be set aside and for the matter to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

8.   Mr Sellwood, who acts for the respondent to the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal, has sought to defend and uphold the decision. The substance  of
    his submission is that the tests are different whether one is  applying
    paragraph 276ADE or whether one is looking at exceptional circumstances
    or unjustifiable harshness when considering the  effect  of  a  refusal
    decision on the Article 8 rights  of  an  individual  and  his  or  her
    family.  Whilst I fully  accept  that  the  tests  to  be  applied  are
    different, the assessment of  evidential  issues  must  be  consistent.
    Notwithstanding Mr Sellwood's sustained submissions  to  the  contrary,
    the conclusions reached by the judge in the two paragraphs I have cited
    cannot sensibly be reconciled.

9.   Mr Sellwood submits that  although  the  decision  may  be  inelegantly
    drafted, it can safely be relied on. He  argues  that  there  were  two
    separate Immigration Rule claims  before  the  judge.  In  addition  to
    paragraph 276ADE, there was a separate claim under the partner route at
    EX.1, to which reference is made in the decision  at  [14].  He  argues
    that paragraph [35] of  the  judgment,  in  adopting  the  language  of
    "insurmountable  obstacle",  amounts  to   a   determination   of   the
    appellant's alternative claim under EX.1.

10.  The interpretation contended for by Mr  Sellwood  would  necessitate  a
    wholesale re-writing of the decision. I do not consider it  appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to  uphold  a  decision  which  requires  to  be
    substantially re-cast in order to make sense  of  it.  If  Sellwood  is
    right that EX.1 was in play, then then the failure of the judge to deal
    with it expressly is a further reason why the decision  should  be  set
    aside. That said, I do not see how Mr Sellwood's reading  of  paragraph
    [35] can be right. In  terms  of  content  and  context,  it  is  self-
    evidently addressing Article  8  outside  Rules,  as  heralded  by  the
    references  to  Agyarko  and  Razgar  in  paragraphs  [31]   and   [32]
    respectively which precede immediately precede it in the determination.

11.   This  decision  is  not  one  where  an  informed  reader  can,   with
    confidence,  conclude  that  the  material  issues  for   determination
    received  anxious  and  consistent  scrutiny.  It  has  at  least   one
    fundamental flaw and must be set aside.

12.  Mr Sellwood made  reference  to  the  issue  of  the  English  language
    requirement and the application of dicta of the Supreme  Court  in  the
    case of Bibi [2015] UKSC 68.  It would be improper and unhelpful for me
    to express any view on his submissions. The matter is  to  be  remitted
    and that issue will be considered when the appeal is determined  at  de
    novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of decision

   1) The appeal is allowed.
   2) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the matter is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge
      other than Judge Mitchell.
   3) No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         6 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



