
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11060/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                              Mr SHAHAJAN AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born  on  10  January
    1991.

 2. The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  14
    September 2017 to reject his human rights claim on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his British partner [SN] and her children.

 3. Judge Loke (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 July 2018.  The judge found that the appellant did not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The appellant's role in
    the children's life did not amount to a "parental  relationship".   The
    judge found  S.117B(6)  was  not  engaged  and  that  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred in failing to make any findings  with
    regard to paragraph 276ADE.  See [3] of the grounds.  Further, that the
    judge failed to take into account S.55 with regard to the children  and
    failure to take into account various case law, Razgar, Beoku-Betts,  VW
    (Uganda), ZH (Tanzania), Huang, Kugathas, R (on the application of  RK)
    and R (Gurung).

 5. Judge M Robertson granted permission to appeal on 3 October 2018.   She
    said, inter alia, as follows:

         "2.  There is some arguable merit in the grounds at paragraph 3  of
             the grounds because whilst there  is  some  confusion  in  the
             submissions between the assessment  of  the  appellant's  life
             (which must be without reference to his relationship  with  Ms
             [N], the appellant did, in his grounds of application, rely on
             para 276ADE(1)(iv), and the judge has  not  dealt  with  these
             submissions with a view to factoring his ability  to  meet  or
             not meet those provisions in  the  proportionality  assessment
             and permission is granted on this ground.  The appellant  must
             not raise his hopes too high, however, because it may be  that
             on the  evidence  before  the  judge  it  was  not  reasonably
             arguable that he would  be  entitled  to  succeed  under  para
             276ADE(1)(iv).

         3.   There is little arguable merit, however, in the other  grounds
             which amount to no more than a disagreement with the  findings
             of the judge which were open to him on the evidence before him
             on all issues raised because: as to paras 1-2 of the  grounds,
             the judge has accepted that Article 8 is engaged on the  basis
             of the appellant's relationship with the Ms  [N]  (see  [11]).
             As to para 4 of the grounds, the judge has considered and made
             findings on the best interests of Ms [N]'s children  at  [11].
             As to para 5 of the grounds, the judge gave  adequate  reasons
             as to why he found that the appellant had not established that
             the appellant had a  'parental  relationship'  with  Ms  [N]'s
             children at [16-25].  As to paras  6-7  of  the  grounds,  the
             judge considered the provisions of S.117B(1)-(5) at [13],  and
             his approach is consistent with guidance from  higher  courts.
             This is not a case in which the  only  factor  in  the  public
             interest side of the balance is the requirement to make an out
             of country  application.   As  para  9  of  the  grounds,  the
             appellant did not satisfy partner requirements of the Appendix
             FM and the provisions of paragraph  EX.1  were  therefore  not
             available to him (Sabir (Appendix FM - EX1 not free  standing)
             [2014] UKUT 00063).   Paras  10-11  of  the  grounds  have  no
             relevance to the decision of the judge".

 6. The grounds were renewed.  The permission  to  appeal  had  erroneously
    said that permission was refused.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  put
    right that error, however, she went on  to  say  that  as  regards  the
    judge's finding that there was no arguable merit to the  second  ground
    relating to the appellant's family life in the UK, she said as follows,
    inter alia:

         "3.  Although the error on the order  could  be  corrected  by  the
             First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  has  lodged  a   renewed
             application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             It is open to me to rectify the error by  granting  permission
             at this stage.  The grounds of appeal are  general  in  nature
             and tend towards making submissions on the facts  rather  than
             identifying errors of law.  I also think it is  unlikely  that
             the appellant could succeed in showing that  there  are  'very
             significant obstacles' to his integration  in  Bangladesh  for
             the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), but  it  is  at  least
             arguable that  the  First-tier  failed  to  make  findings  in
             relation to the appellant's private life.

         4.   However, I depart from Judge Robertson's view in  relation  to
             the second ground.   Although  the  grounds  are  general  and
             unparticularised, it is at  least  arguable  that  the  public
             interest factors  contained  in  S.117B  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are not the only factors  that
             must be considered in an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
             Rules.  The provision makes clear that those factors  only  go
             to the public interest considerations.

         5.   Having accepted that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with a British citizen and that it was
             in the children's best interest to remain in the UK with their
             mother, it was  still  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  consider
             whether there were 'insurmountable obstacles'  to  the  couple
             continuing their family life outside the UK.   If  there  were
             'insurmountable obstacles' the judge would have to  go  on  to
             consider whether it would nevertheless be reasonable to expect
             the appellant to return to Bangladesh to make  an  application
             for entry clearance.  It is arguable that the judge failed  to
             make findings in relation to matters that were material  to  a
             proper assessment of the appellant's right to family life".

Submissions on Error of Law

 7.  Mr  Ahmed  relied  upon  the  grounds.   He  handed  up   a   skeleton
    argument/outline submission although he told me that there was  nothing
    contained in it that had not been referred to in the grounds.   I  have
    taken the skeleton into account along with Mr Ahmed's oral submissions.



 8. There was no Rule 24 response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge carried out an analysis under S.55 at [11] of  her  decision.
    She recorded that the appellant has been living with Ms [N] and her two
    children since 9 February 2016.  The judge took into account  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary, albeit not a paramount  factor.
    She recorded that both children were born in the United Kingdom and had
    lived their entire lives here.  Both children  are  in  the  middle  of
    primary school education.  [MF] is  receiving  professional  assistance
    with his autism diagnosis.  The judge said there was no  question  that
    the children's best endeavours are to remain in the United Kingdom with
    their mother.

10. The issue was whether the appellant's relationship  with  the  children
    amounted to a "parental relationship" which  the  judge  considered  at
    [13]  and  [15]-[23].   The  judge  found  that  whilst  the  appellant
    undertook some supportive duties, including school runs, S.117B(6)  was
    not  engaged  because  the  appellant  did  not  have,  or  there   was
    insufficient evidence to support the claim  that  he  had  a  "parental
    relationship" with the children.

11. It is worth mentioning that whereas at [11]  the  judge  said  [MF]  is
    receiving professional assistance with his autism diagnosis,  there  is
    in fact no such diagnosis in that regard.  The comments on  the  Autism
    Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS-2) at p177-178 of the appellant's
    bundle summarises:

         "Overall, on the ADOS-2, [F] scored below the diagnostic  threshold
         and the findings were negative of a diagnosis  of  Autism  Spectrum
         Disorder" (my emphasis).

12. As regards speech and language concerns, the report dated 8 August 2017
    at p182-184 of the appellant's bundle discharges him from the programme
    with recommendations to continue at school and at home.   There  is  an
    invitation to report future concerns regarding his language skills  but
    there was no suggestion that any have been made.  The judge referred to
    the discharge at [20] of her decision.

13. The judge did not err in finding the appellant had  failed  to  show  a
    parental relationship.  There was nothing to  suggest  the  appellant's
    circumstances  were  comparable  to  R  (on  the  application  of   RK)
    (S.117B(6); "parental relationship") [2016] UKUT 00031.

14. It is correct that the judge  did  not  refer  in  terms  to  paragraph
    276ADE.  Mr Ahmed conceded that save for 276ADE(vi) the judge had dealt
    with all issues elsewhere.  I will refer  to  276ADE(vi)  subsequently.
    As to the rest, it  had  been  agreed  between  the  parties  that  the
    appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  which  she
    considered along with S.117B(1)-(5) at  [12]-[15].   In  clarifying  Mr
    Ahmed's submissions regarding errors of law, he confirmed that the only
    error with regard to the judge's failing to refer in  terms  to  276ADE
    was with regard to 276ADE(vi).  He said there would be very significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh.  That  was  not
    because of the time he has spent in the United Kingdom because  he  has
    only been here for eight years as of the date of the hearing before me.
     Mr Ahmed said rather, it was because the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
    return which  had  been  highlighted  to  the  judge  at  [15]  of  the
    appellant's statement dated 12 June 2018 and which she  had  not  taken
    into account.  [15] of the appellant's statement reads as follows:

         "15. I should perhaps explain why I withdrew my  asylum  claim.   I
             was active in politics when I was in  Bangladesh.   I  claimed
             asylum on 05 October 2012, but withdrew  on  7  February  2013
             fearing that I might be removed to Bangladesh  where  I  would
             not be safe.  I  was  at  that  time  wrongly  advised  by  an
             unscrupulous advisor.  He said  that  if  I  went  ahead  with
             interview and asylum claim, I would be detained and later sent
             back to Bangladesh".

15. I do accept that the statement was before the judge.  I do  not  accept
    she was under any obligation to take account  of  [15].   The  evidence
    before the judge was that when  his  student  leave  expired  (which  I
    understand was in 2011) the appellant made an  application  for  asylum
    and then absconded such that the claim was  abandoned.   The  appellant
    said in cross-examination that he did not know  what  happened  to  the
    claim.  In any event, there was no evidence before the judge or  before
    me in terms of credible corroboration of the advice  from  the  claimed
    unscrupulous  advisor  or  any  complaint  made   to   that   advisor's
    professional body.  On the basic level that the judge failed to  engage
    with 276ADE(vi) in terms of [15] of the appellant's statement, I accept
    that she erred but I do not find the error  to  be  material.   On  the
    contrary, the judge  was  aware  of  the  test  of  reintegration  into
    Bangladeshi society which she referred to at  [2](b).   She  took  into
    account all  the  evidence  before  her  and  based  her  findings  and
    conclusions on that evidence.

16. The  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the couple continuing their family life  outside  the  UK
    because there was no evidence before her in  that  regard.   The  whole
    thrust of the appeal was as regards the disproportionality of requiring
    the appellant to leave the UK to make an out of country application and
    the consequent difficulties he would have.  See [17] of the appellant's
    statement and [14] of the statement of  Ms  [N]  at  pages  13  and  18
    respectively of the appellant's bundle.

17. The judge carried out a careful and comprehensive analysis of  all  the
    evidence put before her on behalf of the appellant. Whilst she did  not
    say so in terms, it is clear that in making her  findings  she  had  in
    mind Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 (see in particular [66]-[68]) and  Rhuppiah
    [2018] UKSC 58 (see in particular [44]).   The  judge  gave  clear  and
    cogent reasons for her findings and decision which were clearly open to
    her on the evidence before her.

Notice of Decision

18. The judge did not err materially.  Her decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         7 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
