
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11666/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th November 2016                        |On 28th November 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ehab Ahmed mohamed abdelnaeim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Abdelnaeim is a citizen of Egypt whose date of birth is recorded  as
    25th November 1966.  On  6th  October  2015  he  made  application  for
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  private,
    and family life in particular, on the basis of  his  relationship  with
    his wife Amanda Fuller, a British citizen.

 2. On 11th November 2015 a decision was made to refuse the application and
    the Appellant appealed.  On 15th June 2016  his  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Turnock  who  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds having regard to the wider application of  Article
    8.  It was conceded in the First-tier and before me that the  Appellant
    could not succeed under the Rules.

 3. Not content with that decision, by Notice  dated  25th  July  2016  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The substance of the grounds as  they  appear,  though
    there is rather more to say about that, was that the judge went  beyond
    the Immigration Rules to the wider application of it without sufficient
    basis.

 4. On 28th October 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bird  granted
    permission on that point.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing before me,  Mr  Hussain  of  Counsel
    representing the Respondent sought to  persuade  me  that  the  grounds
    ought to be disregarded on the basis that they were drafted in  respect
    of a person other than Mr Abdelnaeim.  Certain it  is  that  there  are
    errors in those grounds.  At paragraph 1 it is said that he was refused
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom.  That  was  incorrect.   In  the
    second paragraph of the grounds reference is made to the Sponsor  as  a
    man, which patently she is not; there being three jobs when  there  was
    only one; and the failure to comply with the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM-SE was not the substance of the appeal  but  rather  the  contention
    that there had been a substantial failure to meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules, namely the income threshold.

 6. Mr Diwncyz accepts that there were those errors in the grounds  but  it
    was his submission to me that the substance of the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    are set out at paragraph 5 onwards. I observe that that was  the  basis
    upon which the permission was granted  noting  also  that  in  granting
    permission Judge Bird had had regard not only to the grounds but to the
    decision itself, reading the two together.

 7. There had been no "Rule 24 Notice" filed by the Respondent in this case
    but Mr Diwnycz very fairly and generously waived that  requirement.   I
    am satisfied that even if one were draw a line through those  parts  of
    the grounds which are in error,  there  is  sufficient  basis  for  the
    matter to have been brought before the Upper Tribunal since it is clear
    that the substance upon which permission was granted has real substance
    in this case.  Further as I have already said the judge had  regard  to
    the decision itself when granting permission.  When it was pointed  out
    to Mr Hussain that the Secretary of State would be limited in any event
    only to the ground upon which permission was  being  granted  after  he
    made reference to the Court of Appeal case in Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2  (as  distinct  from
    Mandalia v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKSC  59)
    he did not pursue the point further.

 8. I turn to the substance of the appeal.  It is  not  in  issue  that  Mr
    Abdelnaeim and Sponsor are married nor in issue  that  they  have  been
    found to be self-sufficient.  The simple point before me  was  that  in
    failing to meet the Rules, there  had  to  be  some  sufficient  basis,
    identified by the judge, before looking to  the  wider  application  of
    Article 8.

 9. For the Respondent Mr Hussain submitted that that  was  not  necessary.
    In reliance upon the case of Huang [2007] UKHL  11  in  particular  but
    also by reference to the cases of: Mansour  [2011]  EWCA  832  (Admin);
    Nagre, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (admin);  Ahmed
    [2013] EWCA 300 (Admin) paragraph 29; and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192, the burden of Mr Hussain's submission to me was that all that was
    required was a proportionality assessment once the public interest in a
    case has been resolved.  He did not seek to persuade me that it was not
    a two stage approach but once the public  interest  had  been  resolved
    nothing compelling necessarily needed to be found but rather a focus on
    the particular facts relating to the individual  or  individuals  under
    consideration.

10. I am afraid that I am against Mr Hussain on his point.   I  invited  Mr
    Hussain to point to anything in the decision of this judge which showed
    that  she  had  found  something  sufficiently  compelling  to  justify
    allowing this appeal outside the Rules.  Despite his  best  efforts  he
    was not able to do that though he is to be commended  for  his  effort.
    He simply fell back on his  principal  submission  that  such  was  not
    required.  However in my  judgment  it  is  perfectly  clear  from  the
    guidance in the case of R (on the application of Sunassee) [2015]  EWHC
    1604 taken together with R (on the application of MM (Lebanon))  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 which did not overrule Nagre that a gap has  to  be  found
    following the case of SS Congo [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  (see  para  17),
    between the Rules and the particular circumstances being contended  for
    justifying going outwith those Rules.

11. Mr Hussain is entirely right in my judgment to say that it is  for  the
    Tribunal or a Court to decide what is  sufficient  to  go  outwith  the
    Rules.  He  is  also  right  in  saying  that  in  deciding   what   is
    proportionate again is for the Tribunal or the  Court  but  before  one
    gets to that stage, or what is now trite  law  the  five  stage  Razgar
    test, one has to get outside of the Rules  by  reference  to  something
    sufficiently compelling.  The threshold need  not  be  high  but  there
    needs to be something sufficient.

12. In this case the Sponsor did not have the  requisite  income.   Factors
    relevant to the appeal which the judge might have  been  able  to  take
    into  account  having  regard  to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were in large measure neutral  such  as
    the ability to speak English.  The  inability  to  speak  English  will
    weigh in the Secretary of State's  favour  but  the  ability  to  speak
    English does not add to  the  individual's  circumstances:  AM  (S117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

13. Further it is trite law that Article  8  does  not  provide  a  general
    dispensing power with respect to the Rules.  I observe as I dictate  Mr
    Hussain's head nodding in agreement.  His argument would be that  there
    was nevertheless sufficient in the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case that it would be disproportionate for the Appellant to be required
    to leave the United Kingdom and make application from outside.   It  is
    not entirely clear even in allowing the appeal that the judge  came  to
    that view because she said as follows:

         "I find this to be a finely balanced case.  There is  a  clear  and
         strong public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
         control.  It is not  in  the  interests  of  effective  immigration
         control if the Rules can  be  circumvented  by  the  provisions  of
         Article 8 rights.  However, there are a number of factors, which  I
         have set  out  above  which  indicate  that  effective  immigration
         control would not be undermined  by  permitting  the  Appellant  to
         remain.

14. That is not the correct test.  The  test  is  one  of  proportionality.
    Before, as I have said, one gets to the issue  of  proportionality  one
    has to look to the Immigration Rules.  There is no concept of  a  near-
    miss.  That was resolved in the case of Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 26."   The
    case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 makes plain that getting close to  meeting
    the immigration  rules  adds  weight  to  the  individual's  particular
    interest in the proportionality assessment but still there  has  to  be
    something that takes the individual from that position, being close  to
    meeting the Rules, as the judge clearly found was  the  case  here,  to
    getting beyond them such that the wider application should be applied.

15. In all the circumstances the judge in my judgment has materially  erred
    and so the decision is set aside.

16. The question for me now is whether or not to  remit  the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard again on any particular basis or remake
    it.  Though Mr Hussain at one point sought to invite me, were I find an
    error of law, to remit the case, there has been no cross-appeal in this
    case.  If there were matters which would have allowed the judge to make
    a finding outside of the Rules, then those should have been raised in a
    cross-appeal.  That has not been done.  In the circumstances, given  no
    sufficient gap, I have no option in remaking the appeal to  dismiss  it
    and I so do.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  decision  is
remade.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
