
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/11996/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th March 2019                   |On 05th April 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    D C I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a minor child aged 9 having been born on 26th November
    2009.  She is a citizen of Nigeria.  The  Appellant  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom and has consequently lived in the United Kingdom for all
    her life.  On 3rd August 2017 a human rights  claim  was  made  on  her
    behalf on the basis of her family life with her parents  NCI  and  NOI.
    The Appellant's application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 25th
    September 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sullivan sitting at Harmondsworth on 13th July 2018.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 20th August 2018 the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 11th October 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Boyes considered the decision to  be  very
    short and brief and  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the  grounds  were
    arguable  and  that  the  acceptance  by  the  judge  of  the   matters
    deleterious to the success of the application but nonetheless  allowing
    the appeal may be indicative of the judge erring in law in  respect  of
    the public interest.  He submitted that it was difficult to see how the
    case was allowed  outside  the  Rules  absent  anything  compelling  or
    exceptional to justify even stepping out of  the  Rules  in  the  first
    place.

 4. It was on that basis that  the  appeal  came  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I had noted at that stage that this was an appeal
    by the Secretary of State and for the purpose of continuity  throughout
    the  appeal  process  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as   the
    Respondent.

 5. I noted that the challenges on the error of law were two-fold:

      a) Firstly, that the judge has failed to have  regard  to  the  public
         interest factors outlined  in  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  To be fair to the  judge  he  has
         referred to Section 117B(6) in  one  line  in  paragraph  20.   The
         decision was very short but that did not  of  itself  mean  that  a
         decision cannot be adequate.  However, I was in agreement with  the
         submissions made by the Secretary of State.  Section 117B sets  out
         the public interest considerations  applicable  in  all  Article  8
         cases.  The  judge  failed  to  balance  all  relevant  factors  in
         reaching his conclusion.  That is not to say that his conclusion is
         ultimately wrong but  it  is  appropriate  for  a  proper  and  due
         analysis to be carried out and I was satisfied that the brevity  of
         the decision reflects the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
         consideration of the statutory considerations under Section 117B of
         the 2002 Act are inadequate.  Further, the  judge  failed  to  give
         full and proper analysis as to how this  case  engages  "compelling
         reasons", albeit again that ultimately his conclusion was  not  one
         at this stage that was challenged, rather than the adequacy of  his
         reasoning in reaching such conclusions.  To such extents there were
         material errors of law.

      b) Secondly, there was in addition an adequacy of reasoning  challenge
         and I agreed with the submissions made  by  Mr  Whitwell  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to articulate why in  all  the
         circumstances it would not be reasonable for the family to relocate
         to Nigeria, particularly bearing in mind as he pointed out that  it
         is a mainly English speaking country where the Appellant  would  be
         with her family.  This again constituted a material error of law.

 6. I found that there was an  error  of  law  solely  on  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to leave the UK  and  to  return  to
    Nigeria and  I  directed  that  the  restored  hearing  be  by  way  of
    submission only.  I granted leave to both parties  to  file  and  serve
    skeleton arguments such further evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
    and authoritative case law.

 7. The Appellants have not chosen not to appear.  What they have  done  is
    send in an email from their instructing solicitors stating as follows:

         "The Appellant was born in the UK on 26th April 2009 and has  lived
         in the UK since then.  On 26th April 2019 she will  be  turning  10
         years old and therefore will be eligible to make an application for
         British  citizenship.   We  therefore   wrote   to   the   appeal's
         reconsideration team asking them to reconsider the Appellant's case
         as we have seen in our file all applications made on the  basis  of
         seven year continuous stay  to  be  granted  by  the  Home  Office.
         However, despite the Respondent's granting leave to remain to seven
         year applications they have refused to reconsider  the  Appellant's
         case.

         Further  the  Appellant's  father  has  informed  us  that  due  to
         financial reasons he will not be attending the resumed  hearing  on
         Tuesday 26th March 2019 and will also not  be  instructing  Counsel
         for the hearing.  In the  light  of  this  the  Appellant's  father
         wishes for the Tribunal to make a decision in his  daughter's  case
         in his absence with all the documents already with the Tribunal."

 8. Attached to that email is an  additional  bundle  including  a  witness
    statement of the Appellant's father dated 21st March 2019 which I  have
    read and considered and  the  emails  sent  with  supporting  documents
    seeking reconsideration to the Secretary of State.

 9. It is on that basis that the restored hearing  comes  back  before  me.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr
    Whitwell.  Mr Whitwell is very familiar with this matter.  He  appeared
    before me on the error of law hearing.

Submissions/Discussion

10. Mr Whitwell makes brief submissions to me.  He submits that it  is  for
    the claimant to make out their case and that all cases are not the same
    and  consequently   whilst   neither   he   nor   other   Home   Office
    representatives can comment on other cases presented by the Appellant's
    instructed solicitors each case turns on its own facts and  it  is  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  in  this  matter  that  the  appeal
    should be opposed.  He refers me to the authoritative  guidance  of  KO
    and to the guidance given by the Secretary of State  in  their  January
    2019 Family Migration Appendix FM Section 10b.  He asked me to  dismiss
    the appeal.

Findings

11. The factual scenario in  which  the  Appellant  finds  herself  is  not
    disputed.  She was born in  Romford  on  26th  April  2009  and  it  is
    acknowledged that in April 2019 she will have been in the  UK  for  ten
    years.  It is further acknowledged that she will be able to qualify for
    British citizenship at the end of that period.  That is  not  a  matter
    that is before  me.   There  is  no  further  evidence  or  information
    provided.  I do of course have the preserved findings of fact so far as
    they relate to this appeal from the First-tier Tribunal and the factual
    matrix generally of this case that has  been  put  to  me.   I  am  not
    satisfied having considered that this is a case that should succeed.  I
    find guidance in paragraph 18 of KO (Nigeria) and Others v Secretary of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53  which  states  when
    considering the current  IDI  guidance  and  making  reference  to  the
    findings of Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] SLT 1245:

         "In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of whether it is
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one has  to  address
         the question why would the child be expected to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom?  In a case such as this  there  can  only  be  one  answer
         "because the parents have no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK".   To
         approach the question in any other way "strips away the context  in
         which the assessment of reasonableness is being made".

12. This is a case where the parents have substantially overstayed  in  the
    UK.  The Appellant's father's lack of immigration status in the UK  has
    been known since November 2009.  The Appellant's father  has  taken  no
    steps to abide by the terms of his previous immigration status  and  to
    leave the UK.  It is clear  that  the  Appellant  should  in  her  best
    interests remain with her parents.  The question consequently arises as
    is set out in KO is it whether it is reasonable in the  facts  of  this
    case for her to leave with them.  I conclude that it is.

13. I have given  detailed  consideration  to  the  Home  Office  published
    guidance.  They reflect  that  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  found  that
    reasonableness has to be considered in a real world  context  in  which
    the child finds him or herself and that a parent's  immigration  status
    is relevant in establishing that context.  That is an applicable factor
    in this matter and bearing in mind that the child's  parents  would  be
    expected to leave the UK it is reasonable to expect  the  Appellant  to
    leave with  them  unless  there  is  evidence  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable.

14. I have considered the substantial number of  factors  set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's guidance as to when it would be reasonable  for  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK with a parent or primary carer.   Many
    of those factors apply in  this  case  for  instance  the  parents  are
    citizens of the country and able  to  enjoy  full  rights  of  being  a
    citizen and there is nothing  in  the  country's  specific  information
    which would suggest that relocation would be unreasonable.   These  are
    parents of a child having family, social and  cultural  ties  with  the
    country and there is absolutely no reason why they should not return to
    it.

15. Consequently I am of the view that the assessment of reasonableness  in
    this case leans in favour of finding that  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to leave the UK with her parents and to return  as  a  family
    unit to Nigeria.  For all the  above  reasons  the  Appellant's  appeal
    dismissed.

Decision

16. Having found initially that there was a material error of law  and  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and having gone  on
    to reconsider and rehear  as  to  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  be
    allowed I find, and decide, that the Appellant's appeal is for all  the
    above reasons dismissed and the decision of the Secretary of  State  as
    made in the Notice of Refusal is maintained.

17. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted the  Appellant  anonymity.
    No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 1 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date 1 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

