
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11754/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2019                            |On 11 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     B B
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Komolafe of Dele Adedeji Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Zambia.  He appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 9 May 2019 refusing a
human rights claim.

2.   The essential issue in this case concerns the appellant's health
problems.  He wishes to remain in the United Kingdom to continue on the
course of treatment he is currently receiving for sickle cell disease.  He
was noted by the judge as saying that that particular treatment which he
receives is not available in Zambia and having had a stroke in 2011, he is
likely to have another if his current treatment is not continued.

3.   The judge noted the medical evidence and in particular the recommended
form of treatment in the United Kingdom, which is exchange transfusion, by
which the patient's blood is taken out from one arm while donor blood is
pumped into the other arm, the purpose of this treatment being to reduce
the level of sickle cell disease in the blood and among other things to
reduce the risk of a stroke.  It was said that the appellant required such
treatment every four to six weeks.  The judge accepted expert evidence that
without exchange transfusions 30% of sickle cell disease patients who have
had a stroke will have a further stroke.  The appellant had from time to
time suffered other side effects of sickle cell disease such as ulcers
which had responded to medication and he takes a variety of drugs to manage
his ill health or to help to maintain good health.

4.   The judge found with regard to the conditions in Zambia that treatment
for sickle cell disease is available and indeed, the appellant himself had
received such treatment there.  The available treatment includes simple red
cell blood transfusions by which donor blood is pumped into the patient and
the appellant confirmed that these simple transfusions also reduce the
level of sickle cell disease in the blood.  Medication for the treatment of
sickle cell disease is available in Zambia.  However, exchange blood
transfusions are not available in Zambia.  The judge concluded that she was
not satisfied that there were significant obstacles to the appellant's
relocation in Zambia.  She did not accept that there would be any breach of
Article 3 or Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and said that the
test to be applied was not whether the appellant could receive identical
medical treatment in Zambia and it was not enough to say he could not
receive exchange blood transfusions in Zambia.  The evidence did not show
that the consequences of him receiving the available treatment in Zambia
would be such as to breach Article 3 or Article 8.  None of the expert
medical evidence engaged adequately with the essential question of how the
appellant's health would be affected (if it would) by him changing from
exchange blood transfusions to simple blood transfusions.  The medical
evidence provided failed to detail the frequency or risk of "iron overload"
when simple transfusions were administered, failing to detail the
availability or otherwise of medication to treat the problem and failing to
explain the consequences for a patient if the condition went untreated.
There was also no comparative data as to the respective effectiveness of
exchange blood transfusion and simple blood transfusion in reducing sickle
cell load in the blood.  She considered this to be a fundamental gap in the
evidence.  The appeal was dismissed.

5.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal by a Judge
of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that since the judge had adverted
specifically to the identification of matters to be dealt with in the
course of the hearing it was arguable that if he had the view there was a
fundamental gap in the medical evidence relating to a fundamental issue
appertaining to the health of the appellant this should have been drawn to
the attention of the representatives before the case began.  It was
arguable in the alternative that unfairness had arisen in that matters in
relation to which the judge considered there was a fundamental gap in the
evidence were not put to the appellant.

6.   In his submissions (which were augmented by a written document
provided subsequent to the hearing), Mr Komolafe argued that the appellant
was at increased risk of a stroke.  Treatment by simple transfusion would
lead to overload and the necessary drugs were not available in Zambia.  The
decision of the Secretary of State was clearly disproportionate on the
basis of the Bank Mellat tests.  The appellant was receiving treatment in
the United Kingdom.  Article 3 and Article 8 were engaged.  The evidence
was that the drug was no available in Zambia, so if forced to return the
appellant would suffer serious detriment.  It was always necessary to
compare the situation in the United Kingdom with the other country as
regards the quality of treatment as had been held in D.  Treatment in the
United Kingdom was better than in Zambia.  In line with what had been held
by the House of Lords in Beoku-Betts the Secretary of State had to consider
the impact of removal on people in the United Kingdom and under EB (Kosovo)
it was necessary to consider the proportionality of removal.  Articles 3
and 8 were engaged.

7.   In his submissions, Mr Melvin argued that it had been made clear that
Article 3 was not relied on at the earlier hearing.  The judge had
identified this as being unlikely to succeed.  There was reliance on the
difference in available treatment in the United Kingdom and Zambia and this
did not meet the very high threshold.  The judge had made this clear at
paragraph 20 of her decision.  It was not a new matter today.  The
Secretary of State's response under Rule 24 was relied on.  Authorities
such as GS and SL and more recently PF were relied on, which gave clear
guidance.  No error of law had been identified.

8.   By way of reply, Mr Komolafe argued that the judge had referred to
gaps she noted and there was evidence before the Tribunal of that and this
had not been disputed by the Secretary of State.  The appellant was
experiencing exceptional and compassionate circumstances.  The decision of
the judge should be set aside and the appeal should be allowed.

9.   I reserved my decision.

10.  Dealing first of all with the grant of permission to appeal, I do not
consider that an error of law has been shown in the judge drawing attention
to defects in the evidence before her.  It was for the appellant's
representative to anticipate any problems in the evidence in light of the
case law and base the case on the relevant evidence.  It is not an error of
law for a judge to say that there is a fundamental gap in the evidence.  It
is not his responsibility to provide the evidence and nor is it his
responsibility to set out concerns of that type in advance so that the gap
can be filled if that is possible.  The judge's reasoning is entirely
cogent, clear and sound and properly in line with the authorities.  The
threshold is indeed a high one and the findings, in particular at paragraph
21 of the judge's decision, were clearly open to her.

11.  The respondent rightly relies in particular on what was said by the
Court of Appeal in PF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139, which makes it clear
first that the Tribunal is bound by what was said by the House of Lords in
N [2005] UKHL 31, under which it has to be shown that the applicant's
medical condition has reached such a critical stage that there are
compelling humanitarian grounds for not removing him to a place which lacks
the medical and social services which he would need to prevent acute
suffering while he is dying.  The evidence provided, even including the
postdecision evidence attached to the grounds of appeal, falls well short
of that.  That most recent evidence refers to the difference between
exchange transfusions and top-up transfusions and the consequences, and
goes no further than saying that if the appellant were to switch back to
top-up transfusions in Zambia that the specialist's feeling was that he
would run into more clinical problems with repeated sickle crises and
cerebrovascular events and would eventually need iron chelation therapy
with deferasirox or an infusion of desferrioxamine under the skin every
night for five nights a week, which would impact on his health further.
Even if this evidence, which goes further than the evidence before the
judge, could be taken into account, it can be seen that it falls well short
of the test set out in N.

12.  The Court of Appeal in PF (Nigeria) went on to consider whether the
more relaxed test set out by the Court of Human Rights in Paposhvili [2017]
Imm AR 867 would make any difference and concluded that it would not.  The
test there, as set out in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64, is that

"the boundary of Article 3 protection has been shifted from being defined
by imminence of death in the removing state (even with the treatment
available there) to being defined by the imminence (i.e. likely 'rapid'
experience) of intense suffering or death in the receiving state, which may
only occur because of the non-availability in that state of the treatment
which had previously been available in the removing state".

13.  It can be seen again from the evidence that the facts of this case
fall well short of even the Paposhvili test and therefore it would not be
appropriate, not that I was asked to do this, to consider adjourning to
await the outcome of proceedings in the Supreme Court considering the
Paposhvili test.

14.  Accordingly, I consider that it has not been shown that the judge
erred in law in any respect in her decision, and her decision dismissing
the appeal therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 30 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

