
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12648/2015
     HU/12680/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2017                   |On 3rd November 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        RT HON LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SOBIA BIBI
                                EMAAN SAFDAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Not Represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry Clearance Officer,
    with permission, in relation to a Decision of Judge Thomas in the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 23rd May 2017.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity we shall continue to refer to Ms
    Bibi and Miss Safdar as the Appellants and the Entry Clearance  Officer
    as the Respondent in this judgment.

 3. The Appellants are mother and daughter.  They sought leave to enter  as
    the spouse and child of Mr Mohammad Safdar, who is settled in  the  UK.
    All are nationals of Pakistan.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the wife's application on the basis
    that the marriage was bigamous at inception and  because  she  had  not
    passed an English language test.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the marriage to be valid.  In  that
    he was wrong; however that is immaterial as the Sponsor  is  no  longer
    married to  his  first  wife  and  the  relationship  between  the  1st
    Appellant and Sponsor is genuine and subsisting and  she  can  thus  be
    treated as a partner. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also found that she
    is exempt from the English  language  requirements  and  thus  succeeds
    under Appendix FM.

 6. There is no challenge by the Secretary of State to that decision.

 7. The challenge is to the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in relation  to
    the 2nd Appellant.  The Judge erroneously considered the child's appeal
    under paragraph 297(1)( of the Immigration Rules whereas it fell to  be
    decided under paragraph E-ECC of the Rules.

 8. Mr Duffy accepted that the 2nd Appellant was entitled to succeed in her
    appeal but on the basis that she meets the correct Rule.

 9. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  so  far
    only as it relates to the 2nd Appellant and in redeciding it  allow  it
    on the basis that given that both Appellants meet the  requirements  of
    the relevant Rules, it is a disproportionate breach  of  Article  8  to
    prevent their entry to the UK to join their partner and  father.   That
    was in fact the conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  albeit  the
    incorrect Immigration Rule.

Notice of Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  relation  to
the 2nd Appellant is allowed and that  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision set aside.  In redeciding the 2nd Appellant's  appeal  against  the
Entry Clearance Officer's decision we allow it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2nd November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no
fee award on the basis that the evidence before the Tribunal  differed  from
that before the Entry Clearance Officer.  Had the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
had available the evidence that the Tribunal had he may  well  have  granted
entry clearance.


Signed                              Date 2nd November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin





















