
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12271/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Video Link at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |On 11 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JMT
                         (anonymity direction MAde)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Sobowale instructed by IQ Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the  appeal
    of the respondent JMT against the decision of the Secretary of State of
    4 July 2019 refusing a human rights claim.

2.   We shall hereafter to the Secretary of State as the respondent, as  she
    was before the First-tier Judge, and to JMT as the appellant, as he was
    before the judge.

3.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom, it seems, on 12 January  2011
    with a Tier 2 visa and has remained subsequently, having  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 18 November 2015.

4.   On 28 February 2019 he was convicted at Cambridge Crown  Court  on  two
    counts of sexual assault, intentionally touch  female,  no  penetration
    and on 21 March 2019 he was sentenced at the Cambridge Crown  Court  to
    three months on the first count of sexual assault and twelve months  on
    the second count for sexual assault, the first to run concurrently with
    the second.  A restraining order was placed against  him  on  21  March
    2019 valid for ten years  and  he  was  placed  on  the  Sex  Offenders
    Register for ten years.  A deportation order was made on 2 July 2019.

5.   The appellant's human rights claim focused on his  private  and  family
    life with his wife and son.  He gave evidence before the judge in which
    he accepted that the offence  for  which  he  was  convicted  was  very
    serious and he expressed remorse and  sought  the  forgiveness  of  his
    victims.  He was of previous good character and  at  the  time  he  was
    sentenced he was aged 54.

6.   The appellant's wife gave evidence.  She said that since the  appellant
    had  been  away  her  younger  son  had  been  affected  and  was  very
    distressed.  Church members assisted in comforting him.

7.   She also referred to the death some years earlier of  her  son's  elder
    brother.  They had been very close and were very good friends and after
    he died her son became a loner and said he did not have anyone and  was
    on his own.  With regard to the effect on her son  if  the  appeal  was
    unsuccessful, she said that her son would have no one: having lost  his
    brother he would now lose his father as well.

8.   In his evidence the appellant's son adopted his witness  statement  and
    referred to the schoolwork he had and how his programme  for  work  and
    examinations went.

9.   As the judge properly identified at paragraph 21 of his  decision,  the
    essential  question  in  this  case  was  whether  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's removal would be unduly harsh on his son.   He  found  that
    the appellant's son had been in the United Kingdom for more than  seven
    years.  He observed that whether it would be unduly harsh for  his  son
    to remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant were removed  involved
    looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what  would  necessarily
    be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent.

10.  The  judge  considered  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's son to live in India and found that in reality there was no
    prospect of the son or the appellant's wife going to live in India with
    the appellant.  The son was focusing on studying for his GCSEs which he
    was due to sit the following May (the appeal was heard  on  29  October
    2019).  Plainly his mother would have to remain with him to enable  him
    to sit those examinations given the overall circumstances.

11.  The judge referred to the  guidance  in  the  authorities  such  as  PG
    (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 and KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  It was
    clear that a certain level of family disruption was inevitable  when  a
    foreign criminal was deported, this having been decided by  Parliament,
    and it was necessary for Tribunals to look for something  beyond  that.
    It was clear that in any case great distress might well be suffered  as
    to the effect of deportation and the lives of those affected  would  be
    in a number of ways made more difficult.

12.  The court considered in PG (Jamaica) whether there was  anything  which
    elevated a case above the norm.  It was  noted  that  many  parents  of
    teenage children were confronted with difficulties and upsetting events
    of one sort or another and had to face one or more  of  their  children
    going through a difficult period for one reason  or  another,  and  the
    fact that a parent who was a foreign criminal would no longer be  in  a
    position to assist in such circumstances could not of itself  mean that
    the effects  of  deportation  were  unduly  harsh  on  his  partner  or
    children.  Nor were the difficulties which would  inevitably  be  faced
    increased as they were by the laudable ongoing efforts referred  to  in
    that case and the improvement of  earning  capacity  elevate  the  case
    above the commonplace  so  far  as  the  effects  of  deportation  were
    concerned.  Emotional and behavioural fallout reflected the commonplace
    nature found to exist in that case.

13.  The judge found that the effect of deportation of the appellant on  his
    son went beyond the commonplace.  Some five years ago his elder brother
    died.  His mother in evidence had described the effect on him given the
    closeness  of  their  relationship  and  also  the  effect   upon   the
    relationship between the appellant and his  son.   The  son  faced  the
    prospect of losing his father as  well  and  plainly  in  the  ordinary
    course of events the impact on the son would be harsh.

14.  The judge found that in light of the tragedy  which  had  befallen  his
    elder brother and the consequences of that tragedy for him, the  effect
    of the appellant's deportation upon his son would be unduly harsh.  The
    loss of his elder brother in bringing him closer to  his  father  would
    entail greater distress in separation than the level of distress  which
    would arise following removal of his father had he not lost  his  elder
    brother.  The level of distress would substantially exceed  that  which
    could  be  characterised  as  commonplace  or  that  which   would   be
    anticipated as the ordinary consequence of removal in  the  context  of
    family  life.   The  judge  noted  the  appellant's   wife's   evidence
    concerning her son's approach to his education which was in  effect  as
    to whether it was worthwhile to be concerned with  it.   They  had  all
    been devastated when the elder son had died and  the  appellant's  wife
    believed they had become overprotective  of  the  remaining  son.   The
    appellant spent a lot of time with him and they were very  close.   The
    son had already lost his brother and now he felt that he had also  lost
    his father.  The son had described feeling demotivated since his father
    had been in prison and felt that going to  school  without  having  his
    father at home was pointless.  He described  his  father  as  his  best
    friend and confidante.  He described being dependent on his father  and
    needing him to support him.  As a consequence the judge concluded  that
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules had been met.

15.  He went on to consider whether there would be a  breach  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.  He set out the Razgar [2004] INLR 349 criteria  and
    the approach in  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11.   As  regards  the  issue  of
    proportionality the judge recognised the importance of the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control.  The appellant  could  speak  English
    and was capable of earning his living.   He  accepted  the  immigration
    history  set  out  by  the  respondent  in  applying  the  concepts  of
    precariousness and unlawfulness.  He  noted  that  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is in the public interest and that the  more  serious
    the offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater is  the  public
    interest in the deportation of the criminal.  Exception 2  pursuant  to
    section 117C of the 2002 Act applied where the appellant had a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  the
    effect of the deportation on the child would be unduly harsh.   He  had
    found that the child was a qualifying child and that the  effect  would
    be unduly harsh.

16.   In  considering  the  public  interest  he  recognised  the  need  for
    deterrence and the need to express  public  revulsion.   He  noted  the
    sentencing remarks  of  the  judge  and  how  the  offending  had  been
    described by the respondent.  He accepted the assessment of  risk.   He
    applied section 55 and found that it was  unquestionably  in  the  best
    interests of the son that he lived with both parents.   The  respondent
    had accepted in the refusal letter that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the child to live in India at the current time.  The judge  found  that
    the public interest was outweighed and the appeal fell to be allowed.

17.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge had misdirected himself in law, failed to take
    into account material matters and failed to provide adequate reasons.

18.  Mr Melvin  developed  these  points,  together  with  reliance  on  the
    written submissions that he had put  in  prior  to  the  hearing.   The
    judge's reasoning was challenged and also his findings  in  respect  of
    proportionality which were based on the undue harshness findings almost
    entirely.  He relied on what was said in  HA  (Iraq)  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1176. That decision  did  not  lower  the  undue  harshness  threshold.
    Reliance was placed on the points summarised  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    written submissions.

19.  The judge  had  focused  on  the  consequences  of  the  death  of  the
    appellant's elder son in 2014/2015.  He had accepted the oral  evidence
    of the appellant that this created a special bond.  There  was  however
    no medical evidence as to how the family were affected by this.  It was
    accepted there was much difficulty and distress for the family  but  it
    was argued that that was not enough to  reach  the  elevated  threshold
    test set out at section 117C(5).  Family life could  be  maintained  if
    the appellant were removed to India by modern  means  of  communication
    and visits.

20.  The judge had also failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant  who  had
    worked in India before had family support there.  In  the  Home  Office
    bundle there were letters of support from friends and the church.  When
    the appellant was in prison the son had had  behavioural  problems  and
    the judge had noted this and it had taken the child a little  while  to
    come back to normal.  The family and the church provided support.

21.  With regard to the effect on the child's education, there had  been  no
    GCSEs in 2020 as we now knew, but the Secretary of  State  accepted  it
    was a crucial time in his education so it would be unduly harsh for the
    child to go to India.  There was very little in the evidence other than
    non-attendance at school on a number of occasions and  no  evidence  of
    extra support or any impact on his education of his father's  impending
    removal.  There was little evidence of  impact  on  the  child  or  the
    mother.  Reliance was also placed on what had been said in PG (Jamaica)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 and Imran [2020] UKUT 00083 (IAC).

22.      In his submissions Mr Sobowale relied on and developed  the  points
    made in the written submissions that he had previously provided.   With
    regard to the points made by Mr Melvin, in particular at  paragraphs  7
    and 8 of his written submissions, it had been clarified in HA that  the
    threshold could be met more often than was the case as considered by Mr
    Melvin.  At paragraph 56 in that case it was said that cases  of  undue
    harshness might occur quite commonly.  Also with regard  to  paragraphs
    51 to 53 in HA the need for a case sensitive assessment  was  set  out,
    the need to take account of all material  considerations  such  as  the
    strength of the relationship between the child  and  the  deportee  and
    that could be enough without more.  Factors to be considered  were  set
    out at paragraph 56 including the age of the child, whether they  lived
    with the parent, the degree of emotional dependency on the  parent  and
    the relationship with the remaining parent.  The judge  had  based  his
    decision on at least six of the seven points set out at that  paragraph
    in HA.  He was aware of the son's age, the fact that he was living with
    both parents, the degree of his emotional dependency  on  the  parents.
    The church  had  had  to  step  in  previously.   The  availability  of
    emotional  and  financial  support  from  the  remaining   parent   was
    considered.  The judge had explored the individual  characteristics  of
    the child and made a valid assessment based on  the  likely  effect  of
    separation.

23.  It was argued that what was said at paragraph 9 of Mr Melvin's  written
    submissions was misleading.  The judge had not almost solely relied  on
    the unfortunate death of the elder child  some  years  previously.   It
    could be seen from paragraphs 24 and 25 that the judge had also  looked
    at the impact on the family and at the evidence of the appellant's  son
    and the appellant's wife.  It was not just speculation but an  informed
    assessment of the likely impact on the son.  He was entitled to take it
    into consideration.  It was  corroborated  by  the  evidence  from  the
    church and from the appellant's wife also.  He had not just experienced
    initial distress but it was more than that and it had carried on for  a
    considerable period of time  and  frustration  and  depression  in  his
    behaviour had been observed.  It could be different if it had not  been
    for the two losses.  The judge was right to take the  impact  of  grief
    into consideration.

24.  The Secretary of State  could  not  dictate  what  evidence  should  be
    before the court.  There was no requirement for medical evidence.   The
    evidence was not really challenged by the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing.  The judge had made an evaluative assessment on the  basis  of
    all the evidence.  It could be that a different Tribunal could come  to
    a different conclusion but there was a range of reasonable  conclusions
    and the question here was whether or not the finding of undue harshness
    was within the range of reasonable conclusions the judge  might  reach.
    Reference was made to paragraph 38 in AA (Nigeria) and  also  paragraph
    159 of HA.  The individual circumstances had been  considered  together
    with  the  rest  of  the  evidence.   The  grounds  were  a  matter  of
    disagreement only.

25.  By way of reply Mr Melvin argued that the threshold needed  to  be  met
    and the judge  had  not  considered  this  factor  of  other  emotional
    support, there was no evidence of therapy or help from friends  or  the
    church.  These matters needed to be considered.

26.  We reserved our decision.

27.  The challenge in this case is essentially a reasons  challenge  to  the
    judge's conclusion that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's
    son to be separated from him were he to be removed to India.   This  is
    based as can be seen from what is set out above, from the fact that the
    son had already suffered the devastating loss of his older brother some
    years previously and was now faced with  in  effect  the  loss  of  his
    father also.

28.  We are in agreement with the submissions of Mr Sobowale that  there  is
    no error of law in the judge's decision.  The question  of  whether  or
    not the impact of removal of the appellant in this case on his  son  is
    essentially fact-sensitive, and as  has  been  pointed  out,  does  not
    require medical evidence to be established.  No doubt medical  evidence
    of an adverse impact might well assist in such a case, but its  absence
    cannot be said to be fatal to the possibility of such a  finding  being
    made.  In this case the judge gave thorough and detailed  consideration
    to the issues.  He took full account of the evidence of the appellant's
    son and also of the appellant's wife of the impact on the son first  of
    all of the tragic death of his brother several years  earlier  and  the
    fact that he was now to be faced with his father's departure  from  his
    life  effectively.   No  doubt,  as  Mr   Melvin   has   pointed   out,
    communication could be maintained of a sort and visits could  be  made,
    but that is a very different matter from  day-to-day life  being  lived
    in  the  company  of  a  person  with  whom  there  is  a  very   close
    relationship, as in this case.  The summary of the guidance from HA set
    out at paragraph 7 of the respondent's written submissions was,  as  Mr
    Sobowale has argued, in effect very significantly complied with by  the
    judge  despite  that  decision  coming  out  after  his.   He   clearly
    identified the need for there to be a degree of harshness going  beyond
    what would necessarily be  involved  with  any  child  faced  with  the
    deportation of a parent and an informed, evaluated assessment was  made
    of the impact on the child of his father's deportation.  The judge  was
    clearly aware of the difference between harshness and undue harshness.

29.  It is, as Mr Sobowale accepted, a decision to  which  not  every  judge
    would have come.  That is not the test however.  Mere disagreement will
    not suffice.  The undue harshness test was clearly  understood  by  the
    judge in this case and properly applied by him.  The  fact  that  there
    was assistance in the past from the  church  and  others  to  help  the
    appellant's son after the loss of his brother and that  that  could  be
    repeated was no doubt not without relevance, but the issue for the  son
    in this case was the loss of his father as well  as  the  loss  of  his
    brother, and that double loss was properly and carefully considered  by
    the judge.  He came to findings that were properly open to him and as a
    consequence we find no error of law in his decision.   Accordingly  the
    Secretary of State's appeal against the judge's decision  allowing  the
    appeal is dismissed, and hence that decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds stands.

30.  An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 1st June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



